                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SELECTION BIAS IN COLLEGE ADMISSIONS TEST SCORES

                                           Melissa Clark
                                          Jesse Rothstein
                                   Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach

                                        Working Paper 14265
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14265


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




We thank DeForest McDuff for excellent research assistance and Jeff Smith for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Melissa Clark, Jesse Rothstein, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Selection Bias in College Admissions Test Scores
Melissa Clark, Jesse Rothstein, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 14265
August 2008
JEL No. C24,I2,J24

                                                ABSTRACT

Data from college admissions tests can provide a valuable measure of student achievement, but the
non-representativeness of test-takers is an important concern. We examine selectivity bias in both
state-level and school-level SAT and ACT averages. The degree of selectivity may differ importantly
across and within schools, and across and within states. To identify within-state selectivity, we use
a control function approach that conditions on scores from a representative test. Estimates indicate
strong selectivity of test-takers in "ACT states," where most college-bound students take the ACT,
and much less selectivity in SAT states. To identify within- and between-school selectivity, we take
advantage of a policy reform in Illinois that made taking the ACT a graduation requirement. Estimates
based on this policy change indicate substantial positive selection into test participation both across
and within schools. Despite this, school-level averages of observed scores are extremely highly correlated
with average latent scores, as across-school variation in sample selectivity is small relative to the underlying
signal. As a result, in most contexts the use of observed school mean test scores in place of latent
means understates the degree of between-school variation in achievement but is otherwise unlikely
to lead to misleading conclusions.


Melissa Clark                                          Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Mathematica Policy Research                            Harris School
PO Box 2393                                            University of Chicago
Princeton, NJ 08543-2393                               1155 E. 60th Street
mclark@mathematica-mpr.com                             Chicago, IL 60637
                                                       schanzenbach@uchicago.edu
Jesse Rothstein
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrothst@princeton.edu
                       Selection Bias in College Admissions Test Scores

I.   Introduction

       Data from the two leading college admissions tests—the SAT and the ACT—can provide

a valuable measure of student achievement for researchers studying the economics of education.

Both the SAT and ACT have been administered in approximately the same forms for several

decades, to students from nearly every high school. This permits comparisons between and

within states, in cross-section and over time. This is an important advantage over alternative

tests administered by individual states or school districts, which change frequently and differ

substantially across space.

       A central concern about the use of ACT and SAT scores for research is the non-

representativeness of test-takers. Both exams are taken primarily by college-bound students,

who most likely perform better than would their non-college-bound peers.            As a result,

comparisons of mean SAT or ACT scores between states or between schools may be misleading

about mean latent scores – that is, the average that would be observed were scores available for

all students.   Previous researchers have concluded that state-level mean SAT scores are

substantially biased by selection, and have suggested selection-correction procedures for state-

level data (Dynarski, 1987; Dynarski and Gleason, 1993). These rely on strong exclusion

restrictions, and fail to make an important distinction between states where the SAT is the

dominant exam and those where the ACT is dominant and only the strongest students (who hope

to attend out-of-state colleges) take the SAT. There is no evidence available about within-school

selection, and therefore little guidance for researchers conducting analyses with test score

microdata (see, e.g., Krueger and Whitmore, 2001; Card and Payne, 2002; Rothstein, 2006;

Abraham and Clark, 2006; and Hanushek and Taylor, 1990).


                                                   1
        We provide new evidence on the selectivity of test participation, with an eye toward the

impact of selection on measured mean SAT and ACT scores. We distinguish between selection

within and between schools; with substantial sorting of students across schools, the degree of

selection into test-taking may differ across these two margins.

        We begin by examining state-level test score averages, for which the relevant selectivity

combines between- and within-school selection in the state. Dynarski (1987) documents a strong

negative across-state correlation between SAT participation rates and mean scores. We show

that this largely reflects the contrast between what we call “SAT states,” where most college-

bound seniors take the SAT rather than the ACT, and “ACT states,” where traditionally only

students hoping to attend elite, private, out-of-state colleges took the SAT. Among SAT states,

there is relatively little evidence of selectivity of test participation. However, in ACT states both

ACT- and (especially) SAT-takers are quite highly selected.               To evaluate the exclusion

restriction needed to identify selectivity from cross-sectional data, we also examine a “control

function” estimator that uses state-level scores on the NAEP exam, administered to a random

sample of students in each state, to absorb potential correlations between test participation rates

and average latent achievement. This yields very similar estimates, suggesting that the pure

cross-sectional estimator is sufficient to identify the selectivity of test participation.

        We then turn to an analysis of selectivity within and between schools, within states. An

important concern is that school-level test participation rates may be correlated with the

unobserved quality of the school or of its students. Indeed, estimates based on observational

variation in test participation yield the implausible result that test-takers are negatively selected

within schools, while those based on changes in participation rates over time indicate little

selectivity.



                                                       2
       These results suggest that an exogenous source of variation in test participation is needed

to identify the selectivity parameter of interest. We take advantage of a policy reform in Illinois

that substantially increased ACT participation rates but, plausibly, did not have important effects

on underlying student achievement. Beginning with the high school class of 2002, the ACT

exam was required for graduation; the participation rate in 2002 was 99%, up from 71% in 2001.

The impact of the new requirement varied substantially across schools, with larger increases in

participation rates in schools that initially had low participation—so were far from compliance—

and smaller increases in schools that already participated at high rates. Initial participation rates

covaried strongly with the school racial composition, with a strong positive association between

the school white share and the participation rate in 2000. This association was substantially

attenuated by 2004. Racial composition is thus a strong predictor of the change in participation

rates between 2000 and 2004. 1 Under the plausible assumption that the relationship between a

school’s racial composition and the latent achievement of its students did not change over this

four-year period, the former is a valid instrument for the change in participation rates. Results

from this analysis indicate strong positive selection into test participation, both within and across

schools: Schools with the highest mean latent achievement have the highest participation rates,

and within schools those students who would score highest are most likely to write the exam.

       In our concluding section, we consider the implications of our estimates for analyses that

do not have access to natural experimental variation in test participation.             Across-school

variation in latent test scores is large relative both to within-school variation and to variation in

test participation rates, and is highly correlated with the latter. As a consequence, observed mean

scores are nearly perfectly correlated with latent means, though less variable. As a result,

school-level analyses that fail to account for selectivity are likely to yield attenuated
       1
           It is not, however, a strong predictor in states that did not undergo a policy change.

                                                       3
relationships between test scores and other variables, but if a straightforward correction for this

attenuation is made there are unlikely to be large additional biases.



II. Data

       Our primary data come from microdata samples of SAT and ACT-takers, matched to the

high schools that they attended.      Our SAT data set includes 100 percent of test-takers in

California and Texas, 100 percent of black and Hispanic test-takers, and a 25 percent random

sample of test-takers of other races. The ACT data set includes 50 percent of non-white students

and a 25 percent of white students who took the ACT exam. 2 We focus on school- and state-

level mean scores on each exam. Our school-level analyses use data on students who graduated

from high school in 1996, 2000, and 2004; we focus on 1996 data for our state-level analysis.

       The SAT reports two subscores for each student, math and verbal, and a composite score.

Each of the subscores is reported on a scale with mean 500 and standard deviation around 100

among tested students (with a maximum score of 800 and a minimum of 200). We focus on the

sum of math and verbal scores, which has mean 1000 and standard deviation around 200. The

ACT reports several subscores, including one for a natural science subtest that has no SAT

analogue. We focus on the ACT “composite” score that averages over all subjects. We convert

this from its native scale (ranging from 1 to 36) to the more familiar SAT scale. 3

       The SAT and ACT are competing exams, and market shares vary substantially across

states. In some states—the Northeast, some of the South, and the Pacific coast—most college-

       2
           In both data sets, minority students were over-sampled to permit more accurate
estimation of race-specific models. Due to errors in the processing of the data files, students who
failed to report a race are missing from the SAT data (except in California and Texas, where they
are included) but are sampled at a 100 percent rate in the ACT data.
        3
          The concordance comes from Dorans (1999). The correlation between the state-level
ACT averages constructed from the student-level data and averages reported by the ACT
Corporation is 0.98.

                                                     4
bound students take the SAT, while in others—the Midwest and Plains, and portions of the

South—the ACT is more common.           Colleges that enroll primarily nearby students (public

universities, for example) typically prefer the dominant test in their state, while national, elite

universities tend to prefer the SAT but often accept either. When a college will accept either test

score, students can sometimes arbitrage between the two, taking both tests and reporting only the

higher score. 4 As a result, students who take the less-popular test in their state—particularly

SAT-takers in ACT states—tend to be those who hope to attend the most selective schools.

       State-level test participation rates come from The Digest of Education Statistics (National

Center for Education Statistics, various years) for the SAT and from the ACT Corporation

(2003) for the ACT. We define a state as an “ACT state” if its ACT participation rate exceeds

40% and as an “SAT state” if the SAT participation rate exceeds this threshold. 5 We also use

state-level mean scores from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP; National

Center for Education Statistics, 2006) mathematics exam administered to 8th graders in 1992,

merged to SAT and ACT data from 1996—the same cohort of students four years later.

       Both the SAT and ACT micro data sets contain high school identifiers that can be linked

to records from the Common Core of Data (CCD), an annual census of public schools. 6 From

the CCD, we extract the number of 12th graders at the school, the racial composition, and the

fraction of students receiving free school lunches. Because sampling rates are so high in both the

SAT and ACT data, the simple ratio of the number of (weighted) observations at the school in
       4
          The tests’ content differs somewhat, with more of a focus on knowledge rather than
aptitude on the ACT, so a student may select into the test on which he has a comparative
advantage. Scores can also be manipulated by re-taking the same exam, as most colleges
consider only the highest score (Vigdor and Clotfelter, 2003). Our data report the last recorded
score on each exam. We cannot link individual observations between the SAT and ACT data, so
are unable to measure how much overlap there is between participation on the two exams.
        5
          No state exceeds both thresholds, while two—Arizona and Nevada—exceed neither and
are counted toward neither category. See the online Appendix.
        6
          Our school-level analysis excludes private schools.

                                                    5
our test-taker data sets to the number of 12th graders provides an accurate estimate of the

participation rate at all but the smallest schools. 7 All of our school-level analyses exclude

schools with participation rates below 0.02.

       Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the school-level data sets. Average SAT scores

are much higher in ACT states than in SAT states. The same is true, to a much lesser degree, for

ACT scores in SAT states. Within SAT states, however, schools with high participation rates

tend to have higher scores than those with low participation rates, on both the SAT and the ACT.

Similarly, within ACT states, schools with high participation rates tend to have higher scores

than those with low participation rates on both exams.



III. A Model of Self-Selection and Average Test Scores

       College entrance exams are not compulsory, and students who take them incur both

financial and time costs – perhaps $45 for test registration, plus several hours on a Saturday

morning to take the exam. For students who do not plan to attend college or who plan to apply

only to non-selective colleges that do not require entrance exam scores, there are few benefits to

offset these costs. By contrast, students who hope to attend a selective college will likely find

that the benefits exceed the costs.

       Let μij be the net benefit of taking the exam for student i from group j (where a group

might be a school or a state). Let θj be the mean of this in group j, so that uij = μij – θj has mean

       7
         Students who take exams prior to 12th grade are coded by the year they attend 12th grade
– a student who takes the SAT or ACT as an 11th grader in 2003 is counted toward the 2004
participation measure. The ratio of test takers to 12th grade enrollment overstates the cohort
participation rate in schools with large dropout rates. To address this, our denominator for the
participation rate is the maximum of the number of 12th graders and the average number of
students per grade in grades 9 through 12. The latter average excludes grades with very low
enrollment, defined as those with enrollment less than 10% of total enrollment in grades 9-12 at
the school. In the schools where still we count more test-takers than students, we set the
participation rate to 1 if the difference is less than 10% and drop the school otherwise.

                                                     6
zero in each group. θj will tend to be higher in schools where more students are college bound;

within schools, uij will be higher among the college bound than among students not planning to

attend college. Both θj and uij may vary across tests as well, and θj will generally be higher for

the test preferred by local public universities. Students for whom the net benefits of taking the

exam are positive (μij > 0, or uij > -θj) will take the exam.

        Let αj be the average achievement of students in group j, and let tij* = αj + εij (where εij

has mean zero in each group) be the latent achievement of student i. For many analytical

purposes, it would be useful to observe αj, and this is the parameter of interest for our

investigation of selectivity of test participation. Unfortunately, when test participation is non-

random, this is not observed. Instead, the average of observed scores is

        (1)     t j = αj + E[εij | μij > 0] = αj + E[εij | uij > -θj].

The final term here is the mean of εij among students for whom the net benefit of test

participation is positive. Because benefits and latent achievement are unlikely to be independent

– students who hope to attend college probably have higher achievement levels than those who

do not – this will in general be non-zero. As a consequence, analyses that take t j as a measure of

average achievement in group j may be uninformative about the determinants and consequences

of true average achievement, αj.

        If εij and uij are assumed to be bivariate normal with correlation ρ within each group j,

                ⎛ ε ij ⎞  ⎛ ⎛ 0 ⎞ ⎛ σ 2 ρσ ⎞ ⎞
        (2)     ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ ~ N ⎜ ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟, ⎜⎜      ⎟⎟ ,
                  u       ⎜ ⎝ 0 ⎠ ρσ 1 ⎟ ⎟
                 ⎝ ⎠ij    ⎝         ⎝      ⎠⎠

then the group-level participation rate, pj, indicates the mean test taking propensity in the group:

pj = Pr(μij > 0) = Pr(uij > -θj) = Φ(θj), so θj = Φ-1(pj). This gives (1) a convenient form:

        (3)     t j = αj + ρ * σ * λ(pj),



                                                            7
where λ(p) ≡ φ(Φ-1(p)) / p is the Inverse Mills Ratio (hereafter, IMR) and φ() and Φ() are the

standard normal PDF and CDF, respectively. 8 Thus, if β = ρσ were known, the true mean

achievement in group j could be recovered: αj = t j - β * λ(pj). The challenge is in obtaining a

consistent estimate of β. 9



IV. Alternative Empirical Strategies for Identifying the Selectivity of Test Participation

        We examine several strategies for identifying within-group selectivity. These differ in

their imposed assumptions about the between-school relationship between latent performance

and test participation.

A. Cross-sectional analysis

        We begin with the case where only a single cross section of test scores is observed. The

only available strategy for estimating β is via a regression of group average observed scores on

the group-level IMR:

        (4)     t j = α + λ(pj) β + ((αj – α) + e j).

This yields a consistent estimate of β if and only if αj is uncorrelated with λ(pj). 10




        8
            This is a well-known framework, introduced by Gronau (1974). See also Heckman
(1979). Normality of student achievement within schools is a plausible assumption. Normality
of u is not restrictive: If F(u) is the true CDF of net benefits of test-taking within the school, one
can always convert u to a normal distribution with v=Φ-1(F(u)). In this framework, ρ is defined
as corr(ε, v) rather than corr(ε, u). The assumption that ε and u are bivariate normal is somewhat
more restrictive, but also plausible. We present diagnostic analyses in the Appendix which
suggest that the distributional assumption is approximately correct.
         9
            Given β, the two components ρ and σ can be readily distinguished from the within-
group variance of observed scores, which can be shown to equal σ2 - β2δ(pj) where
δ(p)=λ(p)*[λ(p) + Φ-1(p)]. Inference on ρ and σ is somewhat complex. We focus on inference
for β; since σ > 0, β = 0 if and only if ρ = 0.
         10
            Sampling error in pj is negligible in our data, and the estimates of the sampling error of
β reported below neglect it. When we take account of it using the approach proposed by Murphy
and Topel (1985), the estimated variance of the coefficients of (4) is essentially unchanged.

                                                        8
       This strategy assumes away between-school selectivity: While participation rates may

vary across groups, there a group’s participation rate (or a monotonic function of it) must be

uncorrelated with its average latent achievement. This is not particularly plausible. There are

likely unobserved factors that vary across groups and influence both the test participation rate

and average performance. For example, suppose that groups are schools, and that one school

enrolls academically-strong, college-bound students while another enrolls weaker students who

are less likely to want to attend college. The former school will have higher αj and θj (so lower

λ(pj)) than the latter, producing a downward bias in β and leading to an underestimate of the

degree of within-school selectivity of test participation.

B. Control function estimator

       If a proxy for latent mean performance is available, bias deriving from non-independence

of group-level participation rates and latent achievement can be reduced. We can write:

       (5)      t j = α + λ(pj) β + Xj κ + ((αj – Xj κ ) + e j),

where α + Xjκ is the best linear predictor of αj given proxy Xj. The bias in a regression of t j on

λ(pj) and Xj depends on the variance of (αj – Xjκ) and on its correlation with λ(pj). The better the

proxy, the smaller will be the remaining variance in achievement, and therefore the bias.

C. First-differenced estimates

       School-level proxies for latent achievement are rarely available, and other methods are

necessary. One option is to take advantage of multiple observations on the selection-test score

relationship at the same school from different years. The difference between the expressions for

school mean scores given by (4) in t=0 and t=1 is

       (6)      t j1 – t j0 = (λ(pj1) – λ(pj0)) β + ((αj1 – αj0) + ( e j1 – e j0)).

This first-differenced regression estimates β without bias if

       (7)     corr(αj1 – αj0, λ(pj1) – λ(pj0)) = 0.

                                                            9
That is, while there may be a cross-sectional correlation between a school’s IMR and its latent

average score, there can be no correlation between the change in a school’s IMR and the change

in its latent mean score. 11 This assumption is somewhat more plausible than the corresponding

assumption about levels, but absent an exogenous source of variation in IMRs it is still

problematic: School quality (and the quality of a school’s students) presumably evolves over

time, producing shifts in both αjt and λ(pjt).

D. First-differenced estimates, with instruments

        Let Zj be a variable that predicts the change in IMRs. If Zj is uncorrelated with the

change in latent performance, it can serve as an instrument in (6), allowing for consistent

estimation of β. Below, we form such an instrument by taking advantage of a policy change in

Illinois that mandated that all high school graduates starting with the class of 2002 take the ACT.

Because demographic characteristics of schools were correlated with pre-implementation

participation rates, the “bite” of these policies varied with school demographics. In particular,

schools with higher minority shares had lower pre-implementation participation rates and larger

increases in participation (and larger reductions in IMRs) surrounding implementation of the

policy. 12 Of course, minority share is correlated with mean latent test scores, but it is plausible

that the base-year minority share is uncorrelated with the change in mean latent scores

surrounding the implementation of the policies. If so, this base-year minority share forms a valid

instrument for the change in IMRs surrounding the policy implementation.

        Of course, the interpretation of the IMR coefficient in a model for average observed

scores as a measure of selectivity arises from our assumption that latent achievement and the

propensity to write the exam have a bivariate normal distribution within schools (or states). If

        11
          Note that this approach requires that β not vary with t.
        12
          The instrument does not predict changes in test taking rates in states that did not have a
policy change. See Appendix Table 1.

                                                    10
this assumption is incorrect, even with fully exogenous variation in λ(θj) the coefficient that we

obtain will not have a useful interpretation and will not permit a consistent estimate of αj. In the

appendix, we present several informal diagnostics meant to identify important violations of

normality. We find no indication that the bivariate normality assumption is importantly violated

– polynomials in pj are not significant predictors of t j conditional on λ(θj), and the distribution of

observed scores is quite similar to that implied by normality of pre-selection scores.



V. State-Level Analysis

       We begin by examining the selectivity of test participation within states. Figure 1A

displays the scatterplot of state-level SAT participation rates and mean SAT scores for the 1996

cohort, distinguishing between SAT and ACT states. Consistent with previous analyses by

Dynarksi (1987) and Dynarski and Gleason (1993), there is a strong inverse relationship between

average scores and participation rates. This inverse relationship is driven to a surprising degree,

however, by the inclusion of ACT states; within the SAT states the participation-score

correlation is much smaller. The graph is thus suggestive of strong positive selection into SAT-

taking in the ACT states, as higher participation rates are associated with lower scores, and with

weaker selection in SAT states. This is consistent with the idea that in ACT states only high-

performing students who hope to attend elite out-of-state colleges take the SAT, while in SAT

states all or most college-bound students take the exam. Figure 1B displays the same scatterplot

for the ACT (concorded to the SAT scale). The overall negative correlation between test taking

rates and average scores shown in the SAT data is not as apparent in the ACT data.

       Of course, it is possible that latent ability is correlated with test taking rates, which would

affect the observed correlations between test-taking rates and observed scores. For instance, if

states with better schools manage to persuade more of their students to attend college, the

                                                      11
correlation between participation and observed scores is inflated, potentially masking a negative

causal effect of participation on mean scores arising from positive within-state selection.

       To examine this, we turn to state-level NAEP scores, which are from tests taken by

random samples of students in each state and are therefore not subject to the selection bias that

may be reflected in SAT and ACT averages. Table 2 presents regressions relating state-level

score averages to inverse Mills ratios computed from state-level participation rates. The top

panel shows results for SAT states, with models for SAT scores in columns 1-3 and models for

ACT scores in columns 4-6, and the bottom panel shows parallel results for ACT states.

       The estimates in columns 1 and 4 are consistent with the results shown in Figures 1A and

1B: Selection into participation is strongly positive for the SAT in ACT states, and nearly as

strong (but much less precisely estimated) for ACT scores in ACT states. Selection is weaker in

SAT states, for both exams, and indistinguishable from zero for the ACT. Columns 2 and 5 limit

the sample to the set of states for which NAEP data on the math performance of random samples

of 1992 8th graders – the cohort that took entrance exams in 1996 – are available. This has little

effect, save that the insignificant SAT participation coefficient in SAT states changes sign.

       Columns 3 and 6 attempt to absorb the potential correlation between state-level

participation rates and mean achievement by controlling for the average performance of the

cohort in the state on the 8th grade NAEP math exam in 1992. The inclusion of this control does

not dramatically change the point estimates (excepting again SAT scores in SAT states, where

the IMR coefficient returns to its original value, still insignificant), though it does dramatically

increase the regression goodness-of-fit and the added precision makes the IMR coefficient for

ACT scores in ACT states significant. There is clear evidence of positive selection into taking

both exams in the ACT states, where the propensity to take each exam is correlated around 0.5



                                                    12
with a student’s potential score. Any selection is much weaker in SAT states, where the

correlation is estimated around 0.1-0.2 but zero is well within the confidence intervals.



VI. Observational Analyses of Within-School Selection

       For many purposes, it is useful to distinguish between across-school variation in test

participation rates and within-school selection, each of which can produce selectivity bias in state

average scores. 13 In this section, we present observational analyses that distinguish these two

sources of selection, first using cross-sectional analyses of the relationship between school-level

test taking rates and average scores, then examining changes over time. Each yields implausible

estimates of the key within-school selectivity parameter, ρ, suggesting that the identifying

restrictions are violated. In the next section, we exploit the Illinois policy reform to identify

within-school selectivity under more plausible assumptions.

A. Cross-sectional estimates

       Columns 1-4 of Table 3 present cross-sectional estimates of selectivity in 2000, as in

equation (4). The top panel shows results for SAT states, with two specifications estimated on

SAT scores in columns 1-2 and the same specifications repeated for ACT scores in columns 3-4,

while the bottom panel repeats the analysis for ACT states. The first specification in each pair

controls only for state fixed effects, while the second adds controls for the school racial

composition and for the fraction of students at the school who are eligible for free school

lunches. 14 The inverse Mills ratio coefficients are uniformly negative, though all are reduced




       13
           If the mean latent achievement is independent of the participation rate at the state level,
the IMR coefficient from a state-level regression estimates (σα2 + σε2)1/2 corr(α + ε, θ + u) = (σθ2
+ σu2)-1/2(σεσuρ + σασθcorr(α, θ)).
        14
           Results from models that include county fixed-effects are quite similar.

                                                     13
notably by the addition of the demographic controls. The IMR coefficient for ACT scores in

SAT states is insignificant and near zero in this specification.

       If school participation rates are independent of mean latent scores, the negative

relationship between IMRs and average scores indicates negative selection into test participation

within schools—that is, that the weakest students in each school are the most likely to take the

college entrance exams. The ρ estimates are strongly negative for the dominant exam in a state

and smaller for the secondary exam. Estimates of the selectivity of SAT-writing in SAT states

and of ACT-writing in ACT states are nearly identical. As it is unlikely that test writers are

actually negatively selected within schools, we conclude that the assumptions of the model are

violated by strong across-school correlations between test-taking rates and mean achievement.

B. Time-differenced estimates

       One strategy for removing bias from endogeneity of the school-level participation rate is

to focus only on changes over time in school-level participation rates and scores. This strategy

removes any fixed components of school quality, and identifies the selectivity parameters if

changes in test participation are unrelated to changes in a school’s latent score.

       Columns 5-8 of Table 3 present estimates of the first-differenced regression, (6). The

coefficients on the change in inverse Mills ratio (and estimated ρ’s) are nearly all positive, but

quite small. This is particularly true in SAT states, where the estimated ρs are all less than 0.05.

βs and ρs are somewhat larger in ACT states, but still indicate only minimal selectivity.

       The first-differenced specifications do not impose assumptions about the cross-sectional

correlation between school mean latent scores (αjt) and propensity to write the exam (θjt),

assuming only that the projection of αjt on λ(pjt) is the same in the two years. It is thus possible

to estimate the between-school selectivity of test participation, which we measure as corr(αjt, θjt).

This is reported in the last row of each panel. As our restriction that β be constant across years

                                                     14
prevents this correlation from varying substantially over time, we report only the average

correlation across 1994 and 2000. This is substantial for the dominant test in each group of

states – indicating that better schools have more test writers – but small for the secondary test.

       These first-differenced results, while more plausible than those obtained from the purely

cross-sectional analysis, cannot be presumed to be consistent. There is no particular reason to

think that school quality is constant over this period, nor that changes in quality are for some

reason unreflected in participation rates. Changes in quality (or in school composition) would

most likely produce a positive correlation between the change in θ and the change in α, biasing

the selectivity estimates downward.



VII. The Illinois Policy Reform

       To isolate participation rate changes that are exogenous to changes in school quality, we

take advantage of a policy change in Illinois, an ACT state. Beginning in Spring 2001, all

juniors in Illinois public high schools took the “Prairie State Assessment Examination” (PSAE),

which included the ACT exam as one component. 15 The ACT was administered under the same

conditions as are used for ordinary ACT administrations, and scores derived from the ACT

component of the PSAE are counted as valid for most admissions purposes.

       The new requirement led to large increases in test participation in Illinois. Changes in

average observed scores accompanying this change in participation rates can identify the

selectivity of test participation before the policy change. This requires some care, as changes in

IMRs cannot be treated as entirely exogenous to changes in school quality. First, initial test-

taking rates varied substantially across schools. As the new requirement had more “bite” in

       15
           Students are not required to “pass” the PSAE, and the introduction of the test was not
related to any other statewide changes in school policies. Colorado introduced a similar program
around the same time, but we focus on Illinois because the sample size is so much larger there.

                                                     15
schools with lower initial participation rates, one might expect that schools with lower quality

would have tended to see larger participation increases as they complied with the policy. Any

mean reversion in school quality would bias a first-differenced analysis that treated the change in

IMRs as exogenous.       Second, compliance with the policy was incomplete.           The average

participation rate, as calculated in our data, rose from 57% in 2000 to 89% in 2004. 16 If schools

that complied fully differed in their quality from those that did not, this would again be a source

of potential endogeneity of the change in test participation rates.

       Fortunately for our analysis, there are clear patterns in the impact of the policy that are

plausibly unrelated to changes in school quality. Figure 2 shows the scatterplot of participation

rates against the school fraction white for Illinois high schools in 2000, before the Prairie State

Assessment Exam was introduced, and in 2004. We distinguish between the Chicago Public

Schools and those in other Illinois districts, as the two groups differed substantially on both

dimensions in 2000. 17 In the left panel, which uses 2000 data, there is a strong relationship

between test participation rates and school racial composition, with much higher participation

rates in schools with more white students. This pattern is still present, but much weaker, in

2004. 18 Thus, the increase in participation between 2000 and 2004 was most dramatic for the

schools with the lowest white shares.



       16
            The ACT Corporation reports that 99% of seniors in 2004 took the exam. The
difference likely has to do with the denominator. We calculate the denominator from the
Common Core of Data as the greater of the number of 12th graders and the average number of
students per grade. If dropout rates are high, the average number of students per grade may
over-state the number of potential test takers and lower the test taking rate.
         17
            Chicago also implemented a variety of reforms in the years studied that might affect
scores, test participation, or the distribution of students across schools. See Jacob (2005). All of
our analyses of Illinois data allow for unrestricted differences between Chicago schools and the
rest of the state in test score and participation changes between 2000 and 2004.
         18
            The basic shape of the data is invariant to the use of the school’s 2000 racial
composition on the horizontal axis in both years.

                                                     16
       We exploit this feature of the data to generate variation in the “bite” of the Prairie State

requirement that is plausibly exogenous to changes in school’s latent test scores. Specifically,

we use the school fraction black and fraction Hispanic in 2000 as instruments for the change in

the school-level IMR between 2000 and 2004. 19 These are valid instruments if the relationship

between school racial composition and mean latent score did not change over this time period. 20

       Table 4 presents several analyses of school ACT averages in Illinois. The first column

reports a cross-sectional model using 2000 data. This is quite similar to the analogous model in

Table 3, and like that indicates strong negative selection into test participation. The second

column replicates the first-differenced specification from Table 3 using changes between 1996

and 2000 and just the Illinois data. Like the earlier first-differenced models, this indicates

approximately zero within-school selectivity and strong positive between-school selectivity.

       The remaining columns of Table 4 report first-differenced estimates from data spanning

the Illinois policy change, relating changes in school mean test scores between 2000 and 2004 to

changes in inverse Mills ratios.     Column 3 presents OLS estimates.         These combine the

potentially endogenous variation that identifies the estimates in column 2 with exogenous
       19
            Appendix Table 1 presents first-stage regressions of the change in school IMRs on the
base-year school racial composition. These have the sign implied by Figure 2. The table also
presents a first stage equation estimated using all ACT states except Illinois and Colorado (which
implemented a similar policy change, but where we have been unable to identify a plausibly
exogenous source of variation in the policy’s bite). In this sample, the year-2000 racial
composition of the school is not predictive of the 2000-2004 change in the school’s IMR.
         20
            Data from the NAEP indicate that the black-white mathematics test score gap among
Illinois 8th graders grew by 2 points (on a scale with standard deviation 36) between 1990 and
2005, while the Hispanic-white gap fell by 8 points over the same period. If this trend holds
equally across and within schools and if there are no spillover effects on white students in high-
minority-share schools, we will tend to overstate the within-school selection into participation
slightly. A back-of-the-envelope calculation indicates that this might account for as much as one
fifth of the ρ estimates that we report below. A second threat to the instruments’ validity is that
racial composition in 2000 may be correlated with the change in racial composition over the next
four years, which could be reflected in (or could itself reflect) changes in a school’s mean latent
score. Specifications reported in Appendix Table 1 control directly for the change in school
racial composition, with little effect on the selectivity parameter of interest.

                                                    17
variation deriving from the policy change. The estimates differ dramatically from those in

Column 2, indicating a within-school correlation between participation and scores of 0.48.

Column 4 presents the IV specification. This indicates that falling IMRs (rising participation

rates) produce large reductions in observed average test scores, corresponding to strong positive

selectivity (ρ = 0.75) of students into test-taking within schools.

        We allow the across-school correlation between participation and latent scores – the

between-school selectivity of test participation – to vary between 2000 and 2004. Estimates of

between-school selectivity are shown at the bottom of Table 4. Those that take advantage of the

policy change indicate year-2000 correlations that are notably larger than those from the 1996-

2000 analysis. Correlations in 2004 are smaller than in 2000, consistent with the idea that the

policy served to reduce the “signal” variation in test participation that might correlate with the

quality of the school or its students.



VIII. Implications for Analyses of Unadjusted Means

        The final component of our analysis is to draw out the implications of our results for

analyses that, because they lack a source of exogenous variation in participation like that

produced by the Illinois policy change, are unable to correct for selectivity of test participation.

We cannot estimate the precise bias that this produces in analyses of observed averages without

producing the exact specification that a researcher might attempt to estimate, but we can report

some relevant correlations.

        The key parameters for school-level analyses are the correlation between the observed

mean score at a school and the underlying latent mean, α, and the relative variances of the two

measures. To the extent that the correlation between the measures is large, schools with high

observed scores will tend also to have high latent scores, and analyses that treat the observed

                                                     18
mean score as a measure of the school’s quality will not be unduly affected by selection bias.

That is, coefficient signs will likely be correct; if the variances of the two measures differ, the

magnitude of estimated effects will be affected, in predictable ways.

        To see this, consider a regression that would be correctly specified if the dependent

variable was true mean latent scores α, but suppose that the observed mean score t is used

instead. Let R be the coefficient from a projection of t j onto αj. Then if the true model is:

        (8)      αj = Xj*γ + νj,

we can write (neglecting intercepts)

        (9)      t j = αjR + ( t j – αjR) = Xj* γ *R + νj + ( t j – αjR).

        There are two biases introduced by using t j in place of αj as the dependent variable in

(9). First, the X coefficient, γ, is biased by a factor R due to the different scales of the two

measures. Second, the regression coefficient will be further biased if ( t j – αjR) is correlated

with X. This correlation will vary with the choice of variables to include in X, of course. The

resulting bias, however, depends on this correlation as well as on the variance of ( t j – αjR); the

bias will necessarily be small if Var( t j – αjR) = Var( t j )*(1-(corr( t j , αj))2) is small.

        Table 5 presents various relevant parameters that are implied by the IV estimates in

Table 4. The first row repeats the within-school correlation, ρ. The next several rows show

estimates of the across-school standard deviations of average observed scores, mean latent

scores, the school-level participation parameter θ, and the selection term in models for observed

average scores, ρ*σ*λ(p). All are computed from the same Illinois data used in Table 4. In both

2000 and 2004, the across-school standard deviation of mean observed scores is about 112 SAT

points. This is notably smaller than the standard deviation of latent scores, which is around 150

in 2000 and 130 in 2004; comparing this to the within-school standard deviation (σ) of around
                                                          19
185 indicates that about 35% of the variance of latent test scores is between schools. By

comparison, the standard deviation of θ is around 0.6. As the within-school variation in test

participation is normalized to have variance one, this indicates that only about one quarter of the

variation in test-taking propensity is between schools.

        The next row displays the overall selectivity of test participation, combining the across-

and within-school components. The estimate from the pre-reform period is 0.76, suggesting that

test takers are strongly positively selected on the whole. This is the relevant parameter for

correcting state mean scores, supposing that the relative importance of within- and between-

school components of selectivity do not vary across states. It is somewhat larger than the

estimate obtained for all ACT states from our control function approach in Table 2.

        The next rows of Table 5 show the correlation between observed and latent scores, first

unconditionally and then conditional on the school racial composition.                Unconditional

correlations are 0.97 and 0.98 in the two years. Conditional correlations are somewhat lower,

but remain well above 0.9.        With such high correlations, (1-(corr( t jt , αj))2 is quite small,

implying that the omitted variable introduced by the use of observed means rather than latent

means, ( t jt – αjtR), has a standard deviation of only about 20 points. Bias from the omission of

this variable is likely to be negligible.

        The final row of the table shows R, the coefficient of a projection of latent means onto

observed means. This is 0.74 in 2000 and 0.86 in 2004. Thus, coefficients in regressions like (9)

will be attenuated relative to the true β by 14-26 percent, with the larger number more relevant in

situations where test taking is optional.

        Of course, all of these estimates derive from models estimated from data on Illinois ACT-

takers. They are dependent on the validity of the exclusion restrictions underlying our IV

estimates, and even if these are valid, they may not generalize to other states or to SAT scores.
                                                    20
       On the other hand, several patterns in the data suggests that the basic conclusion—that

selection bias is unlikely to be an important determinant of the qualitative results of analyses that

take school-mean test scores as the dependent variable—is likely to be quite robust. Because

test-taking rates are less variable than observed scores and because the two are so highly

correlated, observed test scores are unlikely to be seriously misleading about rankings of states

or schools even if selection into test participation is much more extreme than our estimates

indicate. As a final exercise, we computed latent scores under various assumptions about the

selection coefficient, ρ. Table 6 reports summaries of the association between these latent scores

and observed school means in 2000, limiting the sample to schools with at least 50 students. The

first column reports the correlation between αj and t j .         The second column reports the

coefficient of a regression of the latter on the former. The third and fourth columns repeat these

measures, after first residualizing both α and t j against the school fraction white.

       Regardless of the value of ρ assumed, the correlation between observed and latent school

means remains quite high, 0.95 when ρ = 1 and higher for smaller values of ρ. Even after

residualizing scores against the school racial composition – likely an important control variable

in many analyses – these correlations are never lower than 0.88. Regression coefficients are

slightly more sensitive, reflecting the dependence of the variance of α on the ρ parameter, but

even these are quite stable across a wide range of ρ values around the estimated value of 0.75.

       We also explore specifications that vary the comparison group. While the first panel of

Table 6 uses all Illinois schools, the second panel limits computation of the statistics to the

relatively homogenous subset of schools that serve the Chicago suburbs, and the third panel

broadens the sample to all schools in ACT states (demeaning αj and t j separately for each state).

While correlations are somewhat reduced in these samples, all remain extremely high: When we

use our estimated ρ, they range from 0.88 to 0.95; even when we assume that ρ = 1 the range is
                                                  21
0.80 – 0.92. With such high correlations, there is little room for substantive bias even when test

scores are not corrected for selection into test participation.



IX. Conclusion

       Researchers often use college admissions test scores as measures of student achievement.

But since only a select group of students take these tests, analyses that use observed score

averages as a proxy for the mean latent test score may be biased. Correcting the selection bias

has been difficult: important unobserved variables likely impact both the propensity to take the

test and the latent test score, and as a result standard selection corrections perform poorly.

       In this paper, we examine selectivity biases in both state-level and school-level SAT and

ACT scores. At the state level, selection appears to introduce important biases only in ACT

states; in SAT states the correlation between the propensity to take the test and the latent score is

small and the resulting selection bias is also small.

       Our school-level analysis uses a policy change in Illinois requiring all high school juniors

to take the ACT as a source of plausibly exogenous variation in changes in participation rates

over time. We find that test takers are strongly positively selected both across and within

schools: Participation rates are higher at higher-performing schools, and within schools higher-

achieving students are more likely to take the test. The across-school variation in latest test

scores is large relative both to within-school variation in latent scores and to across-school

variation in participation rates. As a result, observed mean scores are highly correlated with

latent means, and selectivity bias serves to attenuate variations in school mean scores but is

unlikely to introduce further bias. Thus, despite the strong selectivity of test participation,

simple analyses using observed school-level test scores without controls for selectivity are

unlikely to produce misleading results.

                                                        22
       It remains for further analysis to investigate the validity of our Illinois-based estimates

for data from other states. Based on the patterns seen here, our expectation is that the results will

generalize reasonably well to other ACT states. If so, researchers would be justified in using

unadjusted ACT averages as measures of student achievement, correcting for attenuation but not

further adjusting for selection.




                                                     23
References

Abraham, Katharine G., and Melissa A. Clark. 2006. “Financial Aid and Students’ College
       Decisions: Evidence from the DC Tuition Assistance Grant Program.” Journal of Human
       Resources 41(3): 578-610.
ACT Corporation. 2003. “ACT Average Composite Scores by State.” ACT Corporation
       website: http://www.act.org/news/data.html, May 2003.
Card, David and A. Abigail Payne. 2002. “School Finance Reform, the Distribution of School
       Spending, and the Distribution of Student Test Scores.” Journal of Public Economics
       83(1): 49–82.
Dorans, Neil J. 1999. “Correspondences Between ACT and SAT I Scores.” College Board
       Report No. 99-1.
Dynarski, Mark. 1987. “The Scholastic Aptitude Test: Participation and Performance.”
       Economics of Education Review 6(3): 263–273.
Dynarski, Mark and Philip Gleason. 1993. “Using Scholastic Aptitude Test Scores as Indicators
       of State Educational Performance.” Economics of Education Review 12(3): 203–211.
Gronau, Reuben. 1974. “Wage Comparisons--a Selectivity Bias.” The Journal of Political
       Economy 82(6): 1119-1143.
Hanushek, Eric A. and Lori L. Taylor. 1990. “Alternative Assessments of the Performance of
       Schools: Measurement of State Variations in Achievement.” The Journal of Human
       Resources 25(2): 179–201.
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica 47(1):
       153-161.
Jacob, Brian. 2005. “Accountability, Incentives, and Behavior: Evidence from School Reform
       in Chicago.” Journal of Public Economics 89(5-6): 761-796.
Krueger, Alan B. and Diane M. Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in the
       Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from
       Project STAR.” The Economic Journal 111(January): 1–28.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 1985. “Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
       Econometric Models.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3(4): 370-379.
National Center for Education Statistics. Various years. Digest of Education Statistics. U.S.
       Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement:
       Washington, DC.
National Center for Education Statistics. 2006. “NAEP Data Explorer.” U.S. Department of
       Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Institute for Education Sciences
       website: http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/nde/, accessed April 2006.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2006. “Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School
       Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition among
       Jurisdictions.” American Economic Review 96(4): 1333-1350.
Vigdor, Jacob L. and Charles T. Clotfelter. 2003. “Retaking the SAT.” Journal of Human
       Resources 38(1): 1-33.




                                                24
Figure 1A. Average 1996 SAT Score versus SAT Participation Rate



                           1200
                                                            ND
                                                            IA
                                                               MN
                               1150                           WI
                                                           UT
                                                                KS
          Average SAT Score, 1996

                                                            SD MO
                                                               NE IL
                                                           MS AL
                                                               OKMI
                                                            AR      TN
                       1100


                                                               LA
                                                                  NM
                                                                WYKY          MT
                                                                      ID
                                                                                   OH CO
               1050




                                                                                     AZ                       OR
                                                                                                            WA
                                                                                                            AK              NH
                                                                           WV
                                                                                           NV                              MDVTCT   MA
        1000




                                                                                                              CA         DE ME
                                                                                                                            NJ VA
                                                                                                             FL TX HI        NY
                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                     IN          PA
                                                                                                                        NC
                                                                                                                         GA
                           950




                                                                                                                      SC

                                                  0                        20                 40                           60                   80
                                                                                     SAT-taking Rate, 1996

                                                                                    SAT state              Neutral State
                                                                                    ACT State




Figure 1B. Average 1996 ACT Score versus ACT Participation Rate
                                           1050




                                                                  OR
        Average SAT-Concorded ACT Score, 1996




                                                       VT
                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                            MN WI
                                                      RI                                                                        IA

                                                                        NY                                            MT
                               1000




                                                      CTDE                                                                         SD
                                                                       HI IN                                               OH    MOUT KSNE
                                                       NH
                                                                                      AZ                                    IDCO                ND
                                                                                                      NV                          WY
                                                                                                                                  MI IL
                                                      ME MA
                                                      NJ      CA
                                                          PA MD
                                                            VA                                  FL                               OK
                                                                                                 AK
                     950




                                                                                           TX                             NM
                                                                         GA                                                  AR
                                                                                                                      WVAL KY
                                                                                                                                                TN
                                                                  NC
                                                                                                                                           LA
          900




                                                                    SC
                                                                                                                                      MS

                                                  0                        20                 40                           60                   80
                                                                                     ACT-taking Rate, 1996

                                                                                    SAT state              Neutral State
                                                                                    ACT State




                                                                                                      25
Figure 2. ACT Participation vs. School Racial Composition in Illinois


                                                     2000                                                                           2004

                    1




                                                                                                   1
                    .8




                                                                                                   .8
      ACT participation rate, 2000




                                                                                     ACT participation rate, 2004
                          .6




                                                                                                         .6
          .4




                                                                                         .4
                    .2




                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                                                 Chicago
                                                                                                                                                 Rest of state
                                                                                                                                                 Fitted
                    0




                                                                                                   0

                                     0   .2       .4         .6        .8   1                                       0   .2       .4         .6        .8         1
                                              School fr. white, 2000                                                         School fr. white, 2004




                                                                                26
Table 1. Summary statistics

                                                 SAT States                                           ACT states
                                 All schools        Above         Below               All schools        Above         Below
                                                   average       average                                average       average
                                                 participation participation                          participation participation
                               Mean      S.D.        Mean             Mean           Mean     S.D.        Mean             Mean
                                (1)       (2)         (3)              (4)            (5)      (6)         (7)              (8)
SAT
  Mean score                     978     100         1037              958           1104      145         1117             1096
  School size                    285     201          304              279            239      153          270              218
  No. of test-takers             130     109          209              104             35       55          65               15
  Participation rate            46%      21%         71%              38%            13%       14%         22%               7%
  Fr. white                     68%      31%         78%              64%            83%       23%         82%              84%
  # of schools                  5,167                1,291            3,876          1,882                  756             1,126
ACT
  Mean score (SAT scale)         970     122          983              962            963       89          999              949
  School size                    296     202          254              323            174      144          179              173
  No. of test-takers              42      49           56               32             99       92          132              86
  Participation rate            16%      15%         26%               9%            57%       16%         75%              50%
  Fr. white                     68%      30%         74%              64%            82%       26%         90%              78%
  # of schools                  4,143                1,654            2,489          4,050                 1,147            2,903



Notes: All data pertain to the 2000 cohort. Sample includes only public schools with participation rates (on the SAT in the first
panel or the ACT in the second panel) above 2%. All statistics are computed from unweighted school-level data. Samples in
columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 are schools with participation rates on the relevant exam above and below the state-level participation rate.
School size is the size of a single grade cohort at the school; see text for details.




                                                                      27
Table 2. Cross-sectional estimates of state-level selectivity into test-taking, 1996

                                             SAT scores vs. SAT         ACT scores vs. ACT
                                                 participation              participation
                                             (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)
Panel A: SAT States
  Inverse Mills Ratio in test-taking rate    45.0    -40.7     38.7     28.4     30.5     21.2
  in state                                  (36.2)   (26.7)   (33.8)   (10.9)   (11.9)   (18.4)
  NAEP 8th grade math scores, 1992                              2.0                        1.0
                                                               (0.8)                      (1.4)
  Exclude states without NAEP data?          n         y         y      n         y         y
  N (states)                                 23       19        19      23       19        19
  R2                                        0.06     0.05      0.39    0.11     0.19      0.21
  Underlying parameters
    ρ                                        0.22    -0.20     0.19    0.15      0.16     0.11
    σ                                       200.4    199.9    199.6    195.0    195.3    194.3
Panel B: ACT States
  Inverse Mills Ratio in test-taking rate   110.4    122.0    121.2     77.4     77.5     89.9
  in state                                  (21.6)   (26.0)   (16.4)   (85.2)   (96.5)   (25.7)
  NAEP 8th grade math scores, 1992                              1.7                        3.3
                                                               (0.4)                      (0.2)
  Exclude states without NAEP data?          n         y         y      n         y         y
  N (states)                                 25       21        21      25       21        21
  R2                                        0.52     0.56      0.78    0.04     0.03      0.92
  Underlying parameters
   ρ                                         0.52     0.56     0.55    0.40      0.40     0.46
   σ                                        213.8    219.0    218.6    193.4    193.4    196.3

Note: Average ACT scores are computed from ACT micro-data, concorded to the SAT scale
using the concordance developed by Dorans et al. 1999.




                                                        28
Table 3. Cross-sectional and first-differenced estimates of within-school selectivity into test-taking

                                                Cross-sectional, 2000          First differenced, 1996-2000
                                            SAT scores      ACT scores        SAT scores        ACT scores
                                             (1)    (2)     (3)      (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)     (8)
Panel A: SAT states
  Inverse Mills Ratio in test-taking rate at -170.0 -68.5   -45.0    -2.7
  school, 2000                                (5.1) (4.7)   (5.5)    (4.2)
  Change in Inverse Mills Ratio in test-                                      4.6      9.3     -0.4       1.2
  taking rate at school, 1996-2000                                           (5.1)    (4.8)    (6.9)     (6.9)
  Controls
     State FEs                                  y     y        y        y       y        y       y         y
     Racial composition, fr. free lunch         n     y       n         y      n         y       n         y
  N (schools)                                5,167 5,167    4,143    4,143   4,076    4,076    3,122     3,122
  R2                                          0.33 0.65      0.12     0.47    0.01     0.04    0.02      0.03
  Underlying parameters
     ρ                                        -0.75 -0.36   -0.25    -0.02    0.03     0.05    0.00      0.01
     σ                                        226.6 189.3   177.4    172.7   181.8    182.0    174.2     174.2
     corr(α, θ)                                 0     0       0        0     0.49      0.50    0.08      0.08
Panel B: ACT states
  Inverse Mills Ratio in test-taking rate at -25.0 -19.5    -158.6   -63.8
  school, 2000                                (6.3) (5.8)    (6.4)   (5.3)
  Change in Inverse Mills Ratio in test-                                      18.2     20.0    19.4      22.3
  taking rate at school, 1996-2000                                           (14.0)   (14.1)   (6.8)     (6.8)
  Controls
     State FEs                                  y     y        y        y       y        y       y         y
     Racial composition, fr. free lunch         n     y       n         y      n         y       n         y
  N (schools)                                1,882 1,882    4,050    4,050   1,132    1,132    3,286     3,286
  R2                                          0.14 0.34      0.44     0.66    0.01     0.02    0.01      0.03
  Underlying parameters
     ρ                                        -0.15 -0.11   -0.75    -0.36    0.11     0.12    0.11      0.13
     σ                                        171.2 170.6   211.1    179.6   172.0    172.1    173.0     173.2
     corr(α, θ)                                 0     0       0        0     -0.04    -0.03    0.48      0.49




                                                            29
Table 4. Selection estimates from Illinois data

                                      Cross-      1st difference,       1st difference, 2000-2004
                                  sectional, 2000   1996-2000
                                        OLS            OLS          OLS       IV      OLS         IV
                                         (1)             (2)        (3)       (4)     (5)         (6)
Inverse Mills Ratio in test-           -194.6
taking rate at school                  (16.8)
Change in Inverse Mills Ratio in                         8.6         88.0    149.4
test-taking rate at school                             (15.6)       (12.5)   (37.5)
Chicago                                -160.1           12.2         57.7     67.8     59.6      75.9
                                       (14.1)           (5.3)        (7.0)   (11.8)   (11.3)    (15.9)
Change in test participation rate                                                     -140.0   -302.6
at school                                                                             (22.4)   (107.4)

N (schools)                           390              390          390      390      390         390
R2                                    0.73             0.01         0.23     0.16     0.13        0.01

ρ                                    -0.85             0.05         0.48      0.75
σ                                    228.7             174.9        183.4    199.0
corr(α, θ), 2000                     -0.05             0.67         0.75      0.80
corr(α, θ), 2004                                                    0.48     0.54


Notes: Sample includes public schools with ACT participation rates above 2% and non-missing
demographic information in each of 1996, 2000, and 2004. Instruments in columns 4 and 6 are the
fraction black and fraction Hispanic at the school in 2000.




                                                       30
Table 5. Relevant statistics for studies with imperfect selectivity
controls implied by the Illinois analysis

                                                        2000           2004
                                                         (1)            (2)
Within-school, individual-level correlation (ρ)                 0.75
Standard deviation across schools
    tbar                                                112.3          114.7
    α                                                   147.8          130.3
    θ                                                    0.54           0.60
    ρ*σ*λ(p)                                             45.8           28.3
Net correlation (unconditional)
    corr(α + ε, θ + u)                                   0.76          0.68
Across-school correlations
    corr(tbar, α), unconditional                         0.97          0.98
    corr(tbar, α), conditional on racial composition     0.93          0.96
Regression of α on tbar                                  0.74          0.86

Notes: All entries computed from the model reported in Column 5 of Table
4.




                                                       31
Table 6. Sensitivity of tbar-α relationship to ρ.

                                 Scores                  Residual scores
                         Correlatio     Reg.          Correlation Reg. coeff.
                            (1)          (2)              (3)        (4)
All schools in Illinois (N=344)
 ρ=0                         1            1                1              1
 ρ = 0.25                   1.00        0.91              0.99           0.89
 ρ = 0.5                    0.99        0.81              0.97           0.77
 ρ = 0.6                    0.98        0.77              0.95           0.71
 ρ = 0.75                   0.97        0.71              0.93           0.63
 ρ = 0.9                    0.96        0.64              0.90           0.55
 ρ=1                        0.95        0.59              0.88           0.49
Schools in chicago suburbs
 ρ=0                         1            1                1              1
 ρ = 0.25                   0.99        0.87              0.98           0.87
 ρ = 0.5                    0.98        0.74              0.94           0.71
 ρ = 0.6                    0.97        0.69              0.91           0.65
 ρ = 0.75                   0.95        0.61              0.88           0.55
 ρ = 0.9                    0.93        0.54              0.83           0.46
 ρ=1                        0.92        0.49              0.80           0.40
All schools in ACT states
 ρ=0                         1            1                1              1
 ρ = 0.25                   0.99        0.91              0.99           0.91
 ρ = 0.5                    0.98        0.80              0.95           0.78
 ρ = 0.6                    0.97        0.75              0.93           0.72
 ρ = 0.75                   0.95        0.68              0.90           0.63
 ρ = 0.9                    0.92        0.61              0.86           0.54
 ρ=1                        0.91        0.55              0.83           0.48


Notes: Schools with fewer than 50 students per cohort are excluded.
"Residual scores" are residuals from regressions of mean scores and latent
scores on the school fraction white. The sample for these regressions is
Illinois schools in the first two panels; all schools in ACT states (with state
fixed effects) in the last panel. Correlation and regression coefficients in the
final panel are based on variables that have had a state mean removed.




                                                           32
