                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  MISMATCH IN LAW SCHOOL

                                            Jesse Rothstein
                                             Albert Yoon

                                         Working Paper 14275
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14275


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




We thank Richard Abel, William Bowen, Lee Epstein, Tom Kane, Larry Katz, Andrew Martin, Jide
Nzelibe, Max Schanzenbach, Nancy Staudt, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at NBER,
UCSB, Duke, Vassar, the Universities of Michigan and Virginia, Northwestern, Washington University,
and the Ramon Areces Foundation for helpful comments and suggestions. We are extremely grateful
to the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for financial support and to Elizabeth Debraggio, Jessica Goldberg
and Ashley Miller for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jesse Rothstein and Albert Yoon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Mismatch in Law School
Jesse Rothstein and Albert Yoon
NBER Working Paper No. 14275
August 2008
JEL No. I21,J15,K30

                                            ABSTRACT

An important criticism of race-based higher education admission preferences is that they may hurt
minority students who attend more selective schools than they would in the absence of such preferences.
We categorize the non-experimental research designs available for the study of so-called "mismatch"
effects and evaluate the likely biases in each. We select two comparisons and use them to examine
mismatch effects in law school. We find no evidence of mismatch effects on any students' employment
outcomes or on the graduation or bar passage rates of black students with moderate or strong entering
credentials. What evidence there is for mismatch comes from less-qualified black students who typically
attend second- or third-tier schools. Many of these students would not have been admitted to any law
school without preferences, however, and the resulting sample selection prevents strong conclusions.


Jesse Rothstein
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrothst@princeton.edu

Albert Yoon
University of Toronto Faculty of Law
84 Queen's Park Blvd
Toronto, ON M5S 2C5
albert.yoon@utoronto.ca
I. Introduction

        Critics have long argued that the use of affirmative action in college and graduate

school admissions harms students from underrepresented groups who are the apparent

beneficiaries of admission preferences. These critics claim that students who do not

qualify for ordinary admission are in fact inadequately prepared, and would do better—

learn more and be more likely to graduate—if they were admitted only to schools better

matched to their qualifications (Summers, 1970; Thernstrom and Thernstrom, 1997). 1

Sowell (1978, p. 41), for example, writes that when “Ivy League schools and the leading

state and private institutions” use affirmative action, “[t]he net result is that thousands of

minority students who would normally qualify for good, non-prestigious colleges where

they could succeed are instead enrolled at famous institutions where they fail.”

        Much of the recent debate about what is known as “the mismatch hypothesis” has

focused on law schools. Sander (2004, 2005a,b) finds that large mismatch effects result

from affirmative action preferences for black applicants, but subsequent authors, using

the same data but different estimation strategies, find no evidence of mismatch (see, e.g.,

Ayres and Brooks, 2005; Ho, 2005; Chambers, et al, 2005; Barnes, 2007).

        In this paper, we use simple, reduced-form strategies to re-examine the evidence

regarding mismatch in law school. We find that the data are more informative than the

literature to date would suggest. What evidence there is for mismatch comes from the

least qualified law students. Identification of mismatch effects is particularly difficult for


        1
           The Supreme Court has held repeatedly that affirmative action’s relevant benefits are through
diversity of the educational environment, suggesting that effects on white students’ outcomes are the most
important. See, e.g., Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke 438 U.S. 265 (1978), and Grutter v. Bollinger, 539
U.S. 306 (2003). Another important effect is on the white students who are displaced from selective
schools by less-qualified minority applicants. Neither of these is our focus here. See Holzer and Neumark
(2000) for a review of relevant literatures.

                                                    1
these students; in any event, they are unlikely to be admitted to the most selective law

schools even with preferences. When we focus on students in the top four quintiles of the

entering credentials distribution, we find no evidence for mismatch effects. Even

methods that we would expect to overstate mismatch indicate that affirmative action

benefits rather than harms black students.

       We begin by developing a framework for classifying the empirical strategies used

in the literature to date. Three contrasts have been used: between students of the same

race and same (observable) admission credentials who attend more- and less-selective

schools; between black and white students with the same credentials who, because of

affirmative action, typically attend different schools; and between students at the same

school who differ in their law school grades.

       Each of these contrasts is likely to yield a biased estimate of the mismatch effect –

the effect of attending a highly selective school rather than one that is less selective –

though the form and magnitude of this bias varies. To sign the likely biases, we consider

a simple data generating process, incorporating both observed student credentials and

other qualifications considered in admissions but unobserved by the econometrician. The

first contrast can be expected to understate the mismatch effect, while the second and

especially the third will likely overstate it. As Sander (2004) relies heavily on the third

contrast (while invoking the second), and his critics unanimously rely on the first, the

predictable biases can explain the divergent pattern of results seen in the literature.

       We next select the two strategies – “selective-unselective” and “black-white”

comparisons – that we expect to be the most informative, and we implement simple,

reduced-form versions of each. Our illustrative data generating process indicates that



                                              2
under reasonable assumptions these will bracket the true effects of mismatch on law

school graduation and bar exam passage. 2 While the selective-unselective comparison

has been widely used, the black-white comparison is new to the law school literature. 3

       Consistent with earlier work, we find that students attending highly selective

schools have better academic and labor market outcomes than equally qualified students

attending less selective schools, the opposite sign from that predicted by the mismatch

hypothesis. By contrast, black students have lower graduation and bar passage rates

(although better employment outcomes) than whites with the same admission credentials.

While this result appears consistent with the mismatch hypothesis, further investigation

suggests a more nuanced view. The black-white gap is driven entirely by students whose

admission credentials place them in the bottom quintile of the law student population,

few of whom attend highly selective law schools. Among more qualified students, blacks

graduate and pass the bar exam at similar rates to otherwise similar whites. Moreover,

for the least-qualified law students, black-white comparisons are subject to an important

sample selection bias, deriving from the frequency with which poorly qualified applicants

are rejected by even the least selective law schools. As a consequence, results based on

the bottom quintile cannot support strong inferences about mismatch. We therefore

conclude that the available data provide little evidence regarding mismatch effects on the

least qualified students and strongly suggest that mismatch effects are absent for students

with moderate or better qualifications.

       We emphasize, however, that all of the evidence regarding the mismatch

hypothesis derives from observational analyses. Our conclusions rest on unverifiable


       2
           We also consider employment outcomes, for which our estimates may not bracket the true effect.
       3
           Bowen and Bok (1998) present estimates of this form for undergraduate admissions.

                                                    3
assumptions about the signs of the biases in the comparisons we examine. Because all

black students in the last several decades have had access to admission preferences, more

robust strategies are unavailable. Research and policy must therefore proceed on the

basis of the sort of assumptions – strong, but explicit – that we rely on here.

         The paper proceeds as follows: Section II develops our typology of strategies for

identifying the effects of school selectivity. Section III presents a simple statistical model

illustrating the likely biases in the various strategies. In Section IV, we describe the Bar

Passage Study (BPS) data that we use for our analysis. Section V presents estimates of

the role of affirmative action in law school admissions. We present empirical result from

our two comparisons in Section VI. Section VII concludes.

II. A Typology of Identification Strategies for the Selective School Effect

         The mismatch hypothesis is a claim about the effect of attending a selective

school, relative to one that is less selective. If selective schools have negative effects on

students who are admitted only because of the availability of admission preferences, then

the elimination of such preferences would raise these students’ outcomes. 4

         The strategies that have been used to isolate the effects of selectivity from those

of other potentially confounding variables, particularly the academic credentials that

determine admission to selective schools, can be classified into three broad categories.

         The first is a simple comparison between students attending more- and less-

selective schools, controlling for differences in observed credentials. Kane (1998) and


         4
           There are also plausible claims (see, e.g., D’Souza, 1991, and Steele, 1990) that the existence of
affirmative action harms black students who would be admitted to selective schools even without
preferences by promoting the view that black students are unprepared. On the other hand, if black students
are positively affected by the presence of black classmates (as “critical mass” arguments would imply),
preferences might help these highly qualified black students. We focus on the partial equilibrium effects of
selectivity on individual students, holding other students’ schools fixed.

                                                     4
Bowen and Bok (1998) use this type of comparison to examine the effects of attending a

selective college, while Chambers et al. (2005), Ho (2005), Ayres and Brooks (2005), and

Barnes (2007) use versions of the selective-unselective comparison for law students.

None of these studies finds large negative effects of school selectivity.

         Selective-unselective comparisons identify the effect of attending a selective

school only if the type of school attended is random, conditional on the included control

variables. This is unlikely if admission to selective schools depends on variables that are

not controlled in the statistical analysis. Accordingly, each of the above analyses controls

for students’ observed admission credentials, particularly scores on standardized entrance

tests. But this may be insufficient: Admission decisions reflect other factors – e.g.,

letters of recommendation, personal statements, unusual academic and non-academic

experiences – that are unobserved by the econometrician and therefore cannot be

controlled. 5 If these factors are predictive of later outcomes conditional on observed

credentials, the selective-unselective comparison will be biased.

         A variant of the selective-unselective comparison focuses on the matriculation

decisions of students admitted to several schools, using actual admission decisions to

control for both observed and unobserved credentials. Dale and Krueger (2002) compare

students attending highly selective colleges with others admitted to these schools but

enrolled elsewhere. This eliminates endogeneity due to admission decisions, as the

treatment and comparison students are, by construction, equally admissible. It identifies

the selectivity effect provided that students’ post-admission matriculation decisions are

uncorrelated with other determinants – e.g., ambition – of future outcomes. Dale and


         5
          Ho (2005) matches on a long list of student background characteristics. Even his list cannot
include the unmeasured, non-quantitative admissions credentials that are the most likely source of bias.

                                                     5
Krueger find no effect of school selectivity on average, but find that the effect is positive

for low-income students.

        Ayres and Brooks (2005) and Sander (2005b) attempt to approximate the Dale

and Krueger strategy by comparing law students who report attending their first choice

schools with those who say that they are attending their second choices because their first

choices were too expensive or too far from home. There is no reason to think, however,

that the latter group was – or could have been – admitted to the schools attended by the

former group. As a consequence, the “second choice” estimates are likely subject to the

same biases as are selective-unselective comparisons.

        A second strategy for identifying the effect of selectivity relies on comparisons of

black and white students with similar observed credentials. This strategy attempts to

isolate exogenous variation by leveraging admission preferences for black students who,

because of their preferential treatment, have access to more selective schools than do

whites with similar entering credentials. 6 Use of this variation to identify selectivity

effects requires school selectivity to be the only source of differences between average

black and white outcomes, conditional on observed credentials. Any uncontrolled factors

leading to differences in outcomes will confound the selectivity effect.

        Sander’s (2004) original study combines the black-white comparison with both

selective-unselective comparisons and contrasts between students with better and worse

grades at the same schools. He uses a black-white comparison to estimate a negative

effect of selectivity on law school grades. He then includes both selectivity and grades in

equations for graduation and bar passage. Both selectivity and grades have positive


        6
          We present some evidence on this below. See also Sander (2004) and Rothstein and Yoon (2008)
for law school and Bowen and Bok (1998) and Krueger et al. (2006) for undergraduate admissions.

                                                  6
coefficients, the latter much larger than the former. This leads Sander to conclude that,

on net, preferences depress black outcomes, as the large negative effect operating through

law school grades swamps the positive effect operating through selectivity.

          As Ho (2005) emphasizes, Sander’s inclusion of law school grades, an

intermediate outcome, in his final equation makes his analysis fundamentally different

from the selective-unselective comparison previously discussed. Identification of the

causal effect of grades requires that the unobserved determinants of law school grades

and later outcomes are completely uncorrelated. Unmeasured academic ability is an

obvious omitted variable. High ability students most likely earn higher grades and better

long-term outcomes than low ability students, even conditional on entering credentials.

As a result, Sander’s analysis can be expected to substantially overstate the mismatch

effect.

          While this is an important drawback, Sander’s essential logic, that the mismatch

hypothesis implies that “blacks have much higher failure rates on the bar than do whites

with similar LSAT scores and undergraduate GPAs” (Sander, 2004, p. 373), is sound.

This claim can be evaluated via simple, reduced-form black-white comparisons. One

important advantage of the reduced-form strategy is that the required assumptions are

transparent and much weaker than those needed for Sander’s structured approach.

Nevertheless, they too may be violated; we discuss the likely consequences of this in the

next section. A second advantage is that the black-white comparison does not require a

selectivity measure. The law school data contain only a crude proxy for school

selectivity, seriously limiting selective-unselective comparisons.




                                              7
III. A Simple Statistical Model

         To fix ideas, we consider a simple model relating law school outcomes to entering

credentials, race, and the selectivity of the school attended. Let yi be the outcome for

student i, generated by:

         (1)      yi = α + Xi βX + Zi βZ + bi γ + si θ + εi. 7

Here, Xi and Zi are the student credentials that are considered by a selective school’s

admission office. X is also observed by the econometrician, but Z is not. bi is an

indicator variable for being black. βX, βZ, and γ are projection coefficients, capturing the

predictive power of credentials and race for student outcomes rather than the causal

effects. In particular, γ captures both the direct effect of student race on outcomes and

any systematic difference in unobserved (by the admission office) credentials between

black and white students. si is a measure of school selectivity, with higher values

corresponding to more selective schools. θ is the causal effect of attending a selective

school, relative to a less selective school, on student outcomes.

         ε is an error term, encompassing the portion of student ability that is not observed

in admissions as well as any post-admissions shocks to student outcomes. By

construction, ε is orthogonal to X, Z, and b in the population of law school applicants and

is uncorrelated with the admission decisions of selective schools. However, students’

decisions to accept or decline admission offers at selective schools may be endogenous.

This may produce a correlation between ε and s, conditional on the other variables.

         As written, (1) assumes that θ is constant across students. A realistic version of

the mismatch hypothesis requires heterogeneity in the effect of selective schools, which


         7
           As written, we assume that outcomes are linear in the predictor variables. In our empirical
analysis, we use probit models for binary outcomes; y can be seen as the underlying latent variable.

                                                     8
might have positive effects on well-prepared (high X and Z) students but negative effects

on underprepared students. We return to the potential heterogeneity of θ below.

A.      Selective-unselective comparisons

        Using (1), the difference between the mean outcomes of students attending

selective and unselective schools conditional on race and observed credentials is:

        (2)        Ds(b, X)           ≡ E[y | b, X, s = 1] – E[y | b, X, s = 0]

                                      = θ + E[ZβZ | b, X, s = 1] – E[ZβZ | b, X, s = 0]

                                          + E[γ | b, X, s = 1] – E[γ | b, X, s = 0].

θ is the selectivity effect. The remaining terms represent potential biases.

        The first bias term, E[ZβZ | b, X, s = 1] – E[ZβZ | b, X, s = 0], derives from the

role of unobserved credentials in determining admission to selective schools. 8 Holding X

and b constant, the probability of admission to a selective school is increasing in ZβZ.

This creates a positive partial correlation between s and ZβZ, biasing Ds(b, X) upward.

        The second bias term, E[ε | b, X, s = 1] – E[ε | b, X, s = 0], derives from the

matriculation decisions of students admitted to selective schools. If students with high

unobserved (to the admission office) ability are more likely to take up offers of admission

at selective schools, this bias is positive as well.

        Thus, we expect that the total bias in Ds(b, X) is positive. Analyses that exploit

cross-sectional variation in selectivity without isolating an exogenous component are

likely to overstate the selectivity effect. A similar bias applies to tests based on ∂Ds(b,




        8
            This term could also reflect matriculation decisions, if correlated with Z conditional on X.

                                                       9
X)/ ∂X), as in Barnes (2007). There is every reason to expect that the bias terms in (2)

will vary with X, providing evidence of mismatch even if θ is identically 0. 9

         Dale and Krueger’s (2002) comparison of students attending selective schools

with students who declined admission to those schools (discussed above) plausibly

eliminates the first bias term in (2). The second bias term may remain, as Dale and

Krueger note, if matriculation decisions are correlated with unobserved ability.

         Unfortunately, in the available data it is impossible to know whether students at

less selective schools who do not attend their first choice schools for reasons of cost or

distance – the comparison group for selective school students in the second-choice

analyses of Ayres and Brooks (2005) and Sander (2005b) – were in fact admitted to

selective schools. If they were not, the first bias term in (2) persists in the second-choice

comparison. There is also reason to expect the second bias term in (2) to be important in

this comparison. Students in the second-choice sample are systematically poorer than

those in the first-choice sample and have less-educated parents—both factors that may be

correlated with ε.

B. Between-race comparisons

         Black students, by virtue of their access to affirmative action preferences, are

admitted to more selective schools than are white students with otherwise identical

admission credentials. If school selectivity is harmful, this should be apparent in the

reduced-form black-white gap in outcomes conditional on observed credentials:

         (3)      Db(X) ≡ E[y | b = 1, X] – E[y | b = 0, X]

                           = θ (E[s | b=1, X] – E[s | b = 0, X])


         9
         If X and Z are bivariate normal, for example the first bias term will contain the expression
λ(a+cX) + λ(-a-cX), where a and c are constants and λ() is the inverse Mills ratio. This varies with X.

                                                     10
                                    + E[ZβZ | b = 1, X] – E[ZβZ | b = 0, X] + γ.

The first term in (3) is the selectivity effect of interest, θ, multiplied by the difference in

average selectivity between black and white students conditional on X. The availability

of admission preferences for black students ensures that this is positive, and indeed we

demonstrate below that it is substantial. Ignoring the remaining terms for the moment,

evidence that Db(X) < 0 can therefore be taken as support for the mismatch hypothesis.

         Equation (3) shows two biases that might confound the test. These biases are

different than those in the selective-unselective comparison and likely work in the

opposite direction. The first, E[ZβZ | b = 1, X] – E[ZβZ | b = 0, X], reflects differences in

unobserved (to the econometrician) admission qualifications between black and white

students. This is almost certainly negative—average LSAT scores are lower among

black students than among white students with the same college GPAs (and vice versa),

and it stands to reason that average unobserved admission credentials are lower among

blacks than whites conditional on observables.

         The final term in (3), γ, is the predictive effect of student race within schools,

combining the causal effect of race and any difference in unobserved (by the admission

office) preparedness between black and white students. The latter is likely negative, by

the previous argument. The sign of the causal effect probably depends on the outcome

measure used. 10 When y is an employment outcome, the use of affirmative action in

hiring plausibly produces a positive γ. When y is an academic outcome, however,

explicit and implicit discrimination seem likely to have negative effects (Dauber, 2005).


         10
             To be clear, we do not attempt to estimate the causal effect of race. Because race is not subject
to manipulation, its causal effect cannot be identified (and is arguably not even well defined; see Holland,
1986). This does not prevent the black-white comparison from being informative about the causal effect of
interest, θ, though subject to other potentially confounding influences.

                                                     11
         Combining the two confounding factors, the net bias in Db(X) is likely negative

for academic outcomes. This conclusion is supported by research on the prediction of

college grades (e.g. Rothstein, 2004; Young, 2001), which generally indicates that white

college students outperform black students with the same observed admission credentials

at the same colleges. Similar pattern have been found in law schools (Wightman, 2000;

Wightman and Muller, 1990; Anthony and Liu, 2003; and Powers, 1977). The net bias in

analyses of employment outcomes is more difficult to sign, and could plausibly be either

positive or negative.

         An additional bias in the black-white comparison is not captured by (3). Even the

least selective law schools reject many applicants and many poorly qualified would-be

law students are not admitted anywhere. This is much more common for whites than for

similarly-credentialed blacks. Thus, even if Z is balanced across races conditional on X

among applicants, the admission process truncates the Z distribution, more so for whites

than for blacks. 11 Black-white comparisons based only on matriculants will find larger

gaps – and therefore more apparent evidence for mismatch – than would be observed if

outcomes were measured for the full population of applicants. This bias will be

concentrated at X values where non-admission probabilities are relatively high.

C. Heterogeneous effects of school selectivity

         In equation (1), the effect of attending a selective school is constant. This permits

only a simplistic version of the mismatch hypothesis, θ < 0. A more realistic assumption

is that the selectivity effect is heterogeneous. The mismatch hypothesis is then the claim


         11
           Specifically, assume that a student is admitted to some law school only if Xi δX + Zi δZ > c(bi),
where δX, δZ > 0 and c(bi) is a race-specific constant with c(0) > c(1). Then E[ Z | X, b, admitted to some
school] = E[Z | Z > δZ-1(c(b) – X δX)]. If corr(X, Z) > 0, this is decreasing in b, particularly at X values for
which the admission constraint is most binding.

                                                       12
that θi is negative, on average, for students admitted to selective schools only via

affirmative action preferences.

        This does not fundamentally alter the analysis. With heterogeneous treatment

effects, θ is replaced in (2) with the mean of θi among students attending selective

schools. The logic of mismatch implies that this should be larger than the average effect

in the population of affirmative action beneficiaries, producing yet another upward bias

on selective-unselective comparisons. Equation (3) is more complex. In an earlier

version of this paper (Rothstein and Yoon, 2007), we showed that (3) can be seen as the

reduced form for an instrumental estimator in which bi is used as an instrument for si.

This implies that the relevant mean in (3) is the local average of θi among black students

attending selective schools who would have attended unselective schools had they been

admitted as white students. These students are precisely the population of interest for the

mismatch hypothesis; if it holds, the first term of (3) should be negative.

IV. Data

        The data set used for all studies to date examining mismatch in law school is the

Law School Admission Council’s (LSAC) Bar Passage Study (BPS; Wightman 1998,

1999), a census of students matriculating at accredited law schools in fall 1991. The BPS

contains information on over 27,000 students, about 62 percent of the 1991 cohort. 12

Variables include LSAT scores, college GPAs, and measures of law school performance

and bar exam outcomes. A subsample was chosen to receive a follow-up survey about

employment outcomes four to six months after graduation.



        12
           Most non-response was individual: 163 of 172 accredited law schools participated in the study.
Entering questionnaire response rates for blacks and whites were 59% and 62%, respectively. We have
found no indication that non-response differs systematically by entering credentials.

                                                   13
         Summary statistics are reported in the first two columns of Table 1. We focus on

the 24,049 black and white students with valid data on entering credentials, of whom 7.6

percent are black. We present means by race in Columns 3 and 4, and by race and

selectivity (as defined below) in Columns 5 – 8.

         Our two X variables are the LSAT score and the undergraduate grade point

average (UGPA). LSAT scores range from 10 to 48, with mean 36.8 and standard

deviation 5.5. The UGPA, computed from student transcripts, ranges from 1.5 to 4.0,

with an A grade corresponding to a 4.0, a B to a 3.0, etc. For graphical analyses, we form

an index, using weights of 0.4 and 0.6 on the standardized UGPA and LSAT,

respectively, 13 then convert this index to a percentile score based on the distribution

within our sample. The black-white gaps in LSAT scores and UGPAs in our sample are -

1.59 and -0.96 standard deviations, respectively, while the gap in index percentiles is -40

(corresponding to a gap of -1.69 standard deviations in the index itself). Figure 1

displays the cumulative distribution of percentile scores among black and white students.

         For confidentiality reasons, the BPS groups law schools into six “clusters” based

on size, cost, selectivity, tuition level, and minority representation. We focus on a

dichotomous categorization, treating the “Elite” and “Public Ivy” (Wightman 1993)

clusters as highly selective (s=1) and the remaining clusters – which overlap substantially

in the credentials of their students and have relatively similar admission rates, so provide

little information about school selectivity – as less selective (s=0). 14 24% of BPS

students attend highly selective schools. Within each race, students at the most selective


         13
             These weights are taken from Sander (2004). They are nearly identical to the weights that best
predict attendance at a highly selective school, as defined below.
          14
             We have also conducted our selective-unselective comparisons across all six clusters, with
similar results to those presented below.

                                                    14
schools have much better credentials than students at less selective schools, but the

between-race difference in the probability of attending a highly selective school is small.

         We consider several categories of outcomes. First, we examine performance

during the first year of law school, when curricula are typically standardized and grades

are issued on strict curves. First year grades are important determinants of access to

prestigious internships and post-graduation clerkships. The BPS grades measure is

standardized within law schools. We view it as a purely relative measure, and convert it

to class rank (ranging from 0 at the bottom to 1 at the top) under the assumption that

GPAs are normally distributed within each school. The average black student is at the

23rd percentile of his or her class and the average white student is at the 54th percentile.

         Our second group of student outcome measures has to do with law school

graduation and bar exam success. We form a simple indicator for graduation; the BPS

permits us to track ultimate graduation even for the few students who transfer schools.

Bar passage is somewhat more complex, as some graduates – those who do not plan to

practice law – never sit for the exam. We focus on a measure that excludes non-takers. 15

         Our final category of outcome measures concerns post-law school labor market

experiences. Few non-graduates responded to the BPS follow-up survey, so we restrict

our attention to graduates. We construct three measures: an indicator for full time

employment; an indicator for job quality; and the log annual salary. Our job quality

measure is based on a subjective classification of jobs into prestigious – clerkships,

professorships, large law firms, etc. – and non-prestigious groups. For the job quality and


         15
            We count students who did not graduate from law school as failures. A back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests that about 3% of the graduates that we exclude as non-takers in fact failed the exam in
one of the 14 states that do not report failed attempts. We discuss below several alternative measures that
vary in their treatment of non-takers. Our results are consistent across measures.

                                                     15
salary measures, we restrict attention to respondents with full-time jobs. The sample size

for the employment analyses is 3,144, of whom two-thirds had full-time jobs.

        Each of the outcome measures has advantages and disadvantages for our

purposes. Academic performance within school is most directly tied to mismatch, as a

student who struggles to keep up with his or her classmates will earn poorer grades. On

the other hand, class rank may reflect mechanical effects of selectivity: the same absolute

performance will produce a lower rank at a more selective school simply because the

competition is stiffer. We therefore interpret our class rank analyses as primarily

measuring the degree to which students are mismatched relative to their classmates,

rather than the effects of mismatch. Graduation is a much more absolute measure, though

the threshold may vary somewhat across schools.

        Bar exams use blind graded and are administered by state bar associations, so in

principle there should be no effects of race or of school quality other than those operating

through student achievement. However, students choose where to take the exam and the

state-specific component of the exam varies in difficulty. The BPS does not report the

state where the student took the exam. 16 We expect that selective school students are

more likely to take the exam in states with reputations for more difficult exams (e.g.

California and New York), which also tend to have larger, more prestigious legal labor

markets. If so, selective-unselective comparisons will overstate mismatch effects on bar

passage. It is difficult to sign the effect of endogenous state selection on the black-white

comparison, although we expect that any such effect is small.




        16
            The BPS does report the region in which the exam was taken, though this is a poor proxy for
difficulty. Our results are not sensitive to controlling for this.

                                                   16
         The most important drawback to our employment outcomes is that they may not

be race-blind measures of academic success if employers prefer black job applicants or

applicants from elite schools. These will bias both of our comparisons against the

mismatch hypothesis. 17 Thus, while we expect the black-white comparison to overstate

mismatch effects on graduation and bar passage, this expectation may not hold for

employment outcomes.

V. Measuring Preferences & Mismatch

         Figure 3 displays the fractions of white and black students in the BPS sample who

attend schools in the two highly selective clusters, as functions of the admission index

percentile. These are computed from locally linear regressions; dashed lines show

pointwise 90% confidence intervals. Throughout the index distribution, black students

are much more likely to attend highly selective schools than white students. 18

         The first two columns of Table 2 show probit models for attendance at a highly

selective school. The main table shows coefficients; the bottom row shows the implied

effect of being black on the probability of attending a highly-selective school, averaged

over the covariate variable distribution for black students in the sample. Column 1

includes quadratic controls for LSAT scores and UGPAs, as well as a linear interaction.

The black coefficient is large and positive, indicating that blacks are, on average, 16


         17
            It is not clear that preferences in employment should be discounted entirely. If law firms are
competitive profit-maximizers, a black salary premium would indicate that black lawyers have higher
marginal revenue products. A school that hopes to maximize its graduates’ productivity should then cater
to firm preferences by itself practicing affirmative action. The black-white gap in employment outcomes
can be interpreted as a measure of the combined effect of admissions and hiring preferences.
         18
            The curves in Figure 3 are flattened by the heterogeneity of selectivity within our “highly
selective” category. Sander (2004, Figure 2.8) shows that the probability of admission to the University of
Michigan Law School is nearly a step function in the admissions index, with approximately the same
leftward shift in the curve for blacks that is seen in Figure 3. This suggests that the lowest-credentialed
black and white students in the highly selective BPS clusters probably attend the least selective schools in
these clusters.

                                                     17
percentage points more likely to attend highly selective schools than whites with similar

credentials. This effect is robust to the inclusion of controls for 15 variables measured at

law school entrance, including work experience and several family background measures

(Column 2) and for higher-order terms in the observed credentials (not shown).

        There are no completely unselective law schools, and only 56 percent of the

92,648 applicants from the BPS cohort were admitted to any law school (Barnes and

Carr, 1992; see also Wightman, 1997). The remaining 44 percent are absent from our

data. Figure 2 relates the probability of being admitted to at least one school to the

admission index percentile, using data on applicants and admissions classified by race,

LSAT, and UGPA cells (from Barnes and Carr, 1992). White students whose credentials

would have placed them in the bottom quarter of the matriculant distribution were more

likely than not to be rejected from all the schools where they applied. Conversely, black

admission rates were above 50 percent in every cell above the fifth percentile and were at

least double those of similarly-qualified whites through the lower part of the distribution.

Partly as a result of this gap in admission rates, blacks are dramatically overrepresented

in the left tail of the index distribution of law school matriculants, and about three

quarters of black students in the BPS sample are in the bottom quintile.

        A likely explanation for the gap in admission rates is that even the least selective

schools apply lower thresholds for admission to black than to white applicants. 19 As

discussed earlier, this will bias black-white comparisons against black students,



        19
            This contrasts with undergraduate education where, as Kane (1998) notes, only the most
selective colleges appear to practice affirmative action. Note that the outcome depicted in Figure 2 is
endogenous to application decisions – for example, a student who applies only to Yale Law School might
be admitted nowhere even if she would have been admitted to a less selective school. This probably
accounts for the non-trivial rates at which even highly qualified students are admitted nowhere.

                                                   18
particularly at low index percentiles where the gap in admission probabilities is the

greatest. When we restrict our sample to students in the top four quintiles of the

admission index distribution, in Columns 3-4 of Table 2, the black-white difference in the

probability of attending a highly selective school nearly doubles.

       Figure 4 presents mean first year class ranks as functions of race, school type, and

entering credentials. More qualified students have higher ranks than those with lower

index scores, and students at less selective schools have higher ranks than similarly-

qualified, same-race students at more selective schools. Controlling for selectivity, white

students achieve much higher ranks than blacks. As the black-white comparison relies on

the assumption that blacks and whites would achieve similar outcomes if they attended

the same schools, this result supports our contention that differences in unobserved

ability or direct race effects bias the black-white comparison in favor of mismatch.

       Table 3 presents regression estimates for class rank. The first two columns show

selective-unselective comparisons separately for whites and blacks, again controlling for

quadratics in (LSAT, UGPA). Specifications that control for the full set of covariates

from Table 2, Column 2, are similar. Attending a highly selective school lowers rank by

about 0.06 for whites and by twice that for blacks. Effects on blacks in the top four

quintiles, shown in Column 4, are even larger.

       Columns 5 and 6 present the black-white comparison for the full sample and for

students in the top four quintiles. Because black students attend more selective schools,

with stronger students, than do white students with the same entering credentials, we

expect negative black coefficients. Indeed, black students have ranks about 0.19 lower

than similarly-qualified whites. This gap grows to -0.23 in the upper four quintiles.



                                            19
VI. Results

       Table 2 indicates large differences in the selectivity of the schools attended by

black and white students with similar entering credentials. This difference in selectivity

occurs across the total sample of students, but is largest in the subsample excluding the

bottom quintile of the credentials distribution. Table 3 indicates that each of our

comparisons exploits substantial differences in the degree to which students are

mismatched during law school, as measured by rank in class.

       If mismatch lowers post-law school outcomes for marginal students, both the

selective-unselective and black-white comparisons should show negative effects on these

outcomes. Figure 5 repeats the estimates from Figure 4, this time for bar exam passage

rates. While Figure 4 indicated large selective-unselective and black-white gaps in class

rank, no selective-unselective gap is apparent in Figure 5, and the black-white gap is

relatively small and concentrated at the lowest percentile scores.

       Table 4 reports selective-unselective comparisons for each of our outcomes, with

controls for a quadratic in (LSAT, UGPA). For binary outcomes, we show both probit

coefficients and marginal effects averaged over the treated sample (in square brackets).

       Consistent with Figure 4, the estimates offer no indication of mismatch effects.

For white students (Columns 1-2), the selectivity effect is positive and significant on four

of our five outcomes, with an insignificant negative effect for full-time employment. The

estimated effects for black students (Columns 3-4) are positive and significant for

graduation and salaries; all others are statistically insignificant (though the employment

point estimate is positive and large). Columns 5 and 6 report p-values for tests of the

hypotheses that the white and black effects are equal or are both zero. We (marginally)



                                             20
reject equality in only one case, with a large positive effect on bar passage for whites and

a negligible effect for blacks. In contrast, we reject zero effects in four of five cases.

       Table 5 presents our black-white comparison. Considering first the full sample, in

Columns 1-2, we find that black students have significantly lower graduation and bar

passage rates than similarly-qualified whites. Point estimates indicate nearly a ten

percentage point average effect on bar passage. Since black students attend more

selective schools than do whites with the same credentials, these estimates are consistent

with negative selectivity effects. By contrast, the black effects on employment outcomes

are positive and in two cases are large and significant.

       As discussed earlier, comparisons based on students with very poor credentials

are subject to sample selection bias deriving from the comparatively high rates at which

white applicants with these credentials are denied admission to any law school. This bias

is likely less severe in estimates based on the top four quintiles of the entering credentials

distribution, where large majorities of both white and black applicants are admitted to at

least one school. (Recall from Tables 2 and 3 that affirmative action preferences are just

as strong and black students are just as likely to be mismatched relative to their

classmates in this subsample.) Columns 3-4 of Table 5 show black-white comparisons

for the subsample of top-quintile students. All of the point estimates are notably more

positive than in Column 1. The only negative coefficient is small and statistically

insignificant, indicating only a 2.8 percentage point shortfall in black bar passage rates

relative to similarly-qualified whites.

       We have explored several alternative specifications for both the selective-

unselective and black-white comparisons. Our results are robust to semiparametric



                                              21
controls (implemented via matching techniques) for the LSAT score and undergraduate

GPA, and to the inclusion of controls for the student characteristics used in Column 2 of

Table 2. We also varied the definitions of our dependent variables. For example, we

tried coding students who did not attempt the bar exam as failures or successes, rather

than excluding them as in our main sample; counting part-time workers as employed; and

excluding students with high-prestige but low-salary jobs (e.g. clerkships) from our

analyses of salaries. 20 In each case, results were qualitatively unchanged.

VII.     Conclusion

         The most convincing test of the mismatch hypothesis would require random

assignment of students to more- and less-selective schools. Neither this sort of

experiment nor a convincing natural experiment is available. Accordingly, research and

policymaking must proceed from non-experimental analyses that are identified only via

assumptions about counterfactual outcomes.

         The Bar Passage Study data are well suited for non-experimental analyses. By

focusing on two simple reduced-form comparisons, we have shown that the data speak

clearly about the mismatch hypothesis as it applies to students with credentials in the top

four quintiles of law school matriculants. Neither selective-unselective nor black-white

comparisons offer any evidence for mismatch effects on these students. As the most

selective schools admit almost exclusively from this subpopulation, we conclude that the

use of affirmative action at these schools does not generate meaningful mismatch effects.


         20
            We explored models treating clerkships as an endogenous source of sample selection, using
variables measuring students’ preferences across job types as stated during the first year of law school as
determinants of selection not directly affecting salaries. This had no effect on the results. In another
specification, we modeled taking the bar exam as endogenous. We were unable to estimate the selection
coefficient in our model for bar passage with any precision, largely because we lack plausible instruments
for selection on this margin.

                                                     22
       We similarly find no evidence of mismatch effects on employment outcomes in

any portion of the distribution. Black students are much more likely to obtain good jobs

than are similarly-qualified white students, with a salary premium around 10-15 percent.

This finding might reflect affirmative action on the part of employers. A crucial question

is whether firms’ hiring patterns would change if law schools eliminated affirmative

action. If, in its absence, high-salary firms would recruit from less selective schools to

obtain black lawyers, the observed black salary premium might persist. Thus, our

analysis does not definitively indicate that affirmative action in law school admission

helps black students after law school, as the benefit may derive from affirmative action in

employment. It only demonstrates that the combined effect is positive.

       Our analysis of graduation and bar passage outcomes of students with bottom-

quintile credentials yields murkier results. In this subpopulation, which contains the

majority of black law students, the black-white comparison is consistent with the

presence of mismatch effects deriving from the use of affirmative action by mid-ranked

schools to admit students who would otherwise attend the least selective schools. But we

cannot rule out an alternative explanation—namely, that the observed black-white gap

simply reflects sample selection bias. Many bottom-quintile applicants are unable to gain

admission to any law school. As a consequence of the least selective schools’ use of

affirmative action, this outcome is much more likely for white than for black applicants.

If the unobserved qualifications (e.g., personal statement, references, employment

history) influencing admission decisions are predictive of later outcomes, the resulting

sample selection could well produce the observed black-white gaps.




                                             23
         How predictive would the admission variables have to be of later outcomes in

order to account for the observed data without mismatch? We estimate that a correlation

of 0.25 between the unobserved determinants of admission and graduation would fully

explain the black-white gap observed among bottom-quintile students without recourse to

mismatch-based explanations. 21 A correlation of this magnitude can by no means be

rejected out of hand. Thus, without direct evidence about the selection into law school,

the data do not permit strong conclusions about the existence of mismatch effects on the

least qualified students’ graduation and bar passage rates.

         Even granting this limitation, however, it is possible to comment on magnitudes.

In a companion paper (Rothstein and Yoon, 2008; see also Ayres and Brooks, 2005), we

show that even if the entire black-white gap were attributed to mismatch – that is, even if

sample selection were ignored – the implied effects of mismatch on black students’

graduation and bar passage probabilities would be dwarfed by the positive effects of

preferences on the number of black students admitted to law school. As a consequence,

the only result consistent with the data is that the net effect of affirmative action is to

dramatically increase the number of black lawyers.




         21
            The calculation resembles that used by Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005). We simulated data
with bivariate normal errors in equations for the latent determinants of selection and graduation, assuming
no black-white gap in graduation propensity in the population, then imposed the selection rule. With ρ =
0.25, the simulated sample selection bias equaled the observed black-white gap in graduation rates.

                                                    24
References

Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber (2005). “Selection on
        Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic
        Schools.” Journal of Political Economy 113(1), February: 151-184.
Anthony, Lisa C., and Mei Liu (2003). “Analysis of Differential Prediction of Law
        School Performance by Racial/Ethnic Subgroups Based on the 1996-1998
        Entering Law School Classes.” Law School Admission Council: LSAT Technical
        Report 00-02, Newtown, PA..
Ayres, Ian, and Richard Brooks (2005). “Does Affirmative Action Reduce the Number of
        Black Lawyers?” Stanford Law Review 57(6), May: 1807-1854.
Barnes, Katherine Y. (2007). “Is Affirmative Action Responsible for the Achievement
        Gap Between Black and White Law Students?” Northwestern University Law
        Review 101(4), Fall: 1759-1808.
Barnes, Beverly, and Robert Carr (1992). “1990-91 National Decision Profiles.” Law
        School Admission Services Memorandum to “Admission Officers”, January.
        (Mis-dated 1991).
Bowen, William G., and Derek Bok (1998). The Shape of the River: Long-Term
        Consequences of Considering Race in College and University Admissions.
        Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.
Chambers, David L., Timothy T. Clydesdale, William C. Kidder, and Richard O.
        Lempert (2005). “The Real Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in
        American Law Schools: An Empirical Critique of Richard Sander's Study,”
        Stanford Law Review 57(6), May: 1855-1898.
Dale, Stacy Berg, and Alan B. Krueger (2002). “Estimating the Payoff to Attending a
        More Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and
        Unobservables,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(4): 1491-1527.
Dauber, Michele L. (2005). “The Big Muddy,” Stanford Law Review 57(6), May: 1899-
        1914.
D’Souza, Dinesh (1991). Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus.
        The Free Press: New York.
Ho, Daniel E. (2005). “Why Affirmative Action Does Not Cause Black Students to Fail
        the Bar,” Yale Law Journal 114(8), June: 1997-2004.
Holland, Paul W. (1986). “Statistics and Causal Inference.” Journal of the American
        Statistical Association 81(396), December: 945-960.
Holzer, Harry, and David Neumark (2000). “Assessing Affirmative Action,” Journal of
        Economic Literature 38(3), September: 483-568.
Kane, Thomas J. (1998). “Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admissions,” in The
        Black-White Test Score Gap (Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, eds.),
        Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Krueger, Alan B., Jesse Rothstein and Sarah Turner (2006). "Race, Income and College
        in 25 Years: The Continuing Legacy of Segregation and Discrimination."
        American Law and Economics Review 8(2), Summer: 282-211.



                                         25
Powers, Donald E. (1977). "Comparing Predictions of Law School Performance for
        Black, Chicano, and White Law Students," in Reports of LSAC Sponsored
        Research: Volume III, 1975-1977. Newtown, PA, Law School Admission
        Council: 721-755.
Rothstein, Jesse M. (2004). "College Performance Predictions and the SAT." Journal of
        Econometrics 121(1-2): 297-317.
Rothstein, Jesse, and Albert Yoon (2007). “Mismatch in Law School.” Unpublished
        manuscript, Princeton University, October.
Rothstein, Jesse and Albert Yoon (2008). “Affirmative Action in Law School
        Admissions: What Do Racial Preferences Do?” University of Chicago Law
        Review 75(2), Spring: 649-714.
Sander, Richard H. (2004). “A Systemic Analysis of Affirmative Action in American
        Law Schools,” Stanford Law Review 57(2), November: 367-483.
Sander, Richard H. (2005a). “Mismeasuring the Mismatch: A Response to Ho,” Yale
        Law Journal 114(8), June: 2005-2010.
Sander, Richard H. (2005b). “Reply: A Reply to Critics,” Stanford Law Review 57(6),
        May: 1963-2016.
Sowell, Thomas (1978). “Are Quotas Good for Blacks?” Commentary 65(6), June: 39-
        43.
Steele, Shelby (1990). The Content of Our Character: A New Vision of Race in
        America. St. Martin’s Press: New York.
Summers, Clyde W. (1970). “Preferential Admissions: An Unreal Solution to a Real
        Problem,” University of Toledo Law Review 2(2-3), Spring-Summer: 377-402.
Thernstrom, Stephan, and Abigail M. Thernstrom (1997). America in Black and White:
        One Nation, Indivisible, New York: Simon & Schuster.
Wightman, Linda F. (1993). Clustering U.S. law schools using variables that describe
        size, cost, selectivity, and student body characteristics. Newtown, PA: Law
        School Admission Council/Law School Admission Services.
Wightman, Linda F. (1997). “The Threat to Diversity in Legal Education: An Empirical
        Analysis of the Consequences of Abandoning Race as a Factor in Law School
        Admission Decisions,” New York University Law Review 72(1), April: 1-53.
Wightman, Linda F. (1998). LSAC national longitudinal bar passage study. Newtown,
        PA: Law School Admission Council.
Wightman, Linda F. (1999), User's guide: LSAC national longitudinal data file.
        Newtown, PA: Law School Admission Council.
Wightman, Linda F. (2000). "Beyond FYA: Analysis of the Utility of LSAT Scores and
        UGPA for Predicting Academic Success in Law School." Law School Admission
        Council: Research Report 99-05, Newtown, PA..
Wightman, Linda F., and David G. Muller (1990). An Analysis of Differential Validity
        and Differential Prediction for Black, Mexican American, Hispanic, and White
        Law School Students. Newtown, PA: Law School Admission Council/Law
        School Admission Services.
Young, John W. (2001). “Differential Validity, Differential Prediction, and College
        Admissions Testing.” College Board Research Report 2001-6.

                                         26
Figure 1. Distribution of admission index percentile scores
for black and white matriculants
                      1
Fraction of observations below
  .2       .4     .6      .8




                                                                                                         All
                                                                                                         Whites
                                                                                                         Blacks
                      0




                                             0     20            40             60               80          100
                                                          Admissions index percentile score
Note: Figure displays empirical CDFs of the percentile scores--which by construction are uniformly
distributed in the full sample--for whites and blacks separately.




Figure 2. Fraction of applicants admitted to at least one school,
by race and index percentile
                                         1
Fraction admitted to one or more schools
       .2      .4       .6      .8




                                                                                                         Whites
                                                                                                         Blacks
                      0




                                             0     20             40            60               80          100
                                                 Percentile score (normed to matriculant distribution)
   Figure 3. Fraction attending highly selective law schools,
   by race and index percentile
                  1
                                         Whites
                                         90% CI, Whites
Fraction highly selective
                       .8


                                         Blacks
                                         90% CI, Blacks
.2      .4     .6 0




                                     0      20             40             60        80                100
                                                            Percentile score
Note: Fractions are smoothed using a local linear regression smoother (with an Epanechnikov kernel and
optimal "rule of thumb" bandwidths) applied to the underlying admission index. 90 percent pointwise
confidence intervals are computed by bootstrap with 500 replications. Estimates and CIs are censored
at 0 and 1, and the series are reported only for the range spanned by each race subsample.




Figure 4. First year class rank by race, law school selectivity,
and index percentile
                                 1




                                         Whites, unselective
Class rank (1=highest, 0=lowest)




                                         Whites, selective
                          .8




                                         Blacks, unselective
                                         Blacks, selective
    .2      .4    .6
                  0




                                     0      20             40             60        80                 100
                                                            Percentile score
Note: Ranks are smoothed using a local linear regression smoother (with an Epanechnikov kernel and
optimal "rule of thumb" bandwidths) applied to the underlying admission index. Estimates are shown
only for points between the 1st and 99th percentiles of each subpopulation admission index distribution.
Figure 5. Bar passage rates by race, law school selectivity,
and index percentile
     1
     .8
Fr. passing
 .4     .6




                                                                               Whites, unselective
     .2




                                                                               Whites, selective
                                                                               Blacks, unselective
                                                                               Blacks, selective
     0




              0            20                 40             60                     80                 100
                                               Percentile score
Note: Rates are smoothed using a local linear regression smoother (with an Epanechnikov kernel and
optimal "rule of thumb" bandwidths) applied to the underlying admission index. Estimates are shown
only for points between the 1st and 99th percentiles of each subpopulation admission index distribution.
Table 1. Summary statistics

                                  Full sample       By race           By race and selectivity
                                                                     Blacks           Whites
                                  Mean S.D.      Blacks Whites    Sel. Unsel.      Sel.    Unsel.
                                   (1)     (2)     (3)   (4)      (5)     (6)      (7)       (8)
N                                    24,049       1,836 22,213    419    1,417    5,417 16,796
Black                             7.6% 0.266     100%    0%      100% 100%         0%        0%
Female                            43.7% 0.496    59.5% 42.4%     60.1% 59.3% 43.2% 42.2%
Admissions credentials
  LSAT                            36.8   5.5      28.8   37.5    32.7    27.6      40.5    36.5
  UGPA                            3.24   0.42     2.87   3.27    3.04    2.82      3.43    3.21
  Admissions index                747    105      583    761     662     559       824     740
  Admissions index %ile           51.6   28.4     14.7   54.6    29.3    10.4      72.2    48.9
Law school type
  Selective (top 2 clusters)      24%    0.429    23%    24%     100%     0%      100%      0%
  Elite (top cluster)              8%    0.271    8%     8%      35%      0%      33%       0%
Outcomes
  1st year LGPA                    0.06 0.98     -1.01   0.15    -1.15   -0.97     0.17    0.14
  1st year class rank (est.)       0.52 0.29     0.23    0.54     0.19    0.24     0.55    0.54
  Graduated from law school?      91% 29%        81%     92%     90%     78%      95%      91%
  Ever pass bar exam?             81% 39%        57%     83%     69%     53%      86%      82%
  Ever pass bar (if attempted)?   86% 35%        61%     88%     75%     57%      93%      87%
  Empl. full time (if grad.)      66% 47%        63%     67%     74%     60%      70%      65%
  "Good" job (if employed)        40% 49%        44%     40%     53%     40%      58%      34%
  Salary (if FT; $1,000s)         $39.8 $18.8    $38.0   $40.0   $47.3   $34.5    $49.1    $36.8
  Log salary (if FT)              10.51 0.47     10.44   10.51   10.66   10.35    10.72    10.44
Table 2. Black-white differences in selectivity

                                         Full sample                  Top 4 quintiles
                                       (1)          (2)               (3)          (4)

Black                                 0.858          0.888            1.050         1.064
                                     (0.045)        (0.046)          (0.063)       (0.064)
LSAT                                  -0.175        -0.160           -0.631        -0.608
                                     (0.021)        (0.021)          (0.051)       (0.051)
(LSAT/100)2                           16.014        14.466           51.051        48.378
                                     (2.607)        (2.635)          (5.167)       (5.207)
UGPA                                  -0.387        -0.469           -3.061        -3.204
                                     (0.322)        (0.325)          (0.517)       (0.520)
(UGPA/10)2                           -11.618        -8.719           -3.082         0.926
                                     (4.943)        (4.989)          (6.034)       (6.081)
LSAT * UGPA                           0.048          0.046            0.100         0.099
                                     (0.005)        (0.005)          (0.008)       (0.008)
Additional controls                      n             y                n             y

Average effect of "black" on
probability                           0.162          0.164            0.350         0.348


Notes : The dependent variable is an indicator for attending a school in the "elite" and
"public ivy" clusters. N=24,049 in full sample (Cols. 1-2), 19,806 in subsample (Cols. 3-4).
The table reports probit coefficients and standard errors. The final row shows the
increment in the probability of attending a highly selective school associated with being
black, averaged over the black students in the sample. Additional controls in Columns 2
and 4 are gender; age (in months) at law school entry and its square; mother's and father's
education (plus indicators for missing values); and indicators for disability/handicap, for
speaking English as a second language, for taking more than one year off after college, for
working full-time for 2 or more years, for legal work experience, for working for pay as an
undergraduate, for a father with a white-collar occupation, and for a mother employed
outside the home.
Table 3. Selective-unselective and black-white comparisons for first year class rank

                          Selective-unselective comparison               Black-white comparison
                        Full sample              Top 4 quintiles             Full      Top 4
                     Whites       Blacks        Whites    Blacks           sample     quintiles
                       (1)          (2)            (3)       (4)             (5)         (6)
Selective            -0.060       -0.116         -0.060    -0.211
                     (0.005)      (0.015)       (0.005)   (0.026)
Black                                                                      -0.189        -0.226
                                                                           (0.008)       (0.013)
LSAT                  0.033       -0.015          0.023       0.005         0.019         0.039
                     (0.005)      (0.009)        (0.010)     (0.089)       (0.004)       (0.009)
(LSAT/100)2          -1.435        2.963          0.429      -3.628         -0.207       -1.006
                     (0.600)      (1.198)        (0.997)     (8.310)       (0.458)       (0.979)
UGPA                 -0.193       -0.318         -0.170      -1.273         -0.244        -0.115
                     (0.064)      (0.161)        (0.098)     (0.794)       (0.055)       (0.096)
(UGPA/10)2            6.269        4.940          6.835      15.533         6.379         6.888
                     (0.916)      (2.568)        (1.124)     (7.410)       (0.854)       (1.106)
LSAT * UGPA          -0.003        0.003         -0.004       0.012         -0.002       -0.006
                     (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.001)     (0.012)       (0.001)       (0.001)
N                    20,485        1,698         17,854        412         22,183        18,266

Note: Table reports coefficients from OLS regressions. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 4. Selective-unselective comparisons for post-law school outcomes

                                  Whites               Blacks          p values for hypothesis tests
                                          N                    N        Both equal      Both zero
                                (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)           (5)            (6)
Law school graduation          0.235    22,081      0.233    1,809         0.987          0.000
                              (0.035)              (0.102)
                              [0.028]              [0.045]
Bar passage (if attempted)     0.155    20,862     -0.002    1,705          0.099           0.000
                              (0.032)              (0.089)
                              [0.024]             [-0.000]
Employment
 Has a full-time job         -0.111      2,306     0.154      838           0.261           0.172
                             (0.071)              (0.121)
                            [-0.035]              [0.050]
 "Good" job, if FT employe 0.278         1,532     0.050      537           0.409           0.001
                             (0.085)              (0.140)
                             [0.103]              [0.018]
 Ln(salary), if FT employed 0.153        1,501     0.227      528           0.442           0.000
                             (0.030)              (0.053)

Notes: Reported coefficients are for a selective school indicator in OLS (ln(salary)) and probit (other
outcomes) specifications. Each specification controls for a quadratic in (LSAT, UGPA). Analyses of
employment outcomes use sampling weights. Standard errors are in parentheses. Bold coefficients are
significant at the 5% level. Marginal effects, in square brackets, are the change in probability due to
attending a selective school, averaged over all selective=1 observations. Tests of equal/zero
coefficients are computed from pooled, fully interacted specifications.
Table 5. Black-white comparisons

                                             Full sample                 Top four quintiles
                                                       N                              N
                                         (1)           (2)                (3)        (4)
Law school graduation                  -0.144        23,890              0.031      19,699
                                       (0.046)                          (0.089)
                                      [-0.036]                          [0.005]
Bar passage (if attempted)             -0.287        22,567             -0.122      18,615
                                       (0.042)                          (0.076)
                                      [-0.095]                         [-0.028]
Employment
 Has a full-time job                    0.130          3,144            0.408         2,294
                                       (0.105)                         (0.189)
                                       [0.049]                         [0.143]
 "Good" job, if employed                0.576          2,069            0.759         1,555
                                       (0.129)                         (0.202)
                                       [0.201]                         [0.287]
 Ln(salary), if FT employed             0.100          2,029            0.157         1,525
                                       (0.045)                         (0.071)

Notes : Reported coefficients are for the black indicator in probit & OLS specifications. All
specifications include controls for a quadratic in (LSAT, UGPA). Analyses of employment
outcomes use sampling weights. Standard errors are in parentheses. Bold coefficients are
significant at the 5% level. Marginal effects, in square brackets, are the change in probability
from black=0 to black=1, averaged over all black=1 observations.
