NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

"MIGHT NOT BE A TOMORROW":
A MULTI-METHODS APPROACH TO ANTICIPATED EARLY DEATH AND YOUTH CRIME
Timothy Brezina
Erdal Tekin
Volkan Topalli
Working Paper 14279
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14279

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

All authors contributed equally to this manuscript; names appear alphabetically. An earlier version
of this paper was presented at the 2007 meetings of the American Society of Criminology, Atlanta.
Support for this research was provided by the National Science Foundation (grant # 0520092) and
the Georgia State University Research Foundation. Address correspondence to Timothy Brezina. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Timothy Brezina, Erdal Tekin, and Volkan Topalli. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

"Might Not Be a Tomorrow": A Multi-Methods Approach to Anticipated Early Death and
Youth Crime
Timothy Brezina, Erdal Tekin, and Volkan Topalli
NBER Working Paper No. 14279
August 2008
JEL No. K0,K42
ABSTRACT
A number of researchers point to the anticipation of early death, or a sense of "futurelessness," as a
contributing factor to youth crime and violence. Young people who perceive a high probability of
early death, it is argued, may have little reason to delay gratification for the promise of future benefits,
as the future itself is discounted. Consequently, these young people tend to pursue high-risk behaviors
associated with immediate rewards, including crime and violence. Although existing studies lend
empirical support to these arguments and show a statistical relationship between anticipated early death
and youth crime, this support remains tentative. Moreover, a number of questions remain regarding
the interpretation of this relationship, the meanings that offenders attach to the prospect of early death,
and the causal mechanisms that link anticipated early death to youth crime. In this paper, we address
the limitations of previous studies using a multi-methods approach, involving the analyses of national
survey data and in-depth interviews with active street offenders.

Timothy Brezina
Department of Criminal Justice
1227 Urban Life Building
Atlanta GA 30302-4018
tbrezina@gsu.edu
Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

Volkan Topalli
Department of Criminal Justice
1227 Urban Life Building
Atlanta GA 30302-4018
vtopalli@gsu.edu

“MIGHT NOT BE A TOMORROW”: A MULTI-METHODS APPROACH TO
ANTICIPATED EARLY DEATH AND YOUTH CRIME
Prior criminological research has served to highlight the risks of offending behavior.
These risks include a number of long-term negative consequences that may accrue to offenders
over the life course, including reduced life chances, poor health, and incarceration (Hagan, 1991,
1997; Moffitt, 1993; Robins, 1966; Sampson and Laub 1993, 1997; Tanner, Davies, and
O’Grady, 1999). These risks also include immediate physical dangers—such as injury, paralysis,
or death—that exist in the “foreground” of the criminal lifestyle and that may result from crime
victim retaliation, attacks by rival offenders, or police action (Dobrin, 2001; Hoffman, 2004;
Jacobs, Topalli, and Wright, 2000; McCarthy and Hagan, 2005; Sampson and Lauritsen, 2005;
Topalli, Wright, and Fornango, 2002; Tremblay and Paré, 2003).
At the same time, criminological research has highlighted the existence of hard-core
offenders who appear to be fearless in the face of these dangers (Anderson, 1994, 1999;
Hoffman, 2004; Jacobs et al., 2000; McCarthy and Hagan, 2005; Topalli, 2005a). This
population includes individuals who have experienced stabbings, shootings, or other lifethreatening injuries and yet remain undeterred from a risky and criminal lifestyle (Hoffman,
2004). In the words of one such offender, “I don’t give a damn. I don’t care what happens
really… whether they kill us or we kill them” (Topalli and Wright, 2004: 164).
To account for the fearless and uninhibited conduct of some offenders, a number of
theorists have underscored the sense of hopelessness and fatalism that is said to pervade
economically distressed, high-crime communities (Anderson, 1994, 1999; Garbarino et al., 1992;
Kitwana, 2002; Lorion and Saltzman, 1993; Wilson and Daly, 1997). When young people
believe they have no future, it is argued, they have little to lose by engaging in crime or violence.
This argument is perhaps most explicit in rational choice accounts. For example, Wilson and
1

Daly (1997) propose that urban youth violence is partly attributable to expectations of early
death, which tend to arise in neighborhoods that suffer a high mortality rate. “If a young man's
grandfathers were both dead before he was born, for example, and some of his primary school
classmates had already died,” the tendency to discount the future, and to pursue risky activities
that produce immediate rewards, “could be a normal, adaptive reaction” (Wilson and Daly, 1997:
1274; also see Gardner, 1993; Hill, Ross, and Low, 1997).
This argument is also expressed in subcultural accounts of youth violence, most notably
in the ethnographic works of Elijah Anderson (1994, 1999). To account for the high rates of
youth violence he observed in various inner-city neighborhoods, he highlights the need
expressed by many disadvantaged young males to maintain respect in public encounters and the
willingness of some to risk injury or even death “over the principle of respect” (Anderson, 1994:
92). This fearless attitude toward violence is said to be rooted in the perceived possibility of
early death: “Many are uncertain about how long they are going to live and believe they could
die violently at any time. They accept this fate; they live on the edge” (Anderson, 1994: 94).
Although systematic data in this area are limited, a handful of quantitative studies have
examined the relationship between future life uncertainty (e.g., perceived likelihood of dying
before age 25) and youth crime. In general, these studies provide tentative empirical support for
the idea that anticipated early death is associated with youth crime and violence (Caldwell,
Wiebe, and Cleveland, 2006; DuRant et al., 1994; also see Agnew 2002; Wilson and Daly,
1997). Yet, as described below, questions remain regarding the nature of this association and
whether the anticipation of early death is indeed a contributing factor to offending behavior.
Moreover, the nature of this relationship may be more complex than suggested by previous
studies.

2

In this study, we seek to advance research on the relationship between anticipated early
death and youth crime. To enrich our understanding of this relationship, we adopted a multimethod strategy, combining complementary quantitative and qualitative studies. Multi-method
approaches allow researchers to combine the scientific objectivity afforded by quantitative
techniques with a rich understanding of context that can only be derived through qualitative
interviews with offenders. In Study 1, we seek to overcome the limitations of previous
quantitative studies by utilizing longitudinal data from a large and nationally representative
survey of adolescents. In Study 2, we draw on data from an ongoing ethnographic study of
active street offenders to inform our interpretation of the quantitative findings and to deepen our
understanding of offenders’ attitudes towards death and the risks of criminal activity.
We believe that a closer examination of this issue, employing the strategy described
above, is important for several reasons. First, the findings of our quantitative and qualitative
analyses may help to advance our understanding of the causes of youth crime and violence and
may have implications for the credibility of existing theoretical accounts (e.g., Anderson, 1994,
1999; Hill et al., 1997; Wilson and Daly, 1997). Second, it is necessary to address the limitations
of prior research, and to substantiate the previously observed relationship between anticipated
early death and crime, in order to move beyond basic questions in this area—a task for which
multi-method procedures are particularly well-suited. As described below, a multi-methods
approach can help to expose the causal mechanisms that may be responsible for this relationship
and may point to new directions for future criminological research. Third, our findings may
have implications for the control of youth crime and violence. For example, efforts to deter
criminal offenders by increasing the future costs of crime may have little impact if, in fact,
offenders tend to discount the future (Anderson, 1994; Hill et al., 1997).

3

ANTICIPATED EARLY DEATH AND YOUTH CRIME: EXISTING THEORY AND
RESEARCH
Participation in risky behaviors such as crime or violence often leads to undesirable
outcomes with potentially deadly consequences (Hill et al., 1997). As emphasized by Ross and
Hill (2002: 461), risk-taking is defined as “behavior that jeopardizes well-being or survival”
(emphases in original). From a rational-choice perspective, it follows that expectations about
future well-being or survival—such as the anticipation of early death—would influence a
decision to engage in risk-taking (Caldwell et al., 2006; Gardner, 1993; Hill et al., 1997; Wilson
and Daly, 1997). Drawing on concepts from life history theory, and informed by a
Darwinian/adaptationist framework, Hill and her colleagues (1997) propose an analytical model
of risk-taking that incorporates an emphasis on future unpredictability and “lifespan estimates.”
Specifically, they predict a lower willingness to engage in risky behavior among individuals who
believe that life is predictable and who are able to foresee a future. Such persons tend to be
forward-looking and orient themselves, in part, to the future costs and benefits of their actions.
In contrast, individuals who view the future as uncertain or unpredictable, and who lack
confidence in their future survival, are expected to be focused on the “here and now.” Because
they view the future itself as uncertain, the future consequences of behavior are discounted,
while the immediate benefits of behavior become salient. This orientation should be associated
with an increased willingness to engage in risky behaviors, including aggression (Hill et al.,
1997; also see Wilson and Daly, 1997). In short, “delaying present gratification for future
rewards makes no sense without a long, stable future to look forward to” (Caldwell et al.,
2006:600). The grey shaded boxes in the center of figure 1 depict the hypothesized causal chain
outlined by Hill and her associates, specifically as it would apply to the relationship between

4

anticipated early death and youth crime.
This rational choice approach fits well with prior research indicating that hardcore street
offenders maintain a strong commitment to hedonistic, self-perpetuating boom-and-bust
“partying” cycles focused on drug use, sex, materialistic pursuits, and indiscriminate
lawlessness. Such offenders spend as much as they have, as quickly as possible. The constant
need for cash, drugs, and alcohol to “keep the party going”—combined with careless spending
habits—leads offenders to participate in serious crime to bankroll their impulsive lifestyles
(Katz, 1988; Jacobs, 2000; Jacobs et al., 2003, 2000; Shover, 1996; Shover and Honaker, 1992;
Topalli et al., 2002; Wright and Decker, 1997, 1994).
Moreover, future uncertainty—including the anticipation of early death—emerges as an
explicit theme in several ethnographic studies of criminal offenders. In addition to the works of
Elijah Anderson, described earlier, these studies include Topalli and Wright’s (2004) study of
active carjackers in St. Louis, Missouri and Hoffman’s (2004) study of inner-city offenders in
Boston and Los Angeles. Topalli and Wright (2004: 162) observe that many of the offenders in
their study display an “almost complete disregard” for the future consequences of their risky
criminal pursuits. Although the authors did not focus on life expectancy per se, the responses of
their interviewees suggest that this disregard for future consequences may be related to future
uncertainty. For example, when asked how he spends the money he makes from carjacking, one
offender responded with the following:
Just get high, get high. I just blow the money… So everyday, there’s not a promise that there’ll be
another [day] so I just spend it, you know what I’m saying? (Topalli and Wright, 2004: 162).

Hoffman (2004) observes that, among the offenders she interviewed, the prospect of an
early death was accepted as part of day-to-day life in the inner-city. According to Hoffman, the
young people in her study “accepted the likelihood of [early] death as normal or expected”—an

5

expectation that fostered feelings of powerlessness, worthlessness, and the belief that there is
“little else to lose” (2004: 62-75). Moreover, this expectation of an early demise, or of limited
life chances, was reinforced by the views of other people in their lives. In the words of one
young offender:
Everybody said, “You ain’t never going to make it, you are going to end up dead or you are going
to be in prison and you’re going to catch 25-to-life, you’re going to do this” (Hoffman, 2004:
112).

While highly suggestive, these qualitative studies were not specifically designed to
examine the relationship between anticipated early death and youth crime. The findings are,
however, consistent with the results of quantitative research in this area. Although we are not
aware of any quantitative studies that focus primarily on the anticipation of early death, relevant
findings have been reported in the quantitative research literature and such findings increase
confidence in the qualitative work described above.
For example, DuRant and his colleagues (1995) explored the correlates of violent
behavior in a sample of adolescents living in or around public housing projects in Augusta,
Georgia. In this sample, self-reported violent behavior was moderately and negatively correlated
(-0.18) with a self-rating of survival probability. In particular, the belief that one would reach 25
years of age was associated with a lower level of violent behavior (conversely, the belief that “I
won’t live to be 25” was associated with a higher level of violence).
In a study of risk-taking by Hill, Ross, and Low (1997), community college students and
their acquaintances assessed their own chances of being alive, healthy, financially secure, and
happily married at various ages. Their estimates were used to construct a “future lifespan
assessment” scale, which was found to be negatively correlated (-0.22) with a scale of risk-taking
behavior. Respondents who perceived a long and stable future tended to report a relatively low

6

level of risk-taking. Although the risk-taking scale did not focus on criminal behaviors per se, it
included such items as “fighting or arguing” with teachers, supervisors, or strangers.
Agnew (2002) observed a relationship between “anticipated victimization” and
delinquency in a sample of male high school students. The measure of anticipated victimization
was based on responses to three survey items that indexed the perceived chances of being
stabbed with a knife, shot with a gun, and dying before the age of 25. This measure exhibited a
significant positive effect on delinquency (property crimes and violence) in multivariate
analyses, controlling for family attachment, demographic factors, and other variables.
Finally, Caldwell and her colleagues (2006) observed an association between future
certainty and delinquent behavior in a national sample of African American adolescents. The
authors constructed a measure of “basic life certainty” based on responses to three survey items
that indexed the perceived chances of contracting HIV or AIDS, living to the age of 35, and
being killed by age 21. This measure was negatively associated with delinquent behavior (lying,
shoplifting, fights, and selling drugs) in multivariate analyses—among both males and females—
controlling for household income, neighborhood disadvantage, family structure, and other
variables. In short, respondents who estimated a relatively long lifespan tended to report a lower
level of delinquency.
LIMITATIONS OF PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Collectively, these studies point to a significant association between the anticipation of
early death and youth crime. The limitations of these studies, however, preclude firm
conclusions and several questions remain unanswered. First, with respect to quantitative
research in this area, prior studies have controlled for a limited range of confounding factors.
Individuals who anticipate an early death may be more prone than others to suffer from a variety

7

of other negative circumstances. Thus, we cannot assume that they are more likely to commit
crime only because of their anticipation of early death. To rule out a spurious relationship, it is
important to control for other possible determinants of offending behavior that may be correlated
with anticipated early death (e.g., family process variables, child abuse, parental criminality, and
community-level factors).
Second, all of the studies described earlier are based on cross-sectional data, and many
rely on small and geographically-limited samples. Such data often leave in doubt the causal
direction of observed relationships. Although researchers typically assume that the anticipation
of early death is a contributing factor to youth crime and violence, the reverse may also be true;
that is, participation in a dangerous, criminal lifestyle may lead to the perception that one is at
risk of a shortened lifespan. In the words of one offender we interviewed for this project:
I used to always think something bad would happen to me. Like someone has to pay for this bad
stuff [criminal activity]. You know what man, like they say…what comes around goes around.
(Boo, age 20).

Alternatively, young people who are already committed to a criminal lifestyle may have
an interest in portraying themselves as fearless, and even as courting death. According to Katz
(1988: 233), some offenders pride themselves on their “hardman” image—having the ability to
face chaos and death “without a quiver or a qualm” (also see Åkerström, 1985; Topalli, 2005a).
Although it would be unreasonable to expect studies in this area to completely resolve the issue
of causal order, longitudinal data would be useful and could provide the basis for drawing
reasonable causal inferences (see Sampson and Laub, 1993: 39).
Third, we currently have little knowledge of how offenders process expectations
regarding their future survival, or how such expectations affect their attitudes towards
themselves, others, and offending behavior. Although prior qualitative studies on criminal
decision-making shed some light in this area (e.g., Anderson, 1994, 1999; Hoffman, 2004;
8

Topalli and Wright, 2004), these studies were not specifically designed to assess offenders’
perceptions and expectations regarding the prospect of early death. In short, the psychological
underpinnings of these processes and how they encourage participation in crime is not well
understood.
In this paper, we address these issues by conducting two complementary analyses (see
Figure 1). In Study 1, we analyze longitudinal data from a nationally representative survey of
adolescents within an econometric framework. The aim of this study is to assess the relationship
between anticipated early death and youth crime while controlling for a wide range of observable
variables (e.g., numerous indicators of socioeconomic status, past history of abuse, parental
criminality) as well as unobservable factors (unobserved heterogeneity) operating at the levels of
the family, county, and state. In addition to controlling for an unusually rich set of
characteristics that are likely to be correlated with both criminal behavior and anticipation of
early death, we also utilize data from a large sample of twins and siblings to further eliminate the
potential confounders (e.g., the effects of unobserved variables). The advantage of this
quantitative strategy is that it allows us to delineate, with greater confidence, the statistical
relationship between youths’ anticipation of early death and their involvement in crime.
However, such an analysis does not allow us to explore the meanings that offenders
attach to the prospect of early death and the impact of such meanings and perceptions on their
decisions to offend. To complete our understanding of how anticipated early death leads to
increased offending, it is necessary to access information that offenders themselves have (see
Feeney, 1986).
Therefore, in Study 2, we draw on interview data obtained from a sample of active street
offenders. We engaged each study participant in an in-depth discussion specifically designed to

9

tap their perceptions regarding the risk of early death. This second study complements our
quantitative analyses by exposing the causal mechanisms (e.g., discounting of future
consequences, “here and now” orientation) that may link anticipated early death with criminal
involvement—mechanisms that, in previous quantitative studies, have typically been inferred.
Because qualitative methods can help to expose such mechanisms, their use in the final stages of
large-N studies is recommended (Ragin, Nagel, and White, 2004). In addition, qualitative
methods “can be helpful in assessing the credibility” of causal mechanisms posited by theorists
(Ragin et al., 2004: 15).

STUDY 1: SURVEY DATA ANALYSES
DATA
The data for study 1 were drawn from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health, also known as Add Health. Add Health was specifically designed to investigate
adolescents' health and risk behaviors1 and is considered the largest and most comprehensive
survey of adolescents ever undertaken.2 A total of 20,745 adolescents between grades 7 and 12
and their parents were interviewed in Wave I between April and December 1995 and 15,197 of
them were interviewed again for Wave II conducted from April 1996 through August 1996.3

1

The Add Health is a program project designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris,
and funded by a grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, with
cooperative funding from 17 other agencies. Special acknowledgment is due Ronald R. Rindfuss and Barbara
Entwisle for assistance in the original design. Persons interested in obtaining data files from Add Health should
contact Add Health, Carolina Population Center, 123 W. Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524
(addhealth@unc.edu).
2
More information on the design of Add Health can be found at http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth/design
3
There is a third wave that was administered between August 2001 and April 2002 when the respondents were
between ages 18 and 26. The sample for the Wave II In-home Interview was composed of the respondents of the
Wave I In-home Interview, with the following exceptions: A respondent who was in the 12th grade in Wave I and
who was not part of the genetic sample was not interviewed in Wave II. Respondents who were only in Wave I’s
disabled sample were not re-interviewed.

10

The survey includes a number of detailed questions4 about the delinquent behavior of
adolescents. Specifically, respondents were asked in both waves whether they had committed
any of the following acts in the 12 months prior to the interview date: theft, damaging property,
burglary, assault, robbery, pulling a gun or knife on someone else, and shooting or stabbing
someone else. We created binary variables to indicate whether respondents engaged in each of
these behaviors during the previous 12 months.
Questions were also posed to individuals regarding expectations about their lifespan.
Specifically, they were asked about the chances they will (1) “live to age 35,” and (2) “will be
killed by age 21.” Possible responses to each survey item include “almost no chance”, “some
chance, but probably not”, “a 50-50 chance”, “a good chance”, and “almost certain”. For each
item, we created three binary indicators to represent the following response categories: (1) less
than a 50 percent chance, (2) a 50 percent chance, and (3) more than a 50 percent chance.
The richness of the Add Health allows us to control for an unusually extensive list of
characteristics representing the socio-economic backgrounds of respondents. Specifically, we
include in our models multiple binary indicators representing age, gender, various categories of
race, Hispanic ethnicity, multiple categories for mother’s and father’s education, presence of
mother and father in the household, an indicator for whether the respondent is the first child,
various indicators for birth weight, an indicator for church attendance, various indicators for
religion, binary indicators for standard test scores being in various quartiles, family income,
welfare status of parents, an indicator for whether the father is the biological or step father,

4

Survey administrators took several steps to maintain data security and to minimize the potential for interviewer or
parental influence. First, respondents were not provided with any printed questionnaires. Rather, all data were
recorded on laptop computers. Second, for sensitive topics, such as delinquent behavior, substance use/abuse, and
gun availability, the adolescents listened to pre-recorded questions through earphones and entered their answers
directly on the laptops. Rates of criminal behaviors reported in the Add Health are consistent with those measured
in other sources (Mocan and Tekin, 2005, 2006).

11

whether the respondent was born in the U.S., whether the father was ever jailed, whether the
respondent spent time in foster care, whether the respondent was a victim of abuse by parents or
other caregivers, and weekly allowance of the respondent. These amount to a total of 59 control
variables. When possible, we also include state, county, and time indicators in our models.
The definitions and the descriptive statistics5 of the outcome variables are presented in
table 1. Table 1 also displays the descriptive statistics by perceived probability of being killed
by 21 and living up to age 35. We have a total of 34,780 observations from Waves 1 and 2
combined. About 60 percent of the observations come from Wave 1 and the rest comes from
Wave 2. Of the 34,780 observations, 1,308 indicated that they had less than a 50 percent chance
of living up to age 35, 14,977 indicated that they have about a 50-50 chance of living up to age
35, and 18,485 indicated that they have a more than 50 percent chance of living up to age 35. A
total of 29,221, 4,948, and 611 observations indicated that they had a less than 50 percent, about
50-50, and more than 50 percent chance of being killed by age 21, respectively. As illustrated in
table 1, individuals who have a less confident view of their chances of living beyond ages 21 and
35 are more likely to engage in all of our measures of offending behavior.
ECONOMETRIC FRAMEWORK
As explained above, our “lifespan estimate” measures are based on the individual’s own
perception of his/her likelihood of dying before age 21 and his/her likelihood of living at least
until age 35. We believe these variables constitute good proxies for a person’s anticipation of
early death and they are also consistent with the measures used in previous research. Our goal is
to estimate the effects of anticipated early death on offending behaviors among adolescents. The

5

In the interest of space, we do not discuss the descriptive statistics in detail, but they are available from the authors
upon request. However, they are mostly consistent with one’s expectations as well as the relevant literature.

12

empirical relationship between offending behavior and anticipated early death can be specified in
the following form:
Yist = Xist β + α AEDist + λi + κs + tt + εist,

(1)

where Yist is one of the offending behavior outcomes of individual i living in state (or county) s
in year t; X is a vector of individual and family level determinants of risky behaviors; AED is
one of the anticipated early death (or perceived lifespan) measures; λi is a vector of binary
respondent indicators; κs is a vector of state (or county) indicators; tt is a time indicator; and εist is
an idiosyncratic disturbance term. The coefficient of interest in (1) is α.
In equation (1) it is important to account for all of the unobserved determinants of
offending behavior (or unobserved heterogeneity) that may be correlated with anticipated early
death. Otherwise, the error term in equation (1) will be correlated with AED and this will result
in biased estimates. Although we exploit the richness of our data set by including a long list of
controls in X, it can still be argued that this strategy is not sufficient to control for all the omitted
variables that are correlated with both AED and Y. For example, offending behavior may also
be a function of local deterrence (e.g., number of police officers, the harshness of penalties) or
economic conditions (e.g., the unemployment rate). These local characteristics and conditions
can impact offending behavior while also being correlated with anticipated early death.
Add Health is accompanied by a rich contextual data base with county and state level
variables that, in principle, could be included in our models. Instead we adopt a more effective
strategy and estimate our models with state and county identifiers. This strategy, also called
state (or county) fixed effects, gauges all state (or county) level conditions or attitudes towards
offending behaviors that may also be correlated with anticipated early death. This allows us to
avoid the risk of leaving out any relevant local variables. With state and county fixed effects, the

13

identification of the effect of our AED variable comes from the variation in this variable across
individuals living within the same state or county, respectively. Because county or state fixed
effects also capture the impacts of any local policy or attitude variables at the county or state
levels, these variables cannot be included in our models separately. However, this is not a
concern because the effects of those variables are not the focus of the current research. In
addition to estimating models with state or county fixed effects, we also exploit the longitudinal
nature of our data. Because we have information for the same individuals for two consecutive
years, we are able to control for all the time-invariant unobservables of individuals. This is
implemented by including individual indicators (or individual fixed effects) into equation (1).6
As another attempt to eliminate unobserved heterogeneity that would bias the α, we will
also utilize the genetic sub-sample in Add Health. Twins and siblings are over-represented in
Add Health, allowing us to control for unobservables and observables common to both siblings,
such as socio-economic status and parental characteristics that would be correlated with both
AED and criminal propensities. This is implemented by including family identifiers (or family
fixed effects), which is equivalent to estimating an equation of the following form:
Yist = Xist β + α AEDist + FAMIDi + εist.

(2)

In equation (2), the number of variables in vector X is much smaller, because most of them do
not vary between siblings (e.g. parents’ education, family income, welfare status, etc.). FAMID
is a vector of binary indicators representing the family of each respondent.
A final concern is the potential reverse causality between offending behavior and the
anticipation of early death. As described earlier, participation in criminal or delinquent behavior
may affect the perceptions that individuals develop about, among other things, the risk of dying.

6

Since individual fixed effects gauge for all the time-invariant characteristics of individuals, all time-invariant
observables in vector X drops out of model, such as race, gender, childhood maltreatment, etc.

14

In order to mitigate concerns of bias stemming from this possibility, we also estimate our models
using offending behaviors from Wave 2 and anticipation of early death measures from Wave 1.
Anticipation of early death in Wave 1 can influence offending behaviors in Wave 2, but the
reverse is not possible. Note that individual fixed effects cannot be included in these models
because each individual appears only once in the analysis.
Because our outcomes are binary, we estimate linear probability models using the
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).7 The coefficients of a linear probability model can be interpreted
as marginal effects and are extensively used by economists and other social scientists (Blau and
Tekin, 2007; Chou, Rashad, and Grossman, 2005; Mocan and Tekin, 2006; Tekin and
Markowitz, 2008). It is well known that OLS estimates of coefficients in linear probability
models are consistent estimates of average probability derivatives, but standard error estimates
are biased as a result of heteroskedasticity (Angrist and Krueger, 1999). Therefore, we report
standard error estimates that are corrected for any form of heteroskedasticity.
RESULTS OF STUDY 1
We begin by presenting the results from the estimations using data from Wave 1 only.
Because the results from the models with state fixed effects are almost identical to those with the
county fixed effects, we only present those with the county fixed effects. In each table, we
present the results from the models of the probability of being killed by age 21 in the upper panel
and the results from the models of the probability of living up to age 35 in the lower panel. As
illustrated in table 2, respondents who perceive a less than 50 percent chance of being killed by
age 21 are less likely to commit any of the offending behaviors analyzed compared to those who
perceive a 50-50 chance of being killed by age 21. Furthermore, respondents who estimate their

7

Probit and logit models produced very similar marginal effects.

15

chance of being killed by age 21 at greater than 50 percent are more likely to commit any of
these offenses compared to those who estimate a 50-50 chance.
Similarly, respondents who perceive a less than 50 percent chance of living to age 35 are
more likely to commit any of the eight offending behaviors compared to those who perceive a
50-50 chance of living to age 35; and respondents who estimate the probability of living to age
35 at greater than 50 percent are less likely to commit these actions compared to those who
estimate a 50-50 chance. Furthermore, with the exception of two coefficients (involving assault,
property damage, and a greater than 50% chance of being killed by 21), all of the 32 coefficients
are estimated with statistical significance at less than one percent level.
Table 3 is similar to table 2, but we use data from both Wave 1 and Wave 2 to increase
the power of our estimates through a larger sample size. As displayed in table 3, with the
increased sample, all of the 32 coefficients are now statistically significant at conventional
levels. The coefficient estimates are also mostly consistent with those in table 2. Perceiving a
less than 50 percent chance of being killed by age 21 is associated with a decrease in an
adolescent’s probability of offending behavior by 2.3 percentage points (burglary) to 5.2
percentage points (damaging property). When the perceived chance of being killed by age 21 is
greater than 50 percent, the probability of offending behavior increases by 3.3 percent (property
damage) to 7.3 percent (pulling a knife or gun). Similarly, when the perceived chance of living
to age 35 is less than 50 percent, the probability of offending behavior increases by 3.4
percentage points (graffiti) to 5.7 percentage points (assault and pulling a knife or gun); when the
perceived chance of living to age 35 is greater than 50 percent, the probability of offending
behavior is reduced by 4.8 percentage points (property damage) to 1.6 percentage points
(shooting or stabbing).

16

To guard against reverse causality (i.e., bias due to the potential reverse effect of criminal
involvement on anticipation of early death), we estimate models using lagged measures of the
lifespan estimates. That is, we regress the offense measures from Wave 2 on our control
variables and lifespan-estimate measures from Wave 1. These results are presented in table 4.
We again find substantial evidence of an effect of anticipated early death on the probability of
committing various offenses. The number of statistically significant coefficients decreased as a
result of the reduced sample size. However, twenty of the thirty two coefficients are still
estimated with precision at conventional levels. Furthermore, every single coefficient in table 4
is in the expected direction. We also conclude that reverse causality is unlikely to be an
important factor causing bias in our estimates because the magnitude of our estimates are
consistent with those in table 3, especially for those coefficients that are significant.
In table 5, we present our results from the sibling fixed effects. Note that this sample
uses the sibling (and twins) sub-sample to control for all the observable and unobservable factors
that are common between siblings such as socio-economic status. Despite the extensive controls
of these factors, and a substantial reduction in the sample size, we find considerable evidence for
an effect of anticipated early death on offending. With the exception of four coefficients
(involving burglary, “shot or stabbed,” and a greater than 50% chance of being killed by 21; and
burglary, assault, and a less than 50% chance of living to age 35), all coefficients have the
expected positive and negative signs and, when statistically significant, the effects are in the
expected direction.
Finally, we control for individual fixed effects exploiting the fact that each adolescent is
observed twice in Add Health in Waves 1 and 2. This is a method similar to sibling fixed effects
in terms of controlling for the unobserved heterogeneity that would bias our estimates. Again,

17

despite the extensive controls in individual fixed effects, we find considerable evidence to
support the presence of an effect of anticipated early death on adolescent offending (see table 6).
With the exception of two coefficients (those involving graffiti, theft, and a less than 50% chance
of being killed by 21), all coefficients have the expected positive and negative signs and 15 of
them are statistically significant, all in the expected direction.
The fewer numbers of statistically significant coefficients in sibling and individual fixedeffects models are not of great concern. This is because the identification in sibling and
individual fixed-effects models comes from discordant records in the lifespan-estimate indicators
between siblings and between Waves 1 and 2, respectively. To the extent that a majority of
siblings in a family and the same adolescents between Waves 1 and 2 responded identically to
these questions, the reduction in the precision of estimates is expected. To further support this
notion, we see that most of the insignificant coefficients involve “the probability of being killed
by 21 > 50 percent” or “the probability of living up to age 35 < 50 percent” dummies. In table 1,
we see that they constitute only 3.8 percent (1,308 adolescents) and 1.8 percent (611) of the total
sample, and this is in the sample with observations from Waves 1 and 2 combined. Smaller
representations of these groups in the sample imply the discordant reports between siblings in a
family and adolescents between Waves 1 and 2 will also be fewer. This fact would be expected
to lower the statistical significance of their coefficients.
STUDY 1 SUMMARY
In sum, our quantitative analyses have helped to further isolate the effect of anticipated
early death on offending behavior. In general, this effect remains significant even after
controlling for a wide range of observable and unobservable determinants of offending.
Moreover, we have taken initial steps to rule out the possibility of bias due to reverse causality.

18

Overall, our analyses and findings help to advance prior quantitative research in this area and
increase confidence in the observed relationship between anticipated early death and youth
crime.
To gain a better understanding of how offenders process the risk of early death and how,
exactly, it affects their decision-making, we now turn to our qualitative analysis.

STUDY 2: INTERVIEWS WITH ACTIVE STREET OFFENDERS
SETTING
As part of an ongoing ethnographic study of offender decision-making funded by the
National Science Foundation, in-depth interviews were conducted with active offenders recruited
from the streets of Atlanta, Georgia. Atlanta is known for being a “primary distribution center”
for illicit drugs within the state of Georgia, which serves as “both a final destination point for
drug shipments and a smuggling corridor for drugs transported along the East Coast” (Drug
Enforcement Agency, 2008, n.p.). Moreover, the city of Atlanta suffers a homicide rate that is
nearly four times the national average (Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2006).
Recruiters concentrated their efforts in an area of the city known as Central West Atlanta
(CWA), a community that, historically, has suffered high rates of drug trafficking, serious street
crime, and youth violence. Although CWA has a core group of residents invested in the safety
and improvement of their neighborhoods, most areas within its bounds are dominated by
violence, decay, and a lack of city services, and do not represent “neighborhood communities” in
the conventional middle-class sense (see Inciardi, Horowitz, and Pottieger, 1993). According to
the Atlanta Police Department’s Crime Analysis Unit, CWA represented only 11 percent (47,
016) of the city’s population in 2004-2005, yet accounted for 27 percent of all city homicides

19

and 25 percent of the rapes, 19 percent of the robberies, and 31 percent of the aggravated assaults
known to police. CWA is typical of the kinds of environments that researchers have accessed to
explore and understand demographic and contextual backgrounds for studies on burglary
(Cromwell and Olson, 2004; Cromwell, Olson and Avary, 1991; Piquero and Rengert, 1999;
Wright and Decker, 1994), robbery and theft (Miller, 1998; Shover and Henderson, 1995; Wright
and Decker, 1997), prostitution (e.g., Maher, 1997; Phoenix, 2000), carjacking (Jacobs et al.,
2003; Topalli and Wright, 2004), drug dealing and drug robbery (Bourgois, 1995; Geter, 1994;
Hagedorn, 1994; Jacobs, 1999, 2000, 2006; Jacobs et al., 2000; Topalli et al., 2002), crime
among homeless youth (e.g., Inciardi, et al., 1993; Tyler and Johnson, 2004), gangs (e.g., Miller,
2001) and street snitching (Rosenfeld, Jacobs, and Wright, 2003).
PARTICIPANTS AND RECRUITMENT PROCESS
We employed two different offender-recruiters to identify and locate participants for the
study who fell within our stated inclusion criteria (young offenders who were actively involved
in serious street crime within the past year8). These individuals were African American and
focused their recruitment efforts on areas of CWA with which they were well acquainted. CWA
is overwhelmingly African American (up to 96% in some neighborhoods) and because recruiters
engaged with other offenders within their own network of acquaintances, they were unable to
establish any relationships with non-African-American (i.e., White, Latino, or Asian) offenders.
As a result, the sample almost certainly over-represents African Americans and is therefore less
than a true representation of the overall population of street offenders (in Atlanta or other similar
cities). However, it is important to note that although currently race is correlated with
involvement in crime and violence (i.e., a risk marker), a number of studies have amply
8

It is important to note that the offenders were recruited based on their past behavior, and not because they were
identified by our recruiters as individuals who anticipated an early death. In fact, our recruiters were blind to this
hypothesis in our research.

20

determined that it is almost certainly not the cause (i.e., a risk factor) of such behaviors (see, for
example, Almgren et al., 1998; Cook and Laub, 1998; Lauritsen, Sampson, and Laub, 1991;
Satcher, 2001). It is therefore logical to assume that the ecological context within which these
offenders operate would produce similar patterns of behavior among members of other races.
Moreover, this sample of offenders is especially well-suited for an in-depth study of
anticipated early death and its impact on criminal decision-making. As Bell and Jenkins (1993:
53) observe, questions about future orientation are particularly relevant for young, inner-city
black males “who may already feel alienated from a society that is not making a place for them.”
Furthermore, West (1993: 12-15) observes that a key challenge facing such men is the “eclipse
of hope” for the future, born out of a life of hardship, that tends to breed a “coldhearted, meanspirited outlook” and “incredible disregard” for human life and property.
The offender interviewees were paid $50 for their participation in the study (with
recruiters receiving a $50 referral fee per successful interview). All participants remained
anonymous; we never asked for their real names and assured them that the interviews were to be
used solely for the purpose of research. The in-depth interviews lasted from 45 to 120 minutes
and were conducted between 2006 and 2008 in a private office on a university campus located in
downtown Atlanta or in the streets of CWA (i.e., at fast food restaurants, public parks, or other
outdoor public areas) where the interviewees and the researchers felt comfortable. The
interviews followed a predetermined Q&A protocol but were semi-structured and conducted in
an informal manner. This approach allowed participants to respond freely and to introduce their
own concepts and categories, providing us with a more comprehensive and rich set of data to
explore. This approach has been used successfully in many previous ethnographic studies of
active offenders (e.g., Jacobs et al., 2000; Jacobs and Wright, 1999; Topalli, 2005a; Topalli and

21

Wright, 2004; Wright and Decker, 1994, 1997). Interviews focused on the participants’
perceptions of risk—with particular emphasis on the risk of future injury or early death—and the
extent to which these perceptions influenced their attitudes and behaviors related to offending.
ISSUES OF INTERNAL VALIDITY
Before discussing the qualitative findings, it is important to comment on the internal
validity of the interviews and the possibility of distortion that might arise from interviewees’
attempts to impress us, deceive us, or to justify their conduct. The possibility of distortion is not
unique to our study, but is an issue that concerns all ethnographic research based on offender
interviews. To guard against deliberate dishonesty, we carefully monitored all interviews,
checking for and questioning inconsistent responses. While this strategy does not eliminate the
possibility of distortion, we take confidence in the results of prior research showing that active
street offenders are no more likely than anyone else to lie about their circumstances (see Jacobs
et al., 2000; Wright and Decker, 1994). It should be noted that the same potential for dishonesty
exists within any format of research where participants are asked to discuss difficult or personal
topics. Previous research on the quality and veracity of offender self-report data supports the
contention that semi-structured interviews represent the most efficacious method of obtaining
valid, relevant information about offending and the psychological processes that govern such
behavior (see Huzinga and Elliott, 1986; West and Farrington, 1977; Wright and Bennett, 1990).
Beyond that, the internal validity of these kinds of data and procedures has been exhaustively
addressed in previous research and need not be fully restated here (see, for example, Jacobs et al.
2000, 2003; Jacobs and Wright, 1999; Maher, 1997; Topalli et al., 2002; Topalli and Wright,
2004; Wright and Decker, 1997).

22

RESULTS OF STUDY 2
Our initial interviews with young offenders in Atlanta confirmed research detailed above
on the fatalism and sense of “futurelessness” experienced by many inner-city youth (esp.
Anderson, 1994, 1999; Durant et al., 1994; Hoffman, 2004). What soon emerged from our
discussions with these young offenders was the conclusion that such fatalism emanated from
their day to day experiences with and witnessing of violence:
I grew up with shootin’ and fightin’ all over. You grew up with books and shit. Where I’m from
you never know if you gonna live one minute to the next. It’s like a war out there. People die
every day. You can go to sleep and hear gunshots all night man, all night. Bullets be lying on the
street in the morning. Ambulances and police cars steady riding through my neighborhood, man.
(Deathrow, age 19)

These observations on inner-city life echo previous studies of urban violence which have
depicted such communities as “war zones,” where much of the violence that occurs is public
(taking place on the street or in alleys and parks), and where even young children witness
aggravated assaults and murders (e.g., Bell and Jenkins, 1993; Garbarino et al., 1992; Hoffman,
2004; Lorion and Saltzman, 1993). For example, based on a large sample of young people
drawn from Chicago’s inner-city schools, Bell and Jenkins (1993) determined that three out of
four had witnessed a robbery or some other type of serious violent crime. Thirty-five percent of
these children had been witness to a stabbing, 39 percent had witnessed a shooting, and 24
percent “reported that they had seen someone killed” (Bell and Jenkins, 1993: 49).
Many of the violent attacks witnessed by inner-city children involve victims that they
know personally, including classmates, friends, neighbors, and family members. Furthermore,
nearly half (47%) of the inner-city students in the Bell and Jenkins (1993: 48-49) study had been
personally victimized; either robbed (16%), threatened with a knife (23%) or gun (17%), shot at
(11%), stabbed (4%), or attacked in some other way. Singer and his colleagues (1995) observed
particularly high rates of violent victimization among male public high school students drawn

23

from central-city areas of Denver and Cleveland, with 28 percent of the Denver students and 33
percent of the Cleveland students reporting that they had been shot or shot at.
These experiences with violence contribute to a pervasive sense of fear and vulnerability
in such communities (Lorion and Saltzman, 1993) and are indicative of the kind of victimization
that offenders themselves experience. For example, Topalli (2005b) conducted a study
comparing social perceptions of active offenders, demographic controls (i.e., individuals from
the same neighborhoods as the offenders who did not engage in crime) and college controls from
St. Louis. College controls (who lived primarily in safer suburban areas of St. Louis)
experienced a violent victimization rate of 14.2%, while rates were much higher for demographic
controls (50%) and offenders (68.8%) who lived in the most dangerous, crime-ridden areas of
North St. Louis. Moreover, previous research has demonstrated a strong relationship between
prior exposure to violence and later perpetration of aggression among youth living in poor urban
environments (Eitle and Turner, 2002; Farrell, 1997; see also Margolin and Gordis, 2000;
Scarpa, 2003, 2001).
Predictably, our interviewees described their own lives and neighborhoods as plagued by
the persistent threat of violence. In fact, many claimed to have been shot or stabbed in the past—
some multiple times—and could point to scars that, at the very least, provided evidence of severe
physical trauma. Moreover, they could recall early memories of violence and described an acute
awareness of their own vulnerability:
I’ve been robbed when I was at school, been ripped off, been shot at. No joke. They shot at my
cousins. They shot at my brother. Hell, someone shot at my granny’s house. It’s f***ed up, for
real. Cuz, you don’t know…you just walkin’ around, might not even be doin’ no shit, and
someone just pull up and try to knock you. [Referring to a recent news event] You hear in the
news about that little 3 year old kid got shot? He ain’t in the game [in the drug dealing business]
but he got shot anyhow, right? (Foosey, age 18).

In some interviews, offenders informed us that such bleak outlooks were reinforced by
family members and friends, either as a way of informally indoctrinating them into the violent
24

culture they were a part of or as an attempt to scare them into abandoning their lifestyles (also
see Hoffman, 2004). Ironically, attempts to scare these young men from crime by highlighting
their prospects for an early death may have backfired. When asked about how he had thought
about his future Cris Cris responded,
I swore that I wasn’t gonna see 19. I swear. The way I was goin, I didn’t think I was ever gonna
see 19. I swear. My aunties used to always say, “man you gonna be dead.” My aunties, my
whole family. My momma and my grand-momma never told me nothin like that. My aunties
would say that. The way I was goin’, I was goin’ a real rough route. Made me wanna go do some
more stuff. Made me wanna go do some more bad stuff.

We are reminded of the poignant questions raised by Bell and Jenkins (1993: 53), who
helped to document the violent milieu in which many inner-city young people are immersed:
How does this very real threat [of community violence], often underscored by frequent
attendance at peers’ funerals, affect adolescent males’ sense of a future? How does a
sense of future impact on willingness to engage in risk-taking behaviors, including
violence? How is a willingness to form close relationships with others affected when you
are not sure about your own future or that of the other person?... When does a sense of
futurelessness turn into nihilism?
As the interviews progressed, our study participants helped to shed additional light on
these very issues. Although acutely aware of the risks of violent injury or death, our participants
did not dwell overtly on such possibilities. Rather, as all consistently stressed, and as theorized
by Elizabeth Hill and her colleagues (1997), the possibility of a shortened life span encouraged
them to focus on the “here and now.” When asked if they worried about being victimized, Baby
Boy and J.R. responded;
Everyday there’s a chance I will get robbed, stabbed, or killed. You know what I’m saying? You
put your life on the line every day, every motherf***in’ day. I just take it a day at a time. (Baby
Boy, 21)
I just take it day by day… I try not to think about danger until it comes by me. If it comes by me,
then I think about it. But really, what is the point? Ain’t nothing you can do about it, so just need
to deal with right now, you know. Right now more important than later tomorrow man. (J.R., age
20).

Our participants’ narrow focus on day-to-day events and avoidance of long-term
considerations was impressed upon us further when we specifically asked them to assess the
25

probability of living beyond the next five years. Using the survey items from study 1 as a guide,
we asked the following questions: “What do you think the chances are that you will be killed in
the next five years? Would you say greater than a 50 percent chance? About 50/50? Or less
than a 50 percent chance?” Almost invariably, our participants struggled to answer this question,
not because they failed to understand it, but because—as they explained—they simply do not
think about the future:
I can’t answer that question. I don’t think about it [the chances of getting killed in the future].
(Baby Boy, age 21).
Shit, who knows? I don’t trip off that. That is not something I think on. It is what it is. Life is
short. I don’t know what the chance is. Might be dead by 25 so who cares? (Magic Blue, age 22)

To extent that our interviewees could address such questions, they depicted life as
inherently unpredictable, where even day-to-day survival amounted to a “crap shoot”—a fact
that they accepted, but one that also underscored the futility of future planning:
I say f*** tomorrow. It’s all about today. Might not be a tomorrow. Might get shot. Might get
hit by a bus. So get it now. Now, now, now. Next week might as well be next century. F*** next
week. F*** tomorrow. (Blue Eyes, age 23)
It’s a waste to think about the future. What if someone pops me while I’m slingin’ [dealing
drugs]. Then what? I got shit to do man. I can’t think about that stuff. (Ookie, age 19)

To a large degree, the attitudes of our study participants resemble the coping responses
that develop among individuals in war torn countries. In an article titled, “When Death Seems
Inevitable,” war correspondent Robert Cox (2006: 8) describes how he managed to function
while facing the daily threat of violent death:
Courage, I discovered while covering the “dirty war” in Argentina, is a relatively simple
mater of overcoming fear. I realized one day that I could deal with the idea that I would
be killed, simply by accepting it as fact. The knot in my stomach loosened considerably
after that. There was no reason to fear being killed once that reality had been accepted.
It is fear itself that makes one afraid… Some Iraqi reporters explain that their ability to
function is because they accept their inevitable date with death.

26

As described by some of our active offenders, courage in the face of danger was, in fact,
a requirement of their criminal involvement, including drug dealing, robbery, and carjacking
(also see Jacobs et al, 2000; McCarthy and Hagan, 2005). In the words of one participant, “You
got to be prepared or you gonna get taken” (Foosey, age 18). Thus, the acceptance of death or its
possibility may facilitate crime because it helps to neutralize the fear that would otherwise be
associated with dangerous criminal pursuits.
But the responses of our interviewees suggest several additional ways in which the
anticipation of early death may be linked to youth crime. First, as described above, the perceived
risk of an early death appears to contribute to a “here and now” orientation, a disregard for the
future consequences of one’s actions, and a focus on immediate rewards and benefits; that is,
“get it now.” As Tittle, Ward, and Grasmick argue (2004), self-control requires both the
capacity for self-control as well as the desire to exercise restraint. When young people lose faith
in their future, we would expect them to lose the incentive to defer immediate gratification (also
see Hill et al., 1997).
Second, the prospect of an early death, along with extensive exposure to community
violence, may contribute to attitudes that justify crime and violence, including desensitization to
the consequences of violence, a hostile world view, and disregard for human life (Garbarino et
al., 1992; Kotlowitz, 1991; Lorion and Saltzman, 1993: Topalli, 2005a; West, 1993). As some of
our participants described:
My way of lookin’ at this is, God gonna take everybody, OK? Gonna take me. Gonna take you.
So, what the f*** am I gonna care for anybody? I’m not. I’m gonna get mine, and if I have to kill
your ass to do it, so what? You’d kill me wouldn’t you? Wouldn’t you? So, what’s the point?
Might as well win. Somebody gotta win, somebody gotta lose. Gotta win until you lose. When
you lose you dead. It’s like that. (Chazz, age 17)
There’s only a short time in the world for everybody. I’m gonna make yours shorter than mine.
Believe that. I don’t think about nobody but me and mines, you hear? No sympathy, no way.
(Pac, age 19)

27

In short, these young men appear to embody the nihilism described by West (1993; also
see Anderson, 1999; Kitwana, 2002; Kubrin, 2006). For them, death is an omnipresent reality,
and they adapt to this reality by embracing the attitudes of the macho. The macho feels a need to
not be afraid, to always be ready to die, and “to never give in” (Younoszai, 1993: 74). The
macho is also angry and violent, and “violence that is not afraid of death is violence that can kill”
(Younoszai, 1993: 74). When we commented to Cris Cris that he seemed fearless, he explained:
Cris Cris: I always been like that though since I was young. Ain’t never had no father or brothers
to protect me or tell me what’s up, really I just had to stand my own ground, ain’t have nobody to
tell me, “man, you don’t needa be doin this.” My mom would tell me that but I wouldn’t listen to
her. She don’t know shit. She’s a woman. She ain’t livin’ my life. I feel like I’m the smart one
because I know that life is short. Life is short, so its smart to get yours now. Only the strong
survive man. I’m a man, you hear. I live this shit.
INTERVIEWER: Is that why you think you are so fearless?
Cris Cris: That was sorta the reason, cuz ain’t wasn’t no guarantee I’s gonna see tomorrow.
That’s another reason, see. They’s a lot of folks who want me dead. I’m living a real tough life.
I had everybody lookin’ out for themselves. So, I have to do that too, you know. Ain’t no point in
being scared because you cannot know [what] you gonna die from. So, I can just, you know, not
think about danger and shit. If I see something I want I take it right then because that might be
your only chance in this world to get some. Somebody might be shootin’ dice on the curb or
something, I walk up and take all the money. So like that.

STUDY 2 SUMMARY
We are struck by the apparent overlap between existing, analytical models of risktaking—especially those incorporating an emphasis on lifespan estimates (Hill et al, 1997; Ross
and Hill, 2002)—and the accounts provided by our active offenders. Both suggest that
anticipated early death is linked to crime, in part, because uncertainty over future survival
promotes a focus on immediate gratification and a disregard for future consequences. In
addition, our offender accounts suggest that the anticipation of early death may contribute to (or
facilitate) criminal involvement by engendering nihilistic attitudes and by neutralizing fear
(required to pursue dangerous criminal activity). The convergence of such processes results in
young offenders experiencing little incentive to abide by the law or refrain from violence. These

28

additional concepts, revealed through the use of our interview-based methodology, help to
further illuminate the nature of the relationship between anticipated early death and criminality
and are featured in the (elaborated) explanatory model (see figure 2).

CONCLUSION
Researchers from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds have pointed to the anticipation
of early death, or a sense of “futurelessness,” as a possible contributing factor to youth crime and
violence (e.g., Anderson, 1994, 1999; Lorion and Saltzman, 1993; Wilson and Daly, 1997).
Some researchers have incorporated this form of fatalism into analytical models of risk-taking
(Hill et al., 1997; Ross and Hill, 2002), while others have taken initial steps to assess its
empirical relationship to youth crime (Caldwell et al., 2006; DuRant et al., 1994). Our goals in
this paper were to: (1) verify the statistical relationship that has been observed in prior studies,
using relatively rigorous statistical procedures, and (2) deepen our understanding of this
relationship, and of the possible causal mechanisms involved, with the aid of in-depth interviews
with criminal offenders. The ultimate aim of this multi-methods approach was to help move us
beyond basic questions (e.g., “Is there a non-spurious, statistical relationship between anticipated
early death and youth crime?”) and to facilitate the exploration of more complicated and nuanced
social processes.
Toward this end, the results of our examination suggest several promising avenues for
future research. First, future quantitative studies could follow-up on the insights we extracted
from our interviews with active offenders. The accounts provided by these offenders point to
several mediating variables that could be explored in future research, including a present-time
orientation, perceived salience of immediate benefits, a disregard for the future consequences of

29

behavior, a low desire to exercise self-control, fearlessness, and nihilistic attitudes that may
result from the anticipation of early death. Two additional mechanisms that may link anticipated
early death with crime, and that were implicit in the offender interviews, include: (1) the
development of an “unpredictability schema”—a pervasive belief that the world is a chaotic
place—(see Ross and Hill, 2002), and (2) lack of investment in conventional pursuits; namely,
those associated with delayed benefits, such as school, legitimate work, or the development of a
skill.
Second, future research efforts should address the origins of anticipated early death.
Likely contributing factors include extensive exposure to community violence (Bell and Jenkins,
1993; Garbarino et al., 1992; Hoffman, 2004; Lorion and Saltzman, 1993) and residence in
neighborhoods that suffer a high mortality rate (Wilson and Daly, 1997). According to Anderson
(1999: 135), “…some young people bereft of hope for the future have made their peace with
death…The high death rate among their peers keeps many from expecting to live beyond the age
twenty-five.”
Wilson and Daly’s (1997) aggregate-level study of Chicago communities found a strong
negative correlation (-0.88) between average male life expectancy and the neighborhood
homicide rate, even after removing the effects of homicide mortality on life expectancy. Based
on these findings, they suggest that “people behave as if they have adjusted their rates of future
discounting and risk acceptance thresholds in relation to local life expectancy” (Wilson and
Daly, 1997: 1273). However, the authors did not measure the perceived chances of early death,
or future discounting, directly. It may also be the case that certain types of mortality, such as the
violent death of a close friend or family member, may have an especially strong impact on
individuals’ lifespan estimates.

30

An understanding of the origins of anticipated early death may ultimately suggest ways to
foster young peoples’ optimism in the future and, hence, reduce criminal involvement and other
risky behaviors. Existing theory and research highlights the importance of safe and stable
environments for young people (Bell and Jenkins, 1993; Hill et al., 1997; Ross and Hill, 2002),
but future research in this area could lead to the development of interventions designed to foster
resilience and hope among those who have already faced considerable instability and
unpredictability in their lives.
At the same time, future research in this area may help to illuminate some of the social
dynamics that work against behavior or attitudinal change. For example, Wilson and Daly
(1997) raise the possibility of an aggregate-level feedback loop operating in disadvantaged
communities, in which low life expectancy contributes to future discounting and increased
homicidal violence, which further lowers life expectancy. Although not specified by existing
analytical models, it is not difficult to imagine a similar feedback or amplification loop operating
at the level of individuals. For example, implicit in our offender interviews is the possibility
that, while the anticipation of early death and a “sense of futurelessness” may promote criminal
activity, criminal activity and its associated dangers may only serve to reinforce initial low
expectations about the future. Although the empirical exploration of such possibilities may
prove to be very challenging, they warrant attention in future theoretical and empirical research.
Finally, research on risk and future discounting highlights the potential limitations of
crime-control strategies that seek only to increase the costs of youth crime. Attempts to modify
the future costs of criminal behavior (e.g., an increase in criminal penalties) may have little effect
on young people who discount their future (see Anderson, 1994; Hill et al., 1997). The
anticipation of early death, in particular, may help to explain the fearless nature of some

31

offenders in the face of crime’s potential costs, including legal consequences and long-term
disadvantage but also immediate physical danger.

32

REFERENCES
Agnew, Robert. 2002. Experienced, vicarious, and anticipated strain: An exploratory study on
physical victimization and delinquency. Justice Quarterly 19:603-632.
Almgren, Gunnar, Avery Guest, George Immerwahr, and Michael Spittel. 1998. Joblessness,
family disruption, and violent death in Chicago, 1970–90. Social Forces 76:1465–93.
Åkerström, Malin. 1985. Crooks and Squares: Lifestyles of Thieves and Addicts in Comparison
to Conventional People. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Anderson, Elijah. 1994. The code of the streets. Atlantic Monthly 273:81-94.
Anderson, Elijah. 1999. Code of the Street: Decency, Violence, and the Moral Life of the Inner
City. New York: Norton.
Angrist, Joshua, and Alan Krueger. 1999. Empirical strategies in labor economics. In The
Handbook of Labour Economics, Volume 3A, eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Bell, Carl C., and Esther J. Jenkins. 1993. Community violence and children on Chicago’s south side.
Psychiatry 56:46-54.
Blau, David, and Erdal Tekin. 2007. The determinants and consequences of child care subsidies for
single mothers in the USA. Journal of Population Economics 20:719-741.
Bourgois, Phillippe. 1995. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Caldwell, Roslyn M., Richard P. Wiebe, and H. H. Cleveland. 2006. The influence of future
certainty and contextual factors on delinquent behavior and school adjustment among
African American adolescents. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 35:591-602.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Inas Rashad, and Michael Grossman. 2005. Fast-food restaurant advertising on
television and its influence on childhood obesity. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 11879.
Cook, Philip J., and John H. Laub. 1998. The unprecedented epidemic in youth violence. In
Youth Violence. Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 24, eds. Michael Tonry
and M. H. Moore. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cox, Robert. 2006. When death seems inevitable. Nieman Reports 60(2):8-9.
Cromwell, Paul, and James Olson. 2004. Breaking and Entering: Burglars on Burglary.
Belmont, CA Thomson/Wadsworth.

33

Cromwell, Paul. F., James N. Olson, and D’Aunn W. Avary. 1992. Breaking and Entering: An
Ethnographic Analysis of Burglary. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Dobrin, Adam. 2001. The risk of offending on homicide victimization: A case control study.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 38:154-173.
Drug Enforcement Agency. 2008. Georgia: State fact sheet. Accessed on June 30, 2008 at:
http://www.usdoj.gov/dea/pubs/states/georgia.html
DuRant, Robert H., Chris Cadenhead, Robert A. Pendergrast, Greg Slavens, and Charles W.
Linder. 1994. Factors associated with the use of violence among urban black adolescents.
American Journal of Public Health 84:612-617.
Eitle, David, and R. Jay Turner. 2002. Exposure to community violence and young adult crime:
The effects of witnessing violence, traumatic victimization, and other stressful life
events. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 39: 214-237.
Farrell, Albert, D., and Steven, E. Bruce. 1997. Impact of exposure to community violence on
violent behavior and emotional distress among urban adolescents. Journal of Clinical
Child Psychology 26: 2-14.
Feeney, Floyd. 1986. Robbers as decision-makers. In The Reasoning Criminal, eds. Derek B.
Cornish and Ronald V. Clarke. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2006. Crime in the United States, 2006. United States
Department of Justice. Accessed on June 30, 2008 at:
http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2006/index.html
Garbarino, James, Nancy Dubrow, Kathleen Kostelny, and Carole Pardo. 1992. Children in
Danger: Coping with the Consequences of Community Violence. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Gardner, William. 1993. A life-span rational-choice theory of risk taking. In Adolescent Risk
Taking, eds. Nancy J. Bell and Robert W. Bell. Newbury Park: Sage.
Geter, Robert S. 1994. Drug user setting: A crackhouse typology. International Journal of
Addictions 29:10–15
Hagan, John. 1991. Destiny and drift: Subcultural preferences, status attainments, and the risks
and rewards of youth. American Sociological Review 56:567-582.
Hagan, John. 1997. Defiance and despair: Subcultural and structural linkages between
delinquency and despair in the life course. Social Forces 76:119-134.
Hagedorn, John M. 1994. Homeboys, dope fiends, legits and new jacks. Criminology 32:197–
219.
34

Hill, Elizabeth M., Lisa T. Ross, and Bobbi S. Low. 1997. The role of future unpredictability in
human risk-taking. Human Nature 8:287-325.
Hoffman, Joan S. 2004. Youth Violence, Resilience, and Rehabilitation. New York: LFB.
Huizinga, David, and Delbert. S. Elliott. 1986. Reassessing the reliability and validity of selfreport delinquency measures. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 2:293-327.
Inciardi, James A., Ruth Horowitz, and Anne E. Pottieger. 1993. Street Kids, Street Drugs, Street
Crime: An Examination of Drug Use and Serious Delinquency in Miami. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Jacobs, Bruce A. 1999. Dealing Crack: The Social World of Street Corner Selling. Boston:
Northeastern University Press.
Jacobs, Bruce A. 2000. Robbing Drug Dealers: Violence beyond the Law. New York: Alan de
Gruyter.
Jacobs, Bruce A. 2006. Street Justice: Retaliation in the Criminal Underworld. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Jacobs, Bruce A., Volkan Topalli, and Richard Wright. 2000. Managing retaliation: Drug
robbery and informal social control. Criminology 38:171–198.
Jacobs, Bruce A., Volkan Topalli, and Richard Wright. 2003. Carjacking, streetlife, and offender
motivation. British Journal of Criminology 43:673–688
Jacobs, Bruce A., and Richard Wright. 1999. Stick-up, street culture, and offender motivation.
Criminology 37:149–173.
Katz, Jack. 1988. Seductions of Crime. New York: Basic Books.
Kitwana, Bakari. 2002. The Hip-Hop Generations: Young Blacks and the Crisis in African
American Culture. New York: Basic Books.
Kotlowitz, Alex. 1991. There Are No Children Here. New York: Doubleday.
Kubrin, Charis. 2006. “I see death around the corner”: Nihilism in rap music. Sociological
Perspectives, 48:433-459.
Lauritsen, Janet L., Ralph J. Sampson, and John H. Laub. 1991. The link between offending and
victimization among adolescents. Criminology 29:265–292.
Lorion, Raymond P., and William Saltzman. 1993. Children’s exposure to community violence:
Following a path from concern to research to action. Psychiatry 56:55-65.

35

Maher, Lisa. 1997. Sexed Work. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Margolin, Gayla, and Elana B. Gordis. 2000. The effects of family and community violence on
children. Annual Review of Psychology 51:445-479.
McCarthy, Bill, and John Hagan. 2005. Danger and the decision to offend. Social Forces
83:1065-1096.
Miller, Jodi. 1998. Up it up: Gender and the accomplishment of street robbery. Criminology 36
37–66.
Miller, Jodi. 2001. One of the Guys: Girls, Gangs and Gender. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Mocan, Naci H., and Erdal Tekin. 2005. Drug use and juvenile crime: Evidence from a panel of
siblings and twins. In Substance Use: Individual Behavior, Social Interactions, Markets,
and Politics, eds. Bjorn Lindgren and Michael Grossman. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Mocan, Naci H., and Erdal Tekin. 2006. Guns and juvenile crime. Journal of Law and
Economics 49:507-532.
Moffitt, Terrie E. 1993. Adolescence-limited and life-course persistent antisocial behavior:
A developmental taxonomy." Psychological Review 100:674-701.
Phoenix, Joanna. 2000. Prostitute identities. British Journal of Criminology 40:37-55.
Ragin, Charles C., Joane Nagel, and Patricia White. 2004. Workshop on Scientific Foundations
of Qualitative Research. Washington, DC: National Science Foundation.
Robins, Lee N. 1966. Deviant Children Grown Up. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins.
Rosenfeld, Richard, Bruce A. Jacobs, and Richard Wright. 2003. Snitching and the code of the
street. British Journal of Criminology 43:291-309.
Ross, Lisa T., and Elizabeth M. Hill. 2002. Childhood unpredictability, schemas for
unpredictability, and risk taking. Social Behavior and Personality 30:453-474.
Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1993. Crime in the Making. Cambridge, MA: Havard
University Press.
Sampson, Robert J., and John H. Laub. 1997. A life-course theory of cumulative disadvantage
and the stability of delinquency. In Advances in Criminological Theory, Volume 7:
Developmental Theories of Crime and Delinquency, eds. Terence P. Thornberry. New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.

36

Sampson, Robert J., and Janet L. Lauritsen. 1990. Deviant lifestyles, proximity to crime, and the
offender-victim link in personal violence. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
27:110-139.
Satcher, David. 2001. Youth violence: A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Scarpa, Angela. 2001. Community violence exposure in a young adult sample: Lifetime
prevalence and socioemotional effects. Journal of Interpersonal Violence 16: 36-53.
Scarpa, Angela. 2003. Community violence exposure in young adults. Trauma, Violence, &
Abuse 4:210-227.
Shover, Neal. 1996. Great Pretenders: Pursuits and Careers of Persistent Thieves. Boulder, CO:
Westview.
Shover, Neal, and Belinda Henderson. 1995. Repressive crime control and male persistent
thieves. In Crime Control and Male Persistent Thieves: Putting Theory to Work, ed.
Hugh D. Barlow. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Shover, Neal, and David Honaker. 1992. The socially-bounded decision making of persistent
property offenders. Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, 31:276–293.
Singer, Mark I., Trina M. Anglin, Li yu Song, and Lisa Lunghofer. 1995. Adolescents’ exposure
to violence and associated symptoms of psychological trauma. Journal of the American
Medical Association 273:477-482.
Tanner, Julian, Scott Davies, and Bill O’Grady. 1999. Whatever happened to yesterday’s rebels?
Longitudinal effects of youth delinquency on education and employment. Social
Problems 46:250-274.
Tekin, Erdal, and Sara Markowitz. 2008. The effects of suicidal behavior on productive activities
of young adults. Southern Economic Journal, October.
Tittle, Charles R., David A. Ward, and Harold G. Grasmick. 2004. Capacity for self-control and
individuals’ interest in exercising self-control. Journal of Quantitative Criminology
20:143-172.
Topalli, Volkan. 2005a. When being good is bad: An expansion of neutralization theory.
Criminology 43:797-835.
Topalli, Volkan. 2005b. Criminal expertise and offender decision-making: An experimental
analysis of how offenders and non-offenders differentially perceive social stimuli. The
British Journal of Criminology 45: 265-295.

37

Topalli, Volkan, and Richard Wright. 2004. Dubs, dees, beats, and rims: Carjacking and urban
violence. In Criminal Behaviors: A Text Reader, ed. Dean Dabney. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Topalli, Volkan, Richard Wright, and Robert R. Fornango. 2002. Drug dealers, robbery, and
retaliation: Vulnerability, deterrence, and the contagion of violence. The British Journal
of Criminology 42, 337-351.
Tremblay, Pierre, and Paul-Philippe Paré. 2003. Crime and destiny: Patterns in serious offenders’
mortality rates. Canadian Journal of Criminology and Corrections 45:299-326.
Tyler, Kimberly, and Katherine Johnson. 2004. Victims and offenders: Accounts of playbacks,
invulnerability, and financial gain among homeless youth. Deviant Behavior 25:427-49.
West, Cornel. 1993. Race Matters. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
West, Donald J., and David P. Farrington. 1977. The Delinquent Way of Life. London:
Heinemann.
Wilson, Margo, and Martin Daly. 1997. Life expectancy, economic inequality, homicide, and
reproductive timing in Chicago neighborhoods. British Medical Journal 314:1271-1274.
Wright, Richard, and Trevor Bennet. 1990. Exploring the offender's perspective: Observing and
interviewing criminals. In Measurement Issues in Criminology, ed. Kimberly L. Kempf.
New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wright, Richard, and Scott Decker. 1994. Burglars on the Job. Boston: Northeastern University
Press.
Wright, Richard, and Scott Decker. 1997. Armed Robbers in Action: Stickups and Street Culture.
Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Younoszai, Barbara. 1993. Mexican American perspectives related to death. In Ethnic Variations
in Dying, Death, and Grief: Diversity in Universality, eds. Donald P. Irish, Kathleen L.
Lundquist, and Vivian J. Nelsen. Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.

38

Figure 1. Conceptual and Methodological Model Linking Anticipated Early Death (AED)
to Criminal Behavior

39

Figure 2. Elaborated Conceptual Model Linking Anticipated Early Death (AED) to
Criminal Behavior.

40

Table 1
Definitions and Descriptive Statistics
Full
Sample

Prob. live
35 < 50%

Prob. live 35
= 50%

Prob. live
35 > 50%

Prob. killed
21 < 50%

Prob. killed
21 = 50%

Prob. killed
21 > 50%

=1 if go into a house or building to
to steal something, = otherwise
=1 if paint graffiti or signs on someone else’s
property or in a public place,=0 otherwise
=1 if hurt someone badly enough to need
bandages or care from a doctor or nurse, =0
otherwise
=1 if deliberately damage property that
belonged to someone else, =0 otherwise
=1 if steal something worth more than
$50, =0 otherwise
=1 if use or threaten to use a weapon to
get something from someone, =0 otherwise
=1 if pulled a gun or knife on someone else,
=0 otherwise

0.062
(0.242)
0.083
(0.276)
0.143
(0.350)

0.133
(0.339)
0.140
(0.347)
0.240
(0.427)

0.074
(0.262)
0.099
(0.297)
0.162
(0.368)

0.047
(0.213)
0.068
(0.251)
0.122
(0.327)

0.057
(0.231)
0.077
(0.267)
0.132
(0.339)

0.086
(0.281)
0.109
(0.312)
0.195
(0.396)

0.132
(0.339)
0.164
(0.371)
0.259
(0.438)

0.160
(0.367)
0.048
(0.214)
0.090
(0.286)
0.036
(0.187)

0.232
(0.422)
0.111
(0.314)
0.153
(0.360)
0.111
(0.314)

0.174
(0.379)
0.061
(0.240)
0.102
(0.302)
0.048
(0.214)

0.144
(0.351)
0.033
(0.179)
0.076
(0.265)
0.021
(0.144)

0.154
(0.361)
0.042
(0.199)
0.084
(0.278)
0.028
(0.165)

0.187
(0.390)
0.076
(0.265)
0.117
(0.321)
0.070
(0.255)

0.231
(0.422)
0.137
(0.344)
0.145
(0.353)
0.150
(0.358)

=1 if shot or stabbed someone else, =0
Otherwise

0.027
(0.162)
34,780

0.087
(0.282)
1,308

0.037
(0.188)
14,977

0.015
(0.121)
18,495

0.021
(0.144)
29,221

0.051
(0.220)
4,948

0.104
(0.306)
611

Variable

Definition

Burglary
Graffiti
Assault

Property Damage
Theft
Robbery
Pulled knife or
Gun
Shot or Stabbed
Observations

Notes: Mean scores shown, with standard deviations in parentheses. All the variables refer to the past 12 months.

41

Table 2
OLS Estimates of the Effects of Anticipated Early Death on Offending Behaviors - Wave I
Probability of being killed by 21 < 50%
Probability of being killed by 21 > 50%

Probability of living up to 35 < 50%
Probability of living up to 35 > 50%
County Fixed Effects
Number of observations

Burglary
-0.023***
(0.005)
0.048***
(0.017)

Graffiti
-0.039***
(0.007)
0.054***
(0.021)

Assault
-0.077***
(0.009)
0.038
(0.024)

Property
Damage
-0.057***
(0.008)
0.030
(0.023)

Theft
-0.029***
(0.006)
0.069***
(0.019)

Robbery
-0.036***
(0.005)
0.051***
(0.018)

Pulled Knife
or Gun
-0.046***
(0.006)
0.073***
(0.020)

Shot or
Stabbed
-0.023***
(0.004)
0.052***
(0.015)

0.045***
(0.012)
-0.023***
(0.003)
Yes
20,088

0.048***
(0.014)
-0.038***
(0.004)
Yes
20,080

0.081***
(0.017)
-0.036***
(0.006)
Yes
20,068

0.079***
(0.016)
-0.057***
(0.006)
Yes
20,077

0.045***
(0.012)
-0.023***
(0.004)
Yes
20,087

0.059***
(0.012)
-0.021***
(0.003)
Yes
20,091

0.071***
(0.013)
-0.026***
(0.003)
Yes
20,102

0.054***
(0.010)
-0.011***
(0.002)
Yes
20,094

Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ** indicate statistical significance at <10, <5, and <1 percent levels, respectively.

42

Table 3
OLS Estimates of the Effects of Anticipated Early Death on Offending Behaviors - Wave I and Wave II
Probability of being killed by 21 < 50%
Probability of being killed by 21 > 50%

Probability of living up to 35 < 50%
Probability of living up to 35 > 50%
County Fixed Effects
Number of observations

Burglary
-0.023***
(0.004)
0.044***
(0.014)

Graffiti
-0.031***
(0.005)
0.045***
(0.016)

Assault
-0.052***
(0.006)
0.041**
(0.018)

Property
Damage
-0.042***
(0.006)
0.033*
(0.018)

Theft
-0.028***
(0.004)
0.056***
(0.014)

Robbery
-0.030***
(0.005)
0.034**
(0.015)

Pulled Knife
or Gun
-0.035***
(0.004)
0.073***
(0.015)

Shot or
Stabbed
-0.025***
(0.003)
0.051***
(0.013)

0.053***
(0.009)
-0.022***
(0.003)
Yes
34,479

0.034***
(0.010)
-0.032***
(0.003)
Yes
34,460

0.057***
(0.012)
-0.030***
(0.004)
Yes
34,462

0.055***
(0.012)
-0.048***
(0.004)
Yes
34,461

0.041***
(0.009)
-0.023***
(0.002)
Yes
34,482

0.053***
(0.010)
-0.024***
(0.003)
Yes
34,483

0.057***
(0.009)
-0.019***
(0.002)
Yes
34,504

0.047***
(0.008)
-0.016***
(0.002)
Yes
34,497

Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ** indicate statistical significance at <10, <5, and <1 percent levels, respectively.

43

Table 4
OLS Estimates of the Effects of Anticipated Early Death on Offending Behaviors - Wave 2 Outcomes and Wave I AED
Probability of being killed by 21 < 50%
Probability of being killed by 21 > 50%

Probability of living up to 35 < 50%
Probability of living up to 35 > 50%
County Fixed Effects
Number of observations

Burglary
‐0.028***
(0.007)
‐0.001
(0.019)

Graffiti
‐0.033***
(0.007)
‐0.004
(0.019)

0.015
(0.014)
-0.030***
(0.005)
Yes
14,334

0.002
(0.013)
-0.016***
(0.005)
Yes
14,328

Assault
‐0.011
(0.007)
0.006
(0.019)

0.025*
(0.015)
-0.018***
(0.005)
Yes
14,340

Property
Damage
‐0.044***
(0.009)
0.010
(0.024)

Theft
‐0.032***
(0.006)
0.029
(0.019)

Robbery
‐0.032***
(0.009)
‐0.015
(0.023)

Pulled Knife
or Gun
‐0.020***
(0.004)
0.003
(0.013)

Shot or
Stabbed
‐0.027***
(0.006)
0.030*
(0.018)

0.018
(0.016)
-0.026***
(0.006)
Yes
14,333

0.031**
(0.012)
-0.009***
(0.003)
Yes
14,342

0.010
(0.017)
-0.019***
(0.006)
Yes
14,338

0.022**
(0.010)
-0.008***
(0.002)
Yes
14,352

0.044***
(0.013)
-0.020***
(0.003)
Yes
14,353

Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ** indicate statistical significance at <10, <5, and <1 percent levels, respectively.

44

Table 5
Estimates of the Effects of Anticipated Early Death on Offending Behaviors – Sibling Fixed Effects
Probability of being killed by 21 < 50%
Probability of being killed by 21 > 50%

Probability of living up to 35 < 50%
Probability of living up to 35 > 50%
Number of observations

Burglary
-0.014
(0.011)
-0.013
(0.031)

Graffiti
-0.026**
(0.013)
0.037
(0.037)

-0.000
(0.026)
-0.013
(0.008)
7,070

0.049**
(0.024)
-0.019**
(0.008)
7,065

Assault
-0.035**
(0.015)
0.030
(0.039)

Property
Damage
-0.030**
(0.015)
0.033
(0.039)

-0.005
(0.034)
-0.013
(0.010)
7,068

0.016
(0.025)
-0.035***
(0.012)
7,065

Theft
-0.020*
(0.009)
0.056
(0.035)

0.002
(0.022)
-0.019***
(0.006)
7,071

Robbery
-0.000
(0.014)
0.046
(0.035)

0.069***
(0.026)
-0.009
(0.009)
7,072

Pulled Knife
or Gun
-0.017**
(0.008)
0.053
(0.043)

0.013
(0.024)
-0.016***
(0.005)
7,069

Shot or
Stabbed
-0.013
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.027)

0.023
(0.022)
-0.010*
(0.006)
7,068

Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ** indicate statistical significance at <10, <5, and <1 percent levels, respectively.

45

Table 6
Estimates of the Effects of Anticipated Early Death on Offending Behaviors – Individual Fixed Effects
Probability of being killed by 21 < 50%
Probability of being killed by 21 > 50%

Probability of living up to 35 < 50%
Probability of living up to 35 > 50%
Number of observations

Burglary
0.000
(0.008)
0.035
(0.023)

Graffiti
0.007
(0.008)
0.060***
(0.023)

0.039**
(0.015)
-0.000
(0.005)
34,649

0.033**
(0.016)
-0.005
(0.005)
34,628

Assault
-0.025**
(0.011)
0.043
(0.030)

0.001
(0.020)
-0.008
(0.008)
34,632

Property
Damage
-0.001
(0.010)
0.041
(0.027)

0.008
(0.019)
-0.017**
(0.007)
34,628

Theft
0.009
(0.007)
0.039*
(0.023)

0.015
(0.014)
-0.009**
(0.005)
34,652

Robbery
-0.003
(0.010)
0.039
(0.026)

0.028
(0.017)
-0.014**
(0.007)
34,652

Pulled Knife
or Gun
-0.012**
(0.006)
0.054***
(0.020)

0.024*
(0.012)
-0.008**
(0.004)
34,673

Shot or
Stabbed
-0.010*
(0.006)
0.021
(0.021)

0.024*
(0.013)
-0.006*
(0.004)
34,666

Notes: Heteroskedasticity corrected robust standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, ** indicate statistical significance at <10, <5, and <1 percent levels, respectively.

46

