                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      COGNITIVE AND NON-COGNITIVE PEER EFFECTS IN EARLY EDUCATION

                                           Matthew Neidell
                                           Jane Waldfogel

                                         Working Paper 14277
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14277


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




The authors thank Janet Currie, Sherry Glied, Cecilia Rouse, Greg Duncan, Steve Pischke, Michael
Greenstone, two anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Columbia University and Princeton
University for helpful comments, and Reina Kato for excellent research assistance. Both authors gratefully
acknowledge funding from the Spencer Foundation, and Waldfogel from the John D. and Catherine
T. MacArthur Foundation and Russell Sage Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Matthew Neidell and Jane Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Peer Effects in Early Education
Matthew Neidell and Jane Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 14277
August 2008
JEL No. I21,I28,J13

                                                ABSTRACT

We examine peer effects in early education by estimating value added models with school fixed effects
that control extensively for individual, family, peer, and teacher characteristics to account for the endogeneity
of peer group formation. We find statistically significant and robust spillover effects from preschool
on math and reading outcomes, but statistically insignificant effects on various behavioral and social
outcomes. Of the behavioral and social effects explored, we find that peer externalizing problems,
which most likely capture classroom disturbance, hinder cognitive outcomes. Our estimates imply
that ignoring spillover effects significantly understates the social returns to preschool.


Matthew Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu

Jane Waldfogel
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
jw205@columbia.edu
1. Introduction

        Peer effects have long been of interest in economics and other social sciences because

they are a nonmarket interaction with far reaching implications for school and community

policies, such as school choice, ability tracking, desegregation, and anti-poverty programs. Since

peer effects may manifest themselves in various contexts, empirical research has focused on a

wide range of outcomes – including academic performance, mental health, criminal activity, use

of public services, and wages – and ages – including primary school, secondary school, higher

education, and beyond. 2 More recent estimates of peer effects that use randomized and natural

experiments to address endogeneity of peer group formation generally find empirical support for

peer effects, although estimates vary considerably in magnitude depending on the outcome and

age group studied.

        In this paper, we examine peer effects in early education by looking at the effect of peer

enrollment in preschool on children’s outcomes in kindergarten and the early elementary grades.

We focus on preschool because studies consistently demonstrate large private returns from early

education on numerous cognitive outcomes. 3 Children may directly share the skills developed in

preschool through social interactions in kindergarten, generating knowledge spillovers.

Moreover, improved school readiness through early education may contribute to the pace of

classroom learning in kindergarten so the entire class indirectly benefits from peer enrollment in

preschool. These direct and indirect peer effects may be particularly important at this early age

when environmental factors are so vital to development.

        Since the peer effect we examine stems from a particular form of education (preschool),

rather than inherent characteristics of peers, we interpret it as a spillover effect from early

2
 We describe previous research on peer effects in section 2.
3
 See Currie (2001), Karoly et al. (2006), Cunha et al. (2006), Blau and Currie (2006), and Ludwig and Phillips
(2007) for an overview.


                                                         1
education. Previous research on spillover effects from education has typically focused on social

returns from higher education, but the difficulty in finding plausibly exogenous variation in peer

educational attainment has led to mixed empirical evidence. 4 We contend that the variation in

preschool enrollment used in this analysis, described below, is credible for identifying spillover

effects. As growing amounts of state and federal funds are spent on public preschool programs,

such as Head Start and public prekindergarten programs, knowledge of spillover effects is

essential for assessing the efficient allocation of public investments in early education.

           The perhaps more novel contribution of our study is the focus on non-cognitive outcomes

in addition to cognitive outcomes. Although preschool has demonstrated positive cognitive

benefits, researchers often find negative social and behavioral consequences of preschool

(Belsky et al. (2007)). Children with limited self-control or discipline may unintentionally

spread this behavior to peers, resulting in negative externalities. Given the growing evidence

suggesting the importance of non-cognitive skills in human capital acquisition and earnings

(Heckman and Rubinstein (2001), Heckman et al. (2006)), we also explore spillover effects from

preschool enrollment on various social and behavioral outcomes.

           Furthermore, children with behavioral problems may disturb teacher progress and hinder

the learning of their classmates, so that peer behavior may affect academic performance. For

example, an unruly child may require the teacher to focus more class time on discipline rather

than on the dissemination of knowledge. Peer behavior is often the main rationale behind

smaller class sizes (Lazear (2001)) and several peer effects studies on academic performance

recognize the role of peer disturbance (Hoxby (2000), Hanushek et al. (2003), Ding and Lehrer




4
    See Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) and Moretti (2004) for a review of empirical evidence.


                                                          2
(2007)), but with little direct empirical testing. 5 We directly examine the spillover effects of

social and behavioral problems on academic achievement.

         To account for the endogeneity of peers, which we define as kindergarten classmates, we

adopt a fixed effects, value-added approach, comparable to that employed by Hanushek et al.

(2003), Arcidiacono and Nicholson (2005), and Ding and Lehrer (2007), and exploit the richness

of information in our data, the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Class. School

fixed effects account for sorting into school districts by comparing children from classes within

the same school. To account for selection into classes within a school, we estimate a value

added specification that controls for fall kindergarten scores, which are measured shortly after

kindergarten begins and unlikely to be affected by peers. Moreover, a considerable advantage of

focusing on kindergarten outcomes is the limited scope for student tracking, a potential source of

bias in value added models, because children are new to their environment. To account for

common shocks during the kindergarten school year, we control extensively for individual,

family, peer, and teacher characteristics.

         We provide several pieces of evidence to support our empirical strategy. Peer preschool

enrollment has small, statistically insignificant effects on fall-K scores, suggesting children are

not assigned to peers based on initial ability. All available measures of teacher characteristics

are uncorrelated with class average test scores, suggesting teachers are not systematically

assigned to children. Parents do not appear to compensate for their child’s peer group by

increasing other investments over the same time period, such as the frequency they read to their

child. Once we include either school fixed effects or fall-K scores or both, our results are


5
 Several studies explore the effects of neighborhoods on both cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes (see, e.g.,
Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006)), but data limitations appear to prevent analysis of the effect of peer non-cognitive
outcomes on individual cognitive outcomes. One notable exception is Figlio (2007), who focuses on peer
disturbance in 6th grade students in one school district in Florida.


                                                         3
extremely robust to the inclusion of the numerous covariates available for our analysis,

suggesting omitted variable bias is unlikely to plague our analysis. Lastly, in accordance with

recent falsification tests for value added models suggested by Rothstein (2008), peer preschool

composition in first grade is not significantly related to test score gains in kindergarten.

       We find large, statistically significant effects of peer enrollment in preschool on math and

reading outcomes. Peer preschool enrollment increase math and reading scores by 0.08 of a

standard deviation in kindergarten, which implies the benefits from current preschool enrollment

rates are understated by 16-25% if ignoring spillover effects. Furthermore, the impacts of

kindergarten peer preschool enrollment persist in magnitude through first and third grade for

math scores, though they decline somewhat for reading scores. These estimates imply that

ignoring spillover effects significantly understates the social returns to preschool, supporting one

rationale for public investment in preschool.

       For non-cognitive outcomes, preschool does not appear to directly spillover to peers

behaviors but it may indirectly impede peers cognitive achievement through its impact on

individual behavior. We find imprecisely estimated spillover effects from peer preschool

enrollment on all of our non-cognitive outcomes, although we can not rule out the possibility of

preschool peer effects. In terms of the impact of peer non-cognitive development on individual

cognitive outcomes, we find that the mean of class behaviors does not have a statistically

significant impact. However, the 75th and 90th percentile of peer externalizing problems, a non-

cognitive measure more likely to capture classroom disturbance, hinder math and reading scores,

suggesting only a handful of unruly students may be sufficient for disrupting classroom learning.

Despite these potential negative spillovers, the spillover effects from preschool are positive on

net.




                                                  4
2. Background information

        Preschool programs consist of a wide array of provisions, including community-based

day care centers and preschools, Head Start programs, and school-based prekindergarten

programs. There is an extensive body of research documenting private returns to early

enrichment programs, such as the High/Scope Perry Preschool Project and Carolina

Abecedarian, and Head Start, a public preschool program for disadvantaged children. 6 There is

also a fairly large body of research on the effects of general preschool programs (reviewed in

Smolensky and Gootman (2003) and Waldfogel (2006)). Evidence generally shows positive

effects on cognitive outcomes, though they vary in magnitude across the types of program, but

more mixed evidence on non-cognitive outcomes, including both negative (Belsky et al. (2007),

Magnuson et al. (2007)) and positive effects (Puma et al. (2005)). The NICHD Study of Early

Child Care and Youth Development (SECCYD) was designed to provide a comprehensive

assessment of the effects of non-parental care prior to kindergarten. Recent results using the

SECCYD data documented improvements in vocabulary but increases in behavioral problems

through the end of sixth grade (Belsky et al. (2007)), attracting major headlines and fueling

debates over non-parental care (Carey (2007)).7

        Prior evidence of early education spillover effects is scant. 8 Garces et al. (2002) provide

suggestive evidence that spillover effects from Head Start may exist. They indirectly examine

this by comparing the effect of attending Head Start for older versus younger siblings. They

posit that spillover effects are likely to flow from older to younger siblings because the older


6
  See Currie (2001), Karoly et al. (2006), Cunha et al. (2006), Blau and Currie (2006), and Ludwig and Phillips
(2007) for an overview.
7
  A major concern about the SECCYD analyses is little is done to address the selection of children into non-parental
care. Other studies with more successful attempts at confronting selection, however, also find support for negative
effects (Magnuson et al. (2007a)), so the effects in the SECCYD may not be due solely to selection.
8
  Evidence of spillover effects from higher education is pervasive (see Moretti (2004) for a review), but differing
approaches for dealing with the endogeneity of schooling have yielded different results.


                                                         5
sibling is more likely to influence the younger, and because learned parenting skills may benefit

younger children more than older. They find no evidence of spillover effects on educational

attainment or earnings when the children are adults, but some evidence on criminal activity.

       Evidence on peer effects is vast, so we focus on recent studies most relevant to our study,

recognizing we omit several important studies. Since we examine peer effects during

kindergarten, we first focus on studies that examined peer effects of primary school-aged

children. Hanushek et al. (2003) and Hoxby (2000) found sizeable endogenous peer effects on

math scores in grades 3-6 using the Texas schools microdata. Lefgren (2004) found small but

statistically significant endogenous peer effects on reading scores of third and sixth graders in

Chicago public schools. In terms of exogenous peer effects, Angrist and Lang (2004) found

insignificant peer effects from an increase in minority peers in Boston on math, reading, and

language scores in the 3rd, 5th, and 7th grades. Ammermueller and Pischke (2006) found positive

peer effects of books owned on reading test scores in the 4th grade across several countries in

Europe. Evidence from studies of neighborhood effects is also relevant in that such

neighborhood effects are thought to work, at least in part, through exposure to different groups of

peers. Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006) found no statistically significant neighborhood effects on

reading and math scores for children ages 6-10 and 11-14 in five large U.S. cities in the Moving

to Opportunity (MTO) experiment. Jacob (2004) also found no statistically significant

neighborhood effects on academic achievement in children ages 3-13 in Chicago. These studies

suggest that peer effects at these young ages exist, but depend on the context and specific type of

peer effect examined.

       Also relevant to our analysis are studies that focus on non-cognitive outcomes. While

most focus on crime, some using the MTO experiment focus on mental health as well. Several




                                                 6
studies using the MTO found neighborhood effects significantly reduced violent crimes by teens

(Ludwig et al. (2001)) and improved behavior problems for boys (Katz et al. (2001)), though

these effects disappeared or changed directions for boys and improved for girls in later follow-

ups (Kling et al. (2004), Kling et al. (2007), Sanbonmatsu et al. (2006)). Bayer et al. (2007)

found strong peer effects on criminal activity based on the composition of prison mates. Like

cognitive outcomes, these peer effects differ by context, but suggest the possibility of effects

fading over time. Our study aims to add to this rich literature by examining peer effects on very

young children, where effects may be particularly important, and by simultaneously examining

cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes.

3. Data

           We use the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study-Kindergarten Class of 1998-99 (ECLS-

K), a nationally representative sample of kindergarteners followed through 1st and 3rd grade. 9

The ECLS-K contains detailed information collected through direct child assessments, parent

interviews, and teacher and school questionnaires. We use the K-3 longitudinal file, which

contains 17,401 children, and weight all analyses to account for survey non-response so our

estimates are representative of the kindergarten class. 10

           Outcome variables - For cognitive outcomes, we use direct cognitive assessments of

mathematics and reading skills administered in the spring of kindergarten. The cognitive tests

were designed to assess the age-specific achievement of the child. We use standardized scores

that assess the performance of children relative to their peers. The scores are standardized to

have a mean of 50 and standard deviation of 10, so we can divide our coefficient estimates by 10

to obtain effect sizes of going from no peers in preschool to all peers in preschool.


9
    Children were also followed through the 5th grade, but these data are currently unavailable.
10
    Results are generally unaffected by the use of weights.


                                                            7
Given the difficulty in reliably measuring behavioral and social-emotional outcomes, we use

several measures available from both teachers and parents. Teachers rated each individual

student on four behavioral and social-emotional skills, including self-control (controlling temper,

respecting others’ property, accepting peer ideas, and handling peer pressure), interpersonal

skills (getting along with people, forming and maintaining friendships, comforting or helping

other children, showing sensitivity to the feelings of others, and expressing feelings, ideas and

opinions in positive ways), externalizing problems (frequency with which a child argues, fights,

gets angry, acts impulsively, and disturbs ongoing activities), and internalizing problems

(presence of anxiety, loneliness, low self-esteem, and sadness). Externalizing problems are most

consistent with the notion of peer disturbance (Lazear, 2001), so we pay particular attention to

this measure.

          Teacher’s ratings of individual children may be subjectively reported relative to the

average behavior of the class. For example, a generally disruptive child may be rated favorably

in a class with numerous unruly peers but unfavorably in a class with few unruly peers.

Therefore, we also use the parent’s rating of their child’s self-control as an additional outcome

measure. Although the parent’s rating may reflect the child’s behavior at home rather than at

school, the value added specification limits this concern as long as the change in behavior at

home from fall to spring correlates well with the change in behavior at school over the same time

period.

          These measures are adapted from the Social Skills Rating Scale, a widely used survey

technique for detecting social and behavioral problems in the classroom. Each construct

averages a series of questions rated on a scale of 1 (never) to 4 (very often), so a high score on

self-control and interpersonal skills reflects a favorable outcome while a high score on




                                                   8
externalizing or internalizing problems reflects an unfavorable outcome. Their use in predicting

future non-cognitive functioning is subject to debate, but these scales have high construct

validity as assessed by test-retest reliability, internal consistency, interrater reliability, and

correlations with other, more advanced behavioral constructs (Elliott et al. (1988)) and are

considered the most comprehensive social skill assessment that can be widely administered in

large surveys such as the ECLS-K (Demaray et al. (1995)).

        Preschool enrollment – Based on responses to the type of care arrangements in the year

before kindergarten and the number of hours spent in each, the ECLS-K created a composite

variable indicating the primary type of care (‘p1primpk’). We use any center based care (Head

Start, day care, nursery school, preschool, and prekindergarten) to define preschool enrollment,

leaving parental care and relative or non-relative care in the child’s or another home as the

alternative. Although each type of care may have different effects on children’s outcomes,

sample sizes are too small to isolate peers effects from each source, so we capture the average

peer effect across all types of care. 11

        Control variables - The ECLS-K contains detailed data on the family environment.

Although we do not always measure specific inputs into human capital production and the full

history of investments, we observe numerous proxies that reflect time and money available for

families to invest at specific survey waves. For the mother, we include information on her

current employment status, employment status at the period surrounding birth, educational

attainment, immigration status, and age she gave birth. For the child, we use gender,

race/ethnicity, and an indicator for low birth weight. For household characteristics, we use


11
   We estimated models that include both Head Start (HS) and non-HS enrollment of class, and, although this
stretches our sample and we lose considerable precision, estimates are comparable for the two groups. For math, the
coefficient on non-HS is .478 and for HS is .340 (compared to .5 overall) and for reading it is .434 and .623,
respectively (compared to .5 overall).


                                                        9
income, number of siblings, presence of father in household, father’s employment status and

education, central city or suburban residence, the number of grandparents the child has a close

relationship with, whether English is spoken at home, and if anyone received food stamps or

WIC. For direct measures of inputs, we include the number of books owned, number of records,

tapes, or CDs, and an indicator if the parent reads to the child everyday.

         Teacher and class variables – To account for teacher and classroom quality, we use data

from the fall-K teacher questionnaire, which contains data on the class size and the teacher’s

background. The background measures include age, education, experience teaching both

kindergarten and any grade, years of tenure at current school, gender, race, and type of teaching

certificate. Furthermore, teachers were asked whether they enjoy teaching, would choose

teaching again, and think by teaching they make a difference in children’s lives. We created the

variable “love teaching” equal to 1 if they responded ‘yes’ to all 3 questions. 12 While there are

likely unmeasured components of teaching quality, these variables are widely accepted measures

of teacher quality (Rivkin et al. (2005)).

         Peer characteristics – Studies typically use population measures of peer characteristics,

but such measures are unavailable at the class level. Instead, we compute class average

enrollment in preschool and all other peer characteristics directly from the ECLS-K using the

teacher identification number to identify students within the same class. Based on the number of

students linked to each teacher and teacher reported class size, the ECLS-K sampled 41% of

students within a class on average. 13 Although this greatly increases the quantity of peer



12
   Note that these measures are from fall-K, so it is unlikely that the teacher’s responses to these questions have been
endogenously affected by the students in their class.
13
   Our computed averages compare favorably with three teacher reported averages available (51.0 vs. 51.5% percent
of boys, 15.7 vs. 17.6% percent African-American, and 22.9 vs. 19.2% percent Hispanic), although the latter two
may differ from self-reports for reasons other than measurement error – teachers may misclassify the race and
ethnicity of students.


                                                          10
characteristics we can control for, it induces measurement error that may bias our results.

Fortunately, we can adjust our coefficient estimates for the under sampling of students

(Ammermueller and Pischke (2006)), described in more detail below.

         For computing effect sizes, the standard deviations of the peer variables are also

measured with error. We unfortunately can not adjust the standard deviations of these peer

variables because it requires two reports for preschool attendance (Ammermueller and Pischke

(2006)). 14 This precludes us from computing effect sizes from a one standard deviation change

in peer preschool enrollment, a common metric used to compare results across studies. We can,

however, use the standard deviation of 10 for math and reading scores to compute effect sizes

from certain changes in preschool enrollment because this is a nationally normed test and our

analyses are weighted to provide nationally representative results (normed scores are unavailable

for the non-cognitive outcomes).

         Sample characteristics –Starting from a possible sample of 17,401 children, we exclude

children who were not first-time kindergarteners (i.e., who repeated kindergarten) (665), with

preschool information missing (2,897), with only 1 child per class (so peer averages couldn’t be

computed) (416), and with test scores, teacher identification, and school identification

unavailable (480), leaving a possible sample of 12,943 children. Of the above mentioned

covariates, there was a large number of missing cases for all teacher and class variables and

some parental responses (maternal age at birth, immigration status, grandparents close, early

maternal employment, and number of books owned) (3,278), so we impute them using single

imputation by chained equations to preserve sample size (Van Buuren et al. (in press)). 15 For the


14
   When there is classical measurement error, the covariance of the two variables can be used a measure of the true
variance (Ammermueller and Pischke (2006)).
15
   We choose not to impute the dependent variables or preschool variable because they do not appear to be missing
at random, a necessary assumption for imputation to yield unbiased estimates. Furthermore, because we do not


                                                         11
non-imputed covariates, we use casewise deletion, leaving us with a final sample of 12,501 with

math scores, 11,840 with reading scores, and sample sizes for the non-cognitive outcomes

ranging from 11,446 to 12,070 depending on the outcome. 16

4. Empirical strategy

         A. Econometric model

         To estimate peer effects, we focus on the following regression equation:

(1)        s
         y icd = β 0 preicd + β 1 pre( −i ) cd + β 2 xicd + β 3 x( − i ) cd + β 4 z cd + β 5 y icd
                                                                                                f
                                                                                                   + α d + η cd + ε icd

where y is the child’s cognitive or non-cognitive outcome in kindergarten, s indicates spring, f

indicates fall, i is the individual, c is the classroom, and d is the school. pre indicates whether

the child was enrolled in preschool and pre(− i ) cd is mean enrollment of the class (not including

the index child). x are individual and family level characteristics and z are classroom and teacher

specific characteristics. The error term consists of a group specific component (ηcd) and an

individual, idiosyncratic component (εicd). We adjust all standard errors to account for clustering

of students in the classroom. Our main hypothesis to test is that β1 = 0.

                                                                          (        )
         In this specification we omit the class test score y (−f i ) cd from this equation to estimate

the reduced form peer effect of preschool: the direct effect on test scores plus the indirect effect

on test scores through its impact on class test scores. We interpret this estimate as the spillover

effects from early education, which is a policy effect of interest for understanding the efficient

allocation of early education.



impute preschool, we perform single rather than multiple imputation. Standard errors for the preschool variables
will be valid, but standard errors for the imputed covariates will be understated (Allison (2002)).
16
   Children excluded from the analysis typically have lower test scores, worse non-cognitive measures, lower
preschool enrollment, and come from more disadvantaged backgrounds (not shown). Although we weight our
analysis, these patterns suggest our results may not generalize to the entire kindergarten cohort. Without further
assumptions about the cause of missing observations, there is little we can do to overcome this concern.


                                                               12
        As previously mentioned, we use a sample of students in the class, rather than the entire

class, to compute pre(− i ) cd . Ammermueller and Pischke (2006) present a straightforward

technique for adjusting the coefficient estimates to obtain consistent estimates free from

measurement error; we present a version tailored to our model in the appendix. Consistency of

peer effects estimate is given by:

                  ⎛ N cd − 1 ⎞
(2)      βˆ1adj = βˆ1 ⎜⎜     ⎟
                             ⎟
                    n
                  ⎝ cd   − 1 ⎠
where ncd is the number of sampled students within a class (8.55) and Ncd is the total number of

students in the class (20.51), both observed in the data. 17

        Endogeneity of β1 may arise if parents choose certain schools based on education

preferences, so that a school with higher achieving students may reflect unobserved school

quality or parental investments (Black (1999)). Moreover, children may sort into different

classes based on the quality of the teacher or peers so that the most able students end up with the

best quality teachers or peers. Alternatively, schools may assign children to different classrooms

based on compatibility with the teacher or to obtain a particular mix of peers they deem

optimal. 18

        Equation (1) has several features to aid in identification of β1. To account for the

endogeneity of group formation, we include school fixed effects (αd) to limit our comparison to

children in different classrooms within the same school, which accounts for sorting into school

districts. We also include fall kindergarten outcomes (yficd) in equation (1), which are measured

before children have had sufficient time to interact with their peers, so we examine how


17
   Although class sizes vary in the sample, Ammermueller and Pischke (2006) demonstrate that using the overall
means in their sample performs well for the level of variation in their sample, which is comparable to the level of
variation we observe.
18
   Because we are focusing on exogenous peer effects and not endogenous peer effects, we do not focus on concerns
regarding simultaneity bias.


                                                        13
outcomes change over the course of the kindergarten year. Our estimated peer effect is therefore

the correlation between the variation within schools in class preschool enrollment and the

variation within schools of individual’s changes in test scores during kindergarten (conditional

on the included covariates).

         B. Validity of econometric model

         The summary statistics in Table 1 highlight both the endogeneity of peer preschool

enrollment and the strength of our methodology. Columns (1) and (2) show means and standard

deviations for the individual level variables and teacher characteristics for all children included

in the analysis. 19 Column (3) shows the difference in means of these variables for children in

classes below and above the median class preschool enrollment of 59%, respectively, with p-

values of the differences shown in column (4). For the most part, children with more peers in

preschool perform better on tests, with math and reading scores 1.8 points higher in the above

median group. However, these children also come from more advantaged backgrounds, as

demonstrated by higher parental income and education, to name a few. Out of the 28 covariates

listed in the table, 17 have statistically significant differences for children in classes above and

below the median. This suggests the importance of addressing the endogeneity of preschool

enrollment.

         Columns (5) and (6) highlight the strength of our empirical strategy by presenting these

same differences and p-values after adjusting for school fixed effects. Immediately evident is

that balance of covariates is achieved, exactly what would occur if children are randomly

assigned into classes: of the 41 covariates, only 1 difference is statistically significant. Not only

are these differences much less likely to be statistically significant, they are also much smaller in


19
  We omit the class averages of the individual level variables from this table, but include them in the regression
analysis.


                                                         14
magnitude. For example, the difference in family income falls from nearly $12,000 without

school fixed effects to just over $700 with school fixed effects. When we further adjust for

baseline test scores in addition to school fixed effects (not shown), the same balancing occurs.

This supports the notion that peer preschool enrollment within schools is uncorrelated with

unobservable factors that affect children’s outcomes, a necessary condition for obtaining causal

estimates of peer effects.

       We further probe possible selection effects into classes based on peer preschool

enrollment by replacing the dependent variable in equation (1) with individual level fall-K scores

(and omit it from the right hand side). If selection into classes is based on preschool enrollment,

then peer preschool enrollment will have a significant effect on fall-K scores. Results from this

specification, shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 2, indicate that fall-K scores are

uncorrelated with peer preschool enrollment. The coefficient estimates are small in magnitude

and very imprecise. This suggests that, within schools, students do not appear selectively

assigned to peer preschool enrollment based on their initial ability. This result in conjunction

with the balancing of the adjusted covariates suggest school fixed effects may alone be sufficient

for identifying causal peer effects. In fact, as we demonstrate below, the value added

specification has little impact on our estimates once we include school fixed effects.

       Even if peers are randomly assigned, an additional concern in our analysis is that families

may respond to their child’s peer group by compensating for low peer quality, leading to

spurious estimates of peer effects (Moffitt (2001)). Parent may recognize their child’s peer

quality either directly by knowing the classmates or indirectly through their child’s interim

academic performance. Changing peer groups by switching classes is unlikely to arise – less

than 3% of respondents in our sample change classes within a school in kindergarten for any




                                                15
reason. Parents may, however, respond over the course of the year by providing other

investments in their child.

        To explore whether such compensatory behavior exists, we examine whether peer

preschool enrollment affects two parental investments available in the ECLS-K: the number of

books the child owns and whether the parent reads to the child everyday. We estimate equation

(1) by using the parental investments in place of y, though we use reports at the end of first grade

instead of spring-K for the dependent variable, the earliest time they are asked again in the

ECLS-K after the fall-K interview. Shown in columns (3) and (4) of Table 2, children own more

books as more peers are enrolled in preschool but are read to less often by their parents, though

both estimates are not statistically significant. Although there are other ways parents can

compensate for their children’s environment, this evidence generally does not support that such

behavior exists.

        Although the value added model aids in identifying peer effects, there are two specific

assumptions that must be met. 20 One, the impact of prior inputs and endowments decay at a

constant rate. Although we can not test this assumption directly, we control for several proxies

for historical inputs and endowment, and demonstrate that our results are insensitive to the

inclusion of these variables.

        The second assumption is contemporaneous omitted inputs are not correlated with

previous test scores, which may arise if teachers are strategically assigned to students based on

their previous performance. We do not think this poses a considerable threat to our model

because kindergarten children are mostly in a school for the first time where limited historical

information about the student is available. Also, we use fall kindergarten scores as the baseline


20
 See Hanushek et al. (2003), Todd and Wolpin (2003), and Rothstein (2008) for a full derivation of a comparable
model and the necessary identification assumptions.


                                                       16
score, which is obtained shortly after students have been assigned to teachers, so school

administrators may not be aware of children’s initial ability when assigning them to teachers.

       We also provide empirical support for this assumption in Panel A of Table 3, which

presents results from a regression of the class average scores in fall-K on teacher and class

characteristics in kindergarten, such as education, certification, experience, and class size, and

school fixed effects. Within each panel, the dependent variable is either the mean or the variance

of the individual scores within a class; teachers may have classes with comparable mean levels

of ability but a more effective teacher may be assigned to students with a wider range of abilities.

Based on an F-test of joint significance, these characteristics are uncorrelated with all class level

outcomes, suggesting contemporaneous inputs from teachers are unlikely to bias our results.

       Alternatively, if we perform this same analysis for later grades, we find evidence that

teachers are systematically assigned to students. In Panel B, we regress class average scores

from spring-K on first grade teacher and class characteristics and school fixed effects. In Panel

C, we regress spring first grade class average scores on grade three teacher and class

characteristics and school fixed effects. Teacher characteristics are correlated with mean math

and reading scores even within schools, and are correlated with some of the non-cognitive

outcomes. These results suggest teacher sorting is likely to be a concern for examining peer

effects from later grades, so our empirical strategy may not be valid for examining the impact of

peer preschool enrollment in each grade.

       As a general specification check of the value added model, we regress current outcomes

on future inputs. Future inputs should not be correlated with current test scores, so any evidence

to the contrary suggests our model is misspecified (Rothstein, 2008). In columns (5) and (6) of

Table 2, we present estimates from a regression of spring kindergarten outcomes on fall




                                                 17
kindergarten outcomes and first grade peer and teachers characteristics (omitting kindergarten

peer and teacher characteristics). The coefficient on first grade peer preschool is not statistically

distinguishable from zero, further supporting the validity of our empirical strategy.

           As further support for this assumption, we exploit the richness of background information

available in the ECLS to control for numerous inputs during the kindergarten year. We include

in x various individual level factors and, because we compute peer characteristics from these

individual characteristics, we also control extensively for composition of peers in x(−i ) cd .

Furthermore, we include the teacher and classroom characteristics in zcd. As we demonstrate

below, our estimates of β1 are extremely robust to the inclusion of these variables.

           We note that peer preschool enrollment may be correlated with individual preschool

enrollment, suggesting it may be difficult to distinguish whether the effects of peer preschool

enrollment are due to own enrollment or enrollment of peers. Although individual enrollment

may be endogenous, our value added specification will capture the immediate private returns to

preschool in the fall-K score. As with other historical inputs, as long as there is constant decay

in the private returns to preschool, our estimates for class preschool enrollment will reflect peer

effects. We can test this assumption by adding individual preschool to our regression and a)

testing whether the coefficient on individual preschool differs from zero and b) assessing

whether the coefficient on peer preschool changes. For cognitive outcomes, we find that both

individual preschool is not statistically significant and including it does not change the estimated

peer preschool effect. For non-cognitive outcomes, we find the coefficient on individual

preschool is statistically significant but our estimates of the peer effects are unchanged by

including it. 21


21
     Results are not shown, but are available from authors upon request.


                                                           18
        We also note that the coefficient on individual preschool reflects the additional effects of

individual preschool above and beyond any immediate effects, so it provides an additional way

of partially assessing the private returns to preschool. Unfortunately, the value added approach

precludes us from identifying the full private returns to preschool enrollment since the immediate

returns are captured by the lagged test score.

5. Results

        A. Cognitive spillover effects from preschool

        For both cognitive outcomes, we present results from 4 sets of models: without both

school fixed effects and fall-K scores, without school fixed effects but with fall-K scores, with

school fixed effects but without fall-K scores, and with both school fixed effects and fall-K score

(our preferred specification). Within each model, we estimate 4 specifications: the first includes

only individual and peer preschool enrollment as covariates (preicd and pre(− i ) cd ), the second

adds individual level covariates (xicd), the third adds group level covariates ( x(−i ) cd ), and the

fourth adds teacher and class characteristics (zcd). We make several comparisons across

specifications to underscore the strength of our empirical strategy.

        Columns (1)-(4) of Table 4 show results for math scores without adjustment for

measurement error in the peer variables. Focusing on estimates without school fixed effects and

fall-K scores (panel A), we find a statistically significant effect of peer enrollment in preschool

of 3.3, which implies that going from no peers in preschool to all peers in preschool raises math

scores by 3.3 points. This estimate, however, gets successively smaller in magnitude as we

control for more covariates. In column (4), which includes all covariates, the estimate falls to

0.92, though it remains statistically significant at conventional levels. This changing pattern




                                                    19
across specification suggests the likelihood of omitted variable bias, so we can not make strong

claims that estimates from column (4) are free from bias.

       When we add fall-K scores but continue to omit school FEs (panel B), we find much less

variability in estimates across the specifications: they range from 0.55 to 0.70 and are all

statistically significant. The stability of estimates suggests the value added approach controls for

many confounding factors. Additionally, the coefficient on individual preschool now becomes

statistically insignificant, indicating that the value added specification controls well for prior

inputs and endowment and most of the effect of preschool on cognitive outcomes is immediate.

       When we add school FEs but omit fall-K scores (panel C), we also find that our estimates

range minimally as we add more covariates, from 0.55 to 0.75, and remain statistically

significant at the 5 or 10% level. This suggests that once we account for sorting into school

districts, there is little evidence of sorting into classes within schools based on preschool

enrollment, as results from Tables 1 through 3 indicated. Importantly, despite two entirely

different sources of variation to identify spillover effects, these results are quite comparable to

the value-added results without school FEs, providing further credibility to our estimation

strategy.

       In the value-added specification with school FEs (panel D), our estimates range even less

as we add more controls, ranging from 0.53 to 0.51. The spillover estimate that includes only

individual preschool, fall-K scores, and school FEs is 0.52, and including the full set of over 70

covariates slightly reduces the estimate to 0.51. Breaking this down further, our estimates

change from 0.52 in column (3) to 0.51 in column (4) when we add the measures of teacher

quality and classroom characteristics, further supporting the notion that teacher sorting is

unlikely to drive our results. The individual preschool effect now is essentially zero, suggesting




                                                  20
our peer preschool variable is in fact capturing the impact of peers. The R-squared ranges from

0.74 to 0.75, suggesting the value added approach is controlling for a considerable amount of

variability in math scores. Many of the control variables we add are widely found to be highly

predictive of children’s achievement, so it is impressive that our spillover estimates are

unaffected by their inclusion. In fact, comparing the estimates from column 4 of panel C to

panel D, we see our R-squared increase from 0.41 to 0.75, but our estimates for peer preschool

only changes from 0.55 to 0.51. Despite the vast increase in explanatory power of the

regression, the stability of our estimate further demonstrates the robustness of our methodology.

         Turning to reading scores in columns (5)-(8) we find not only the same pattern of

robustness across models and within specifications but estimates that are nearly identical in

magnitude as the math scores. Estimates range from 0.50 to 0.61 in the specification with school

fixed effects and fall-K scores and are statistically significant at the 5% level. This remarkable

stability across important predictors and different sources of variation is supportive that our

empirical strategy is uncovering causal spillover effects and not merely correlations. 22,23

         To assess the magnitude of these spillover effects, we would ideally like to compute

effect sizes from a standard deviation change in peer preschool enrollment to facilitate

comparisons to other peer effects studies. We can use equation (2) to adjust our coefficients for

measurement error in peer preschool enrollment and use the normalized standard deviation of 10




22
   We also estimate our model using the gain in test scores in kindergarten as the dependent variable rather than
including fall-K scores as an independent variable. Using our full specification with school fixed effects and all
covariates, the estimate for math scores is 0.493 and for reading scores is 0.495, and both are statistically significant
at the 5% level. These results are also largely insensitive to excluding the covariates, ranging from 0.464 to 0.495
for math scores and 0.495 to 0.538 for reading scores.
23
   As an additional specification check, we also estimate models that include the class average fall-K scores
(excluding the reference child) to control for unobserved group effects not accounted for in the group level
covariates. Estimates are largely unaffected by including the class average scores: the estimate for math scores
changes slightly from 0.506 to 0.471 and on reading scores is virtually unchanged at 0.507.


                                                           21
for test scores, but we unfortunately can not make an adjustment to the standard deviation of peer

preschool enrollment with the data at hand.

           As an alternative approach for assessing magnitude, we compute the spillover effects

from various changes in preschool enrollment rates and compare it to estimated private returns

from preschool programs; this yields estimates of the missed benefits from ignoring spillover

effects. For example, we compute the spillover effects of moving from no children in preschool

to the current rate of preschool enrollment, which gives estimates of the missed benefits from

current preschool enrollment rates. For estimates of the private returns to preschool, we use

estimates from Gormley and Gayer (2005) for private returns to prekindergarten and from Puma

et al. (2005) for private returns to Head Start. Although our preschool variable captures a wide

array of provisions and may not be directly comparable to these private returns, 24 we choose

these two because both have strong research designs and provide readily comparable effect sizes

for cognitive outcomes. Gormley and Gayer (2005), who exploited the introduction of a

universal prekindergarten program in Tulsa, Oklahoma by comparing those born just after the

cutoff date for admission to those born just before, found cognitive outcomes of prekindergarten

attendees improved by 0.39 of a standard deviation in kindergarten (denoted ‘GG’ in the chart

below). The Head Start Impact Study (Puma et al. (2005)), which randomly assigned children

into Head Start, found statistically significant effect sizes ranging from 0.16 to 0.24 across

several cognitive assessments measured at age 4. Since the estimates from Puma et al. (2005)

reflect intent to treat, to maintain consistency with our estimates we instead use the treatment on

the treated estimates from Ludwig and Phillips (2007) that range from 0.24 to 0.36 (denoted ‘LP

low’ and ‘LP high’, respectively, in the chart below).



24
     See footnote 11.


                                                  22
         We compute the following spillover rates using estimates from our preferred

specification: 1) going from 0% to 100% enrollment, 2) going from 0% to the current enrollment

rate of 45.8%, and 3) going from the current enrollment rate to 100%. 25 The third comparison is

potentially important for understanding the impacts of implementing universal preschool,

although we recognize this makes the strong assumption that current quality of preschool

remains unchanged under universal preschool. The following chart shows computations for the

3 alternatives.

∆preschool                  (1)                    (2)                                  (3)
enrollment                Β1adj/σy       (Β1adj/σy)*∆preschool               column (2)/private returns
                                                                           GG         LP low        LP high
0-100%                     0.132                   0.132                  0.338        0.548         0.366
0-45.8%                    0.132                   0.076                  0.155        0.252         0.167
45.8-100%                  0.132                   0.055                  0.183        0.297         0.198
Notes: Β1adj is the measurement error adjustment given in equation (2) using coefficient estimates from column (4)
from Panel D of Table 2. σy is the standard deviation of test score (=10).

Estimates from the second row imply that the benefits from current preschool enrollment rates

are understated by 16-25% if ignoring spillover effects and estimates from the third row imply

that the benefits of moving from current preschool enrollment rates to universal preschool are

understated by 18-30%. Results from this chart suggest spillover effects are an important

component of private returns; the social returns to preschool are considerably understated if

spillover effects are overlooked.

         B. Non-cognitive spillover effects from preschool

         Turning to the behavioral and social-emotional outcomes, shown in Table 5, we only

present results from our preferred specification (value added with school fixed effects and full set

of controls) because we examine 5 different dependent variables, though we find similar


25
  We cannot simply add the last two to get the first one because peer effects are multiplier effects. We recognize
this assumes linear peer effects, which may be inappropriate if those currently enrolled are most likely to benefit
from preschool.


                                                         23
robustness patterns across specifications as with the cognitive outcomes (not shown). In contrast

to cognitive outcomes, we do not find statistically significant spillover effects on behavioral or

social-emotional outcomes. In fact, for none of the 5 outcomes in any of the specifications do

we find a statistically significant effect. We also perform a joint test across all 5 outcomes by

performing a seemingly unrelated regression, and the p-value from this test is 0.39. Although the

estimates are not statistically significant, the effect sizes of moving from no peers in preschool to

all peers in preschool (using the sample standard deviations) are comparable in magnitude to the

effect sizes for the cognitive outcomes, though we can not be certain these effect sizes are correct

because the standard deviations of the non-cognitive outcomes are measured with error.

Therefore, we can not rule out the possibility of behavioral spillover effects, and we further

probe this below.

       We also find of interest that the individual preschool effect persists despite including fall-

K scores. That is, children who went to preschool have social or behavioral problems that

increase over the course of the kindergarten year. Although the value-added approach does not

yield estimates of the full behavioral effect – fall-K scores absorb initial behavioral effects – the

fact that we find a continued effect is strongly suggestive that adverse individual level behavioral

effects from preschool exist.

       C. The impact of peer non-cognitive development on individual cognitive outcomes

       We next examine whether peer non-cognitive development has an effect on cognitive

outcomes by including in equation (1) the class average from fall-K of each of the non-cognitive

measures. If peer behavior disrupts classroom learning, we expect to find positive coefficients

on self-control and interpersonal skills and negative coefficients on externalizing and

internalizing problems. Shown in columns (1) and (4) in Table 6, we find that the class averages




                                                 24
of the behavioral and social-emotional outcomes have no statistically significant effect on

cognitive outcomes, according to both individual t-tests and a joint F-test that circumvents

concerns regarding multicollinearity of the non-cognitive measures. Furthermore, including

these measures has little effect on our estimates of the preschool spillover effects.

       One concern with using the mean of class behaviors is it may only take one disruptive

students to inhibit classroom instruction (Lazear, 2001), and this may not be captured in the

mean. We instead include the 75th and 90th percentile of class behaviors, which will more

reliably detect the presence of any disruptive children. Shown in the subsequent columns in

Table 6 (columns (2)-(3), and (5)-(6)), we find a statistically significant negative effect for

externalizing problems on math scores, which is the behavioral measure most consistent with

disruptive behaviors. For reading scores, none of the non-cognitive outcomes are statistically

significant individually, but a joint F-test suggests they have a statistically significant impact on

reading scores. We find little difference between estimates from the 75th and 90th percentile for

both math and reading scores, which suggests only a handful of unruly peers are sufficient for

disrupting the academic progress of their classmates.

       We also note that the coefficient on peer preschool becomes slightly larger in these

specifications as well. This is not surprising because, as previously mentioned, Table 4 produces

reduced form estimates of the impact of peer preschool enrollment. That is, the results from

Table 4 represent the direct effect of peer preschool enrollment plus the indirect effect through

its impact on class averages. Therefore, since we have partialed out the negative indirect effect

from class averages in Table 6, the direct effect from peer preschool enrollment increases. This

also indicates that although the results from Table 6 suggest some negative spillover effects from




                                                  25
preschool, the reduced form estimates from Table 4 indicate the net spillover effects from

preschool are positive.

        D. Persistence of spillover effects

        Even if students show initial gains from peers, it is possible these effects disappear over

time as children age, given evidence of fade-out effects from Head Start (e.g., Currie and

Thomas (1995)). In Table 7, we explore the persistence of effects by looking at the effects of

peer preschool enrollment on spring 1st and 3rd grade outcomes. For math scores, we find

comparable point estimates (0.68 for first grade and 0.60 for third grade) to the spillover

estimates in the spring of kindergarten. Estimates are less precise, which could be due in part to

the smaller sample that results from attrition, though they remain statistically significant for the

first grade results. For reading scores, we find some evidence the impacts fade over time, with

estimates falling to 0.36 in first grade and 0.37 in third grade, though this difference is not

statistically significant. This slightly fading impact is consistent with the negative coefficient on

individual preschool (from Table 4), which suggest private returns to preschool on reading

decreases over time. Both sets of estimates are also generally insensitive to the inclusion of

control variables. 26

        E. Heterogeneity of spillover effects

        Results thus far have examined the average impact of peer preschool enrollment, but the

impact may vary across children. To assess heterogeneous effects, we interact peer preschool

with several characteristics of the child: own preschool enrollment, food stamp recipient, race,

immigration status, gender, and presence of father. Shown in Table 8, we do not find statistically

significant interaction effects for any of the variables we examine, though the lack of an


26
  For behavioral and social-emotional outcomes (not shown), the estimates remain statistically insignificant and
become considerably smaller in magnitude for externalizing and internalizing problems.


                                                        26
interaction effect with own preschool enrollment, shown in column (1), is interesting in its own

right. A negative coefficient on the interaction term would suggest that once a child attends

preschool they no longer benefit from their peers enrollment because they already gained the

skills from their own attendance. The fact that we do not find a statistically significant

interaction term dismisses the notion that 100 percent enrollment would no longer result in

spillover effects.

6. Conclusion

        This paper explores whether spillover effects from early education programs exist by

examining the effect of peer enrollment in preschool on children’s outcomes in kindergarten. To

address concerns regarding omitted variables, we estimate value added models with school fixed

effects that control extensively for individual, family, peer, and teacher characteristics. Although

kindergarten outcomes are of interest in their own right, focusing on this age group strengthens

our empirical strategy because there is less sorting into classes based on prior outcomes.

Numerous sensitivity analyses support the interpretation of our estimates as causal estimates of

peer effects.

        We find robust, significant spillover effects from preschool on math and reading scores

that appear to persist through the third grade. We find little evidence to support direct social and

behavioral spillovers, but we find that peer non-cognitive development, particularly externalizing

problems, impacts student achievement, suggesting an indirect route through which preschool

has negative impacts. The social returns to preschool, however, are positive on net.

        These results have three implications. One, significant spillover effects from preschool

suggest a potentially suboptimal allocation of preschool enrollment. Two, our results that peer

externalizing behaviors impact individual cognitive outcomes supports the key assumption




                                                 27
through which smaller class sizes improve academic achievement (Lazear (2001)). Three, and

most generally, our evidence of strong peer effects as early as kindergarten support contentions

that policies such as school choice and ability tracking will have significant consequences for the

academic achievement of children.

7. References

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist (1999). “How Large are the Social Returns to Educations?
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws.” NBER Working Paper 7444.

Allison, Paul (2002). Missing Data. Series: Quantitative Applications in the Social Sciences.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Ammermueller, Andreas and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (2006). “Peer Effects in European Primary
Schools: Evidence from PIRLS.” NBER Working Paper 12180.

Angrist, Joshua and Kevin Lang (2004). “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects?
Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program.” American Economic Review 94(5): 1613-1634.

Arcidiacono, Peter and Sean Nicholson (2005). “Peer effects in medical school.” Journal of
Public Economics 89 (2–3): 327– 350.

Bayer, Patrick, Randi Hjalmarsson, and David Pozen (2007). “Building Criminal Capital behind
Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections.” NBER working paper 12932.

Belsky, Jay, Deborah Lowe Vandell, Margaret Burchinal, K. Alison Clarke-Stewart, Kathleen
McCartney, and Margaret Tresch Owen (2007). “Are There Long-Term Effects of Early Child
Care?” Child Development, 78(2): 681 – 701.

Black, Sandra (1999). “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114 (2): 577-599.

Blau, David and Janet Currie (2006). “Who’s Minding the Kids? Preschool, Day Care, and After
School Care.” In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (eds.), The Handbook of Economics of Education.
New York, NY: North Holland.

Carey, Benedict (2007). “Poorer behaviour is linked to time in day care.” The New York Times.
March 26, 2007.

Cunha, Flavio, James Heckman, Lance Lochner and Dimitryi Masterov (2006). “Interpreting the
Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (eds.), The Handbook of
Economics of Education. New York, NY: North Holland.




                                                28
Currie, Janet (2001). “Early Childhood Intervention Programs: What Do We Know?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 15(2), 213-238.

Demaray, Michelle, Stacey Ruffalo, John Carlson, R.T. Busse, Amy Olson, Susan McManus,
and Amy Leventhal (1995). “Social Skills Assessment: A Comparative Evaluation of Six
Published Rating Scales.” School Psychology Review 24(4): 648-71.

Ding, Weili and Steven Lehrer (2007). “Do Peers Affect Student Achievement in China’s
Secondary Schools?” Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2): 300-312.

Elliott, Stephen, Frank Gresham, Terry Freeman, and George McCloskey (1988). “Teacher and
Observed Rating of Children’s Social Skills: Validation of the Social Skills Rating Scales.”
Journal of Psychoeducation Assessment 6:152-161.

Figlio, David (2007). “Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers.” Education
Finance and Policy, 2(4): 376-394.

Garces, Eliana, Duncan Thomas, and Janet Currie (2002). "Longer Term Effects of Head Start."
The American Economic Review, 92(4), 999-1012.

Gormley, William, and Ted Gayer (2005). “Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma: An
Evaluation of Tulsa’s Pre-K Program.” Journal of Human Resources 40(3): 533-558.

Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman, and Steven Rivkin (2003). “Does Peer Ability
Affect Student Achievement?” Journal of Applied Econometrics 18: 527–544.

Heckman, James and Yona Rubinstein (2001). “The Importance of Noncognitive Skills: Lessons
from the GED Testing Program.” American Economic Review, 91(2): 145-149

Heckman, James, Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua (2006). “The Effects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior.” Journal of Labor
Economics 24: 411-482.

Hoxby, Caroline (2000). “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
Variation.” NBER Working Papers #7867.

Jacob, Brian (2004). “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago.” American Economic Review, 94(1): 233-258.

Karoly, Lynn et al. 2006. Investing in our Children: What We Know and Don't Know About the
Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions. Santa Monica, CA: RAND.

Katz, Lawrence, Jeffrey Kling, and Jeffrey Liebman (2001). “Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2):
607-654.




                                             29
Kling, Jeffrey, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence Katz (2005). “Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 87–130.

Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman and Lawrence Katz (2007). “Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75(1), 83–119.

Lazear, Edward (2001). “Educational Production.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (3):
777-803.

Lefgren, Lars (2004). “Educational peer effects and the Chicago public schools.” Journal of
Urban Economics 56: 169–191

Ludwig J, Duncan GJ, Hirschfield P. (2001). Urban poverty and juvenile crime: evidence from a
randomized housing-mobility experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 655–679.

Ludwig, Jens and Deborah Phillips (2007). “The Benefits and Costs of Head Start.”
NBER Working Paper #12973.

Magnuson, Katherine, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2007a). “Does Prekindergarten
Improve School Preparation and Performance?” Economics of Education Review 26: 33-51.

Magnuson, Katherine, Christopher Ruhm, and Jane Waldfogel (2007b). “The Persistence of
Preschool Effects: Do Subsequent Classroom Experiences Matter?” Early Childhood Research
Quarterly 22(1): 18-38.

Manski, Charles (1993). “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem.”
The Review of Economic Studies 60(3): 531-542.

Moffitt, Robert (2001). “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibrium, and Social Interactions.”
In S. Durlauf and P. Young (eds.), Social Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Moretti, Enrico (2004). “Human Capital Externalities in Cities.” In V. Henderson and J.F. Thisse
(eds.), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. New York, NY: North Holland.

National Center for Education Statistics (2004). User’s Manual for the ECLS-K Third Grade
Public Use Data File and Electronic Code Book. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
Education

Puma, Michael, Stephen Bell, Ronna Cook, Camilla Heid and Michael Lopez (2005). “Head
Start Impact Study: First Year Findings.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Administration for Children and Families: Washington, DC.

Rivkin, Steven, Eric Hanushek, and John Kain (2005). “Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement.” Econometrica 73(2): 417-458.




                                              30
Rothstein, Jesse (2008). “On the Identification of Teacher Quality: Fixed Effects, Tracking, and
Causal Attribution.” Mimeograph, Princeton University.

Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, Jeffrey Kling, Greg Duncan, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn (2006).
“Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement: Results from the Moving to Opportunity
Experiment.” Journal of Human Resources 41(4): 649–691.

Smolensky, Eugene and Jennifer Appleton Gootman (2003). Working Families and Growing
Kids: Caring for Children and Adolescents. Committee on Family and Work Policies, National
Research Council. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

Todd, Petra and Kenneth Wolpin (2003). “On the Specification and Estimation of the Production
Function for Cognitive Achievement.” Economic Journal.

Van Buuren, S, J Brand, C Groothuis-Oudshoorn, and D Rubin (in press). “Fully Conditional
Specification in Multivariate Imputation.” Journal of Statistical Computation and Simulation.

Waldfogel, Jane (2006). What Children Need. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.




                                               31
Appendix

In this section we sketch the measurement error adjustment in equation (2) based on the
derivation in Ammermueller and Pischke (2006) with school fixed effects. 27 Suppose we are
interested in estimating the following equation (omitting other covariates for clarity):

            yicd = β1wcd + εicd

where wcd = pre(−i ) cd is the average preschool enrollment less the index child for the entire class
of students (Ncd). We only observe a sample of students in the class (ncd), and denote the
                                            *
measured average preschool enrollment by wcd  . The estimate of β1 converges to:

             cov( y, w* ) cov(β 1 w + ε , w* ) β1 cov(w, w* )
 p lim βˆ1 =             =                    =
              var(w* )        var(w* )            var(w* )

We must define the covariance and variance terms in the above equation, where P-i is the set of
all students in the class and S-i is the set of sampled students in the class:
                                                2                           2
                ⎛        prei ⎞ ⎛ 1 ⎞                     ⎛          ⎞ ⎛           ⎞                           ⎛         ⎞
var(w ) = var⎜⎜ ∑
        *
                                   ⎟=⎜              ⎟  var⎜ ∑ prei ⎟ = ⎜ 1 ⎟ (ncd − 1) var( prei ) = ⎜ 1 ⎟ var( prei )
                                   ⎟   ⎜            ⎟     ⎜          ⎟    ⎜        ⎟                           ⎜         ⎟
                ⎝ S −i ncd − 1 ⎠ ⎝ ncd − 1 ⎠              ⎝ S−i      ⎠ ⎝ ncd − 1 ⎠                             ⎝ ncd − 1 ⎠
                      ⎛         prei            prei ⎞ ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛ 1 ⎞
cov( w, w* ) = cov⎜⎜ ∑                 ,∑               ⎟ ⎜ N − 1 ⎟⎜ n − 1 ⎟∑∑
                                                        ⎟=⎜           ⎟⎜        ⎟           cov( prei , prei )
                             N
                      ⎝ P− i cd     − 1  S −i  n cd − 1 ⎠ ⎝ cd        ⎠⎝ cd     ⎠ P− i S −i
                ⎛ 1 ⎞⎛ 1 ⎞                                             ⎛ 1 ⎞
             = ⎜⎜             ⎟⎟⎜⎜          ⎟⎟(ncd − 1) var( prei ) = ⎜⎜        ⎟⎟ var( prei )
                  N
                ⎝ cd     −  1      n
                               ⎠⎝ cd   − 1   ⎠                           N
                                                                       ⎝ cd − 1  ⎠

Plugging these terms in gives:
                ⎛ 1 ⎞
            β1 ⎜⎜           ⎟⎟ var( prei )
                ⎝ N    −  1  ⎠                    ⎛ n −1 ⎞
p lim βˆ1 =         cd
                                           = β 1 ⎜⎜ cd     ⎟⎟ .
             ⎛ 1 ⎞                                  N
                                                  ⎝ cd − 1  ⎠
             ⎜⎜          ⎟⎟ var( prei )
                 n
              ⎝ cd   − 1  ⎠

We can use the measured averages for Ncd and ncd from our sample to adjust our estimate of β1 to
obtain consistent estimates of the peer effect:

              ⎛ N cd − 1 ⎞
βˆ1adj = βˆ1 ⎜⎜          ⎟.
                         ⎟
                n
              ⎝ cd   − 1 ⎠



27
  The main difference is we assume no measurement error in the individual level covariates and therefore derive
results for a bivariate regression.


                                                            32
Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                           1        2            3          4            5          6
                                                                                    difference   p-value
                                         mean     std dev    difference   p-value      (FE)       (FE)
Dependent variables
math spring K                            51.080   9.667       1.854       0.000       0.328      0.019
reading spring K                         50.960   9.583        1.840      0.000       0.326      0.022
self-control spring K (teacher rating)    3.196   0.621       -0.055      0.004      -0.026      0.035
externalizing problems spring K          1.655    0.641       0.053       0.002      0.028       0.014
interpersonal relations spring K          3.136   0.632       -0.019      0.317      -0.019      0.119
internalizing problems spring K          1.556    0.508       0.001       0.963      0.010       0.326
self-control spring K (parent rating)    2.881    0.498       0.035       0.002      -0.010      0.217
Class & teacher characteristics
class average preschool                   0.580   0.258        0.416      0.000       0.194      0.000
class size                               20.651   4.381       -0.160      0.436       0.042      0.473
teacher age                              41.727   9.978       -0.036      0.940       0.217      0.449
years tenure at school                    9.344   7.850       -0.070      0.855       0.164      0.474
years teach K                             9.154   7.714        0.059      0.879      0.039       0.870
total years teaching                     12.948   9.218       -0.123      0.788       0.011      0.969
teacher male                              0.015   0.123       -0.009      0.136       0.001      0.725
teacher white                             0.862   0.345        0.002      0.916      -0.007      0.433
temporary teaching certificate            0.084   0.277        0.007      0.578       0.007      0.409
alternate teaching certificate            0.014   0.120        0.006      0.251      -0.001      0.853
regular teaching certification            0.223   0.416        0.030      0.127       0.006      0.600
highest teaching certification            0.656   0.475       -0.048      0.034      -0.012      0.360
some graduate school                      0.335   0.472       -0.071      0.001      -0.003      0.797
masters or more                          0.374    0.484       -0.005      0.845       0.000      0.993
Background characteristics
individual preschool                      0.580   0.494       0.415       0.000       0.193      0.000
maternal age at birth                    23.886   5.406       1.207       0.000       0.065      0.339
grandparents close                        2.215   1.242       0.070       0.014       0.027      0.136
# of siblings                             1.436   1.062       -0.078      0.001       0.000      0.991



                                                        33
Table 1. Summary Statistics (continued)

family income                                  52167         44329            11648            0.000             731             0.171
# books owned                                 76.706        59.694             6.536           0.000            1.111            0.141
# records, tapes, CDs owned                   15.417        17.705             1.695           0.000            0.445            0.076
child age                                       6.207        0.342             0.002           0.832            0.003            0.563
parent read to child everyday                   0.458        0.498             0.035           0.002            0.008            0.285
mom employed FT                                 0.461        0.499            -0.003           0.799           -0.004            0.583
mom employed PT                                 0.222        0.416             0.006           0.503            0.001            0.853
dad employed FT                                 0.718        0.450             0.000           0.992            0.007            0.276
dad employed PT                                 0.026        0.159             0.000           0.956            0.001            0.615
central city                                    0.351        0.477             0.011           0.635            0.000            0.157
suburban                                        0.423        0.494             0.112           0.000            0.000            0.901
male                                            0.508        0.500            -0.005           0.584           -0.007            0.296
black                                           0.144        0.351             0.079           0.000            0.004            0.355
hispanic                                        0.167        0.373            -0.076           0.000           -0.014            0.003
mother HS dropout                               0.124        0.329            -0.054           0.000           -0.006            0.223
mother HS graduate                              0.634        0.482            -0.058           0.000            0.000            0.979
father HS dropput                               0.102        0.303            -0.054           0.000            0.000            0.930
father HS graduate                              0.471        0.499            -0.078           0.000           -0.007            0.310
immigrant                                       0.172        0.377            -0.047           0.000           -0.009            0.094
father present                                  0.784        0.412            -0.015           0.177            0.004            0.481
early maternal employment                       0.755        0.430             0.010           0.272            0.000            0.941
low birthweight (<5.5 lbs.)                     0.074        0.262            -0.004           0.496           -0.005            0.165
english at home                                 0.902        0.297             0.055           0.000            0.005            0.292
mother or child WIC                             0.451        0.498            -0.086           0.000           -0.003            0.680
receive food stamps                             0.172        0.377            -0.011           0.290           -0.001            0.865
# of individuals=12501, # of schools=901, # of classes=2436
All values are weighted by sampling probability. 'difference' is the difference in means of the variables for children in classes above
vs. below the median class preschool enrollment of 59%. ‘p-value' is from t-test of variables below/above median that cluster on class.
'FE' adjusts variables for school fixed effect.




                                                                  34
Table 2. Tests of Peer Group Exogeneity


                                  1               2                   3              4                     5               6
                                   Fall-K Outcomes                 Compensatory Behavior                     Future inputs
                                 Math          Reading             # books     read to child             Math           Reading
                                                                   owned         everyday
individual preschool             0.922              0.96            3.151          0.000                -0.095            -0.187
                              [0.166]***        [0.177]***         [2.602]        [0.010]               [0.118]           [0.128]
class preschool                  0.056             0.033            3.928         -0.010                -0.025             0.244
                                [0.318]           [0.357]          [4.002]        [0.020]               [0.222]           [0.255]
# of individuals                 12501             11840            11481          11526                 10463             9923
# of schools                      901               891              900            900                   886               874
# of classes                     2436              2275             2450           2450                  2349              2194
Covariates
school fixed effects                Y                Y                  Y                Y                    Y                Y
fall-K score                        N                N                  Y                Y                    Y                Y
individual characteristics          Y                Y                  Y                Y                    Y                Y
group characteristics               Y                Y                  Y                Y                    Y                Y
teacher & class chars               Y                Y                  Y                Y                    Y                Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. All
regressions are weighted by sampling probability. 'Individual characteristics' listed in Table 1, 'group characteristics' are class means
of individual characteristics (not including reference child), and 'teacher & class characteristics' are listed in Table 1. Columns 5 & 6
include class preschool, group background characteristics, and teacher and class characteristics from 1st grade. Columns (1) and (2)
present estimates of equation (1) using individual level fall-k test scores as the dependent variable. Columns (3) and (4) present
estimates of equation (1) using measures of parental investments in place of test scores. Columns (5) and (6) present estimates of
equation (1) measuring all covariates in the 1st grade.




                                                                    35
Table 3. Test of Teacher Assignment: Effects of Teacher Characteristics on Class Average Fall-K Scores

                                                  1             2              3          4             5           6            7
                                                                             Self-                  External-   Internal-       Self-
                                                                           control    Interpers-      izing       izing        control
                                                Math        Reading       (teacher)   onal skills   problems    problems      (parent)
A. Regress fall-K class average outcome on K teacher and class characteristics
Dependent variable: mean of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0      1.00          1.17           0.78        1.29         0.38         0.73         0.54
Prob > F                                        0.45          0.29           0.69        0.20         0.98         0.75         0.91
Dependent variable: variance of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0      0.33          1.36           0.64       0.96          0.44        0.71          1.12
Prob > F                                        0.99          0.17           0.83       0.49          0.96        0.77          0.34
# of classes                                    2413         2252           2331        2331          2386        2356          2441

B. Regress spring-K class average outcome on 1st grade teacher and class characteristics
Dependent variable: mean of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0     1.95          1.97           1.22         1.89         1.18         1.61         1.02
Prob > F                                       0.03          0.02           0.26         0.03         0.29         0.08         0.43
Dependent variable: variance of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0     0.47          0.83           0.86         0.76         0.89        1.42          0.52
Prob > F                                       0.93          0.62           0.59         0.69         0.55        0.15          0.91
# of classes                                   2634          2516          2720          2716         2731        2712          2685

C. Regress spring-1st grade class average outcome on 3rd grade teacher and class characteristics
Dependent variable: mean of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0        1.91         2.40         0.82           0.62         1.27          0.39       1.16
Prob > F                                          0.05         0.01         0.59           0.79         0.25          0.94       0.32
Dependent variable: variance of class scores
F-test teacher & class characteristics = 0        0.41         1.27         1.56           1.47         1.29          0.36       0.76
Prob > F                                          0.93         0.25         0.12           0.15         0.24          0.96       0.66
# of classes                                     2130          2086         2159           2152         2155          2149      2175
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. All regressions are weighted by sampling probability, include teacher
and class charateristics as described in Table 1, and include school fixed effects. F-test includes 9 degrees of freedom.



                                                                    36
Table 4. Spillover Effects of Preschool on Spring Kindergarten Cognitive Outcomes

                                       1                2                  3                 4             5               6                7                8
                                                                Math                                                            Reading
A. No school FE, no fall-K score
individual preschool                  1.958           0.854               0.847             0.816        1.662           0.736            0.705            0.654
                                   [0.197]***      [0.167]***          [0.166]***        [0.165]***   [0.202]***      [0.182]***       [0.180]***       [0.178]***
class preschool                       3.300           1.211               0.992             0.920        2.791           1.289            1.069            0.946
                                   [0.456]***      [0.327]***          [0.325]***        [0.324]***   [0.455]***      [0.378]***       [0.378]***        [0.372]**
R-squared                              0.02            0.30                0.31              0.31         0.02            0.22             0.23             0.24

B. No school FE, fall-K score
individual preschool                 0.013            0.051               0.074             0.063       -0.162           -0.114           -0.102           -0.123
                                    [0.111]          [0.112]             [0.112]           [0.112]      [0.124]         [0.126]          [0.126]          [0.125]
class preschool                      0.547            0.612               0.695             0.663        0.494            0.631            0.747           0.679
                                   [0.236]**       [0.234]***          [0.241]***        [0.241]***    [0.265]*        [0.263]**       [0.274]***        [0.274]**
R-squared                             0.68             0.69                0.69              0.70        0.62             0.63             0.64             0.64

C. School FE, no fall-K score
individual preschool                  1.207           0.724               0.719             0.698        1.081           0.578            0.557            0.525
                                   [0.179]***      [0.165]***          [0.165]***        [0.164]***   [0.180]***      [0.170]***       [0.169]***       [0.169]***
class preschool                       0.751           0.652               0.588             0.549        0.841           0.752            0.597            0.528
                                    [0.359]**       [0.312]**           [0.312]*          [0.311]*     [0.389]**       [0.343]**        [0.345]*          [0.344]
R-squared                              0.30            0.41                0.41              0.41         0.29            0.39             0.39             0.40

D. School FE, fall-K score
individual preschool                  0.028           0.003           0.003          -0.002             -0.112           -0.149         -0.149          -0.163
                                     [0.106]         [0.106]         [0.106]        [0.106]            [0.112]          [0.113]        [0.113]         [0.112]
class preschool                       0.524           0.527           0.517           0.506              0.608            0.599          0.544           0.504
                                    [0.215]**       [0.213]**      [0.212]**       [0.213]**          [0.247]**        [0.244]**      [0.249]**       [0.248]**
R-squared                              0.74            0.75            0.75           0.75               0.71             0.72           0.72            0.72
Observations                              individuals=12501, schools=901, classes=2436                       individuals=11840, schools=891, classes=2275
SUR joint-test                     χ2(2)=7.99       P>χ2=0.02
Covariates
individual characteristics               N               Y               Y                Y                 N                Y                Y               Y
group characteristics                    N               N               Y                Y                 N                N                Y               Y
teacher & class chars.                   N               N               N                Y                 N                N                N               Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. All regressions are weighted by
sampling probability. See notes to Table 2 for description of covariates. All columns contain regression results of equation (1) using spring-K math and reading
scores as the dependent variable. Panels B and D include fall-K math and reading scores s independent variables. 'SUR joint test' is a test of joint significance of
class preschool on the math and reading equations from columns (4) and (8).

                                                                                    37
Table 5. Spillover Effects of Preschool on Spring Kindergarten Noncognitive Outcomes

                                     1                   2                    3                    4                   5
                               Self-control       Interpersonal         Externalizing       Internalizing        Self-control
                                (teacher)              skills             problems            problems             (parent)
individual preschool              -0.042              -0.043                0.032               0.019               -0.007
                               [0.010]***          [0.011]***            [0.010]***           [0.009]**            [0.009]
class preschool                   -0.029              -0.038                0.014               0.028               -0.023
                                 [0.024]             [0.025]               [0.021]             [0.020]             [0.018]
R-squared                          0.52                 0.5                  0.6                 0.42                0.43
# of individuals                  11636               11446                 11919               11759               12070
# of schools                        881                 883                  889                 887                  901
# of classes                       2324                2321                 2380                2342                 2462
SUR joint-test                 χ2(5)=5.17          P>χ2=0.39
Covariates
school fixed effects                Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
fall-K score                        Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
individual characteristics          Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
group characteristics               Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
teacher & class chars               Y                    Y                   Y                    Y                    Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. All
regressions are weighted by sampling probability. See notes to Table 2 for description of covariates. All columns contain regression
results of equation (1) using spring-K non-cognitive measures as the dependent variable. 'SUR joint test' is a test of joint significance
of class preschool on all non-cognitive equations in columns (1) through (5).




                                                                   38
Table 6. Spillover Effects of Noncognitive Outcomes on Spring Kindergarten Cognitive Outcomes

                                                   1                2              3               4                 5             6
                                                                 Math                                           Reading
class preschool                                   0.600          0.679           0.666           0.482            0.613           0.599
                                               [0.239]**      [0.238]***      [0.238]***       [0.279]*        [0.276]**       [0.277]**
class self-control                               -0.089          0.198           0.095           0.265            0.185           0.246
                                                [0.312]         [0.245]         [0.231]         [0.338]         [0.256]         [0.233]
class interpersonal skills                       -0.099         -0.057           0.054          -0.016            0.292           0.330
                                                [0.259]         [0.216]         [0.212]         [0.290]         [0.248]         [0.235]
class externalizing problems                     -0.315         -0.526          -0.555           0.418           -0.177          -0.091
                                                [0.232]       [0.168]***      [0.140]***        [0.275]         [0.208]         [0.163]
class internalizing problems                     -0.204          0.076           0.060           0.115           -0.115          -0.062
                                                [0.230]         [0.164]         [0.144]         [0.277]         [0.196]         [0.155]
Mean or percentile of noncognitive outcomes       mean            75th            90th           mean             75th            90th
F test noncognitive = 0                           0.93            5.28            9.24            0.78            3.45            4.21
Prob > F                                           0.45           0.00            0.00            0.54             0.01           0.00
# of individuals                                 11257           11257           11257           10768           10768           10768
# of schools                                       885            885             885             871              871             871
# of classes                                      2256           2256            2256            2134             2134            2134
Covariates
school fixed effects                                Y              Y              Y               Y                Y               Y
fall K score                                        Y              Y              Y               Y                Y               Y
individual characteristics                          Y              Y              Y               Y                Y               Y
group characteristics                               Y              Y              Y               Y                Y               Y
teacher & class chars                               Y              Y              Y               Y                Y               Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. See notes to
Table 2 for description of covariates. All columns contain regression results of equation (1) using spring-K math and reading scores
as the dependent variable. 'Self-control' is from the teacher report.




                                                                    39
Table 7. Spillover Effects of Preschool on Cognitive Outcomes in 1st and 3rd Grade

                                1             2               3               4         5           6             7             8
                                                     Math                                               Reading
1st grade
class preschool              0.660         0.614         0.657              0.679      0.490      0.473         0.368         0.361
                            [0.386]*      [0.369]*      [0.372]*           [0.370]*   [0.456]    [0.433]       [0.441]       [0.434]
# of individuals             10084         10084         10084              10084      9530       9530          9530          9530
# of schools                   894           894           894                894       884        884           884           884
# of classes                  2376          2376          2376               2376      2213       2213          2213          2213

3rd grade
class preschool               0.514         0.509            0.576          0.602      0.403      0.358         0.407         0.374
                             [0.428]       [0.403]          [0.388]        [0.391]    [0.502]    [0.476]       [0.464]       [0.461]
# of individuals              10062         10062            10062          10062      9466       9466          9466          9466
# of schools                   894           894              894            894        883        883           883           883
# of classes                  2375          2375             2375           2375       2211       2211          2211          2211
Covariates
school fixed effects              Y             Y            Y            Y             Y               Y             Y          Y
fall K score                      Y             Y            Y            Y             Y              Y              Y          Y
individual characteristics        N             Y            Y            Y             N               Y             Y          Y
group characteristics             N             N            Y            Y             N              N              Y          Y
teacher & class chars             N             N            N            Y             N              N              N          Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. All
regressions are weighted by sampling probability. See notes to Table 2 for description of covariates. All columns contain regression
results of equation (1) using spring 1st or 3rd grade math and reading scores as the dependent variable.




                                                                      40
Table 8. Heterogeneity of Spillover Effects of Preschool on Spring Kindergarten Outcomes

                                       1                  2                  3               4                5                 6
                                 own preschool      receive food
interaction variable:             attendance           stamps              black        immigrant       father present        male
Math
class preschool                       0.637            0.363                0.620         0.521              0.850            0.488
                                    [0.326]*          [0.249]            [0.236]***     [0.244]**         [0.408]**         [0.275]*
class preschool interaction           -0.224           0.649               -0.694         -0.067            -0.459            0.036
                                     [0.408]          [0.516]              [0.604]       [0.513]           [0.453]           [0.374]
Reading
class preschool                        0.168            0.492           0.525             0.454              0.127             0.455
                                      [0.382]         [0.285]*        [0.281]*          [0.270]*            [0.467]           [0.326]
class preschool interaction            0.557            0.057          -0.116             0.367              0.508             0.097
                                      [0.441]          [0.604]         [0.653]           [0.601]            [0.529]           [0.417]
school fixed effects                     Y                Y               Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
fall K score                             Y                Y               Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
individual characteristics               Y                Y               Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
group characteristics                    Y                Y               Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
teacher & class characteristics          Y                Y               Y                 Y                  Y                 Y
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Robust standard errors that cluster on class in brackets. All
regressions are weighted by sampling probability. See notes to Table 2 for description of covariates.




                                                                    41
