                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




COMPLEMENTARITY OF SHARED COMPENSATION AND DECISION-MAKING SYSTEMS:
            EVIDENCE FROM THE AMERICAN LABOR MARKET

                                          Arindrajit Dube
                                          Richard Freeman

                                        Working Paper 14272
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14272


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2008 by Arindrajit Dube and Richard Freeman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
 exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
 © notice, is given to the source.
Complementarity of Shared Compensation and Decision-Making Systems: Evidence from
the American Labor Market
Arindrajit Dube and Richard Freeman
NBER Working Paper No. 14272
August 2008
JEL No. J33,J54,L23,L25

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines the relationship between shared capitalist modes of pay and shared modes of
decision-making via employee involvement and related committees and between them and measures
of productivity and worker well-being in two data sets: the employee based Worker Participation and
Representation Survey and the California Establishment Survey. It finds in both data sets that the
forms of shared compensation are complementary in the sense that they are more likely to be found
together than if firms chose them separately; that shared compensation systems are positively associated
with shared decision-making; and that combining shared compensation systems and employee involvement
has greater impacts on outcomes than each system by itself.


Arindrajit Dube
UC Berkleley Institute of Industrial Relations
2521 Channing Way
Berkeley, CA 94720
adube@berkeley.edu

Richard Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
freeman@nber.org
                                                                                               2




       In the 1990s an increasing proportion of US firms moved toward compensation systems

that made part of pay depend on the economic performance of work-groups or the firm. They

gave profit-sharing bonuses, paid group incentive schemes (gain-sharing), developed employee

stock ownership programs, awarded stock options, and funded pensions through defined

contribution pension plans which put considerable assets in the stock of the firm. Over the

same period, firms introduced teams, total quality management, quality circles, employee

involvement committees, and other structures that gave employees a greater role in decision-

making.

   How significant are these new forms of compensation and modes of employee

involvement? To what extent are the new forms of compensation linked to employee

involvement programs? How have they affected employee behavior and attitude?

   This paper examines these questions using the 1994-1995 Freeman-Rogers “Workplace

Representation and Participation Survey” (WRPS) (Freeman and Rogers, 1999), and the 2003

California Establishment Survey (CES). The WRPS focuses on employee involvement and

work organization but also asks about the mode of compensation so that we can link

compensation systems and employee decision-making. The CES surveys businesses on

compensation and decision making practices, and has productivity-related outcomes that allow

us to examine the relation between firm performance and compensation and decision-making

systems.

   We find that: 1) New forms of compensation based on pay for group or company

performance, or ownership of company shares have increased rapidly;2) Compensation systems

that base part of pay on company or group performance are linked with employee participation

in decision-making, suggesting that these institutions form a complementary package of
                                                                                                    3

employee-management relations; 3) Together, employee involvement programs and shared

compensation improve outcomes such as job satisfaction, attitude toward the firm, and a 0-1

measure of whether the worker was or was not likely to stay with the firm. In the worker

survey, involvement programs have an independent effect on outcomes whereas the effect of

shared compensation depends on the presence of involvement programs. 4) The highest

outcomes occur when firms combine pay for company or group performance with an ownership

stake in the firm and employee involvement committees. This supports the notion that these

policies form a complementary package of employee-management relations.

    The principal weakness in our study is the lack of exogenous variation in the presence of

compensation and decision making systems, which firms choose, presumably for economic

reasons. Still, the evidence fits more readily with the hypothesis that shared compensation and

decision-making have real economic impact through altering collective employee incentives

than with the null hypothesis that the results reflect sorting of firms or the impact of a single

unobservable variable. We find similar associations in the two datasets and in specifications

that control for unobserved factors. We also find complementarity in both the incidence of

shared compensation and decision-making and in their relation to outcomes that suggests that

the systems have real effects even though unobservable factors may bias estimated magnitudes.

The New Forms of Pay

   Traditional economic analysis of labor contracts distinguish between: employment

contracts, whereby a firm buys the time of a worker to do what management views as

profitable and pays a time-based wage; and sales contracts, where the firms buys a product

from the worker (Simon, 1947). In the employment contract model, the employer determines

the activities that workers undertake at the workplace subject to principal/agent problems when

the employer cannot fully monitor employee effort. By contrast, the sales contract is a model of
                                                                                                   4

self-employment where the worker decides how much to work and how to produce the product.

The classic sales contract in the job market is the piece rate. In cases where pieces can be

readily measured, this solves principal agent problems but loses the advantages of coordinating

work and of workers sharing knowledge of newly discovered ways to improve productivity.

   The shared compensation and decision-making arrangements on which we focus fit

between these polar cases. Under these arrangements workers share the financial benefits and

risks of economic activity and/or decisions about production with the firm. Ideally, giving

workers a financial incentive to behave in the interests of the firm and empowering them to

make decisions increases the value of the firm and enhances worker well being.

   There are diverse systems of shared compensation. We differentiate between systems that

involve financial ownership, where the workers’ reward depends on share prices, and group or

company profit-sharing or bonus systems that reward workers on the basis of group or

company performance irrespective of share prices. Employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs),

majority employee ownership, defined contribution pension money invested in one’s own firm,

stock purchase plans and employee stock options all fit under the financial ownership rubric.

Gain sharing, profit-sharing, bonuses linked to performance, Scanlon plans based on cost-

saving, and so on, fit under the profit-sharing rubric.

   There are also diverse institutions for shared decision-making. Employee involvement

committees (EI), works councils as in the European Union, quality circles and team production

give workers a say in what happens at their work site. At the corporate level, workers can serve

on boards, which Germany legislatively requires but which is uncommon in the US, and

worker-run pension funds can appoint directors.

   Our classification arguably exaggerates differences among systems. Almost all

employment arrangements have scope for sharing profits and decisions between owners and
                                                                                                      5

workers. Most workers paid straight time wages have some control over decisions, and the

better they perform, the more likely the firm will give them pay increases, promotions, and

other benefits in the future. At the other end, even small partnerships will divide decision-

making unevenly, while piece rate systems are more complicated than the simple sales contract

model indicates, especially when the firm has to update the piece rates regularly due to

technological change (Freeman and Kleiner, 1999). Still, the differences between traditional

employment and sales contracts and modern shared compensation contracts are sufficiently

large to make this a useful typology.

   The incentive to free ride creates a problem for shared compensation structures.

Rationalizing employee stock ownership or company-wide profit sharing is difficult because it

is hard to see how these systems can motivate individual workers. It’s one thing to pay the

CEO of Starbucks or Bank of America stock options or profit-related bonuses, since their

decisions can affect the share price and profits; but the clerks at a local store can hardly affect

the share price or company-wide profits. Lazear (1999) offers a sorting explanation for variable

pay among managers – that compensation linked to long term financial viability of the company

elicits better information from managers about the true state of affairs. But, as he notes, such an

explanation does not explain shared compensation for lower level workers. Oyer and Schafer

(2002) argue that options may attract workers optimistic about the firm – which in conjunction

with tax benefits from delayed exercise of options can provide an edge to this form of

compensation. However, this seems to imply that options are useful mainly when they can fool

employees, which is unlikely over a long period of time.

   One possible explanation is that variable compensation affect employees by helping create a

corporate culture that improves company performance. For instance, if employees share the

gains when the company is doing well, they may feel more enthusiastic about putting forth
                                                                                                      6

greater effort based on notions of fairness, even if rational calculations favor free riding on the

efforts of others. They may self-monitor effort at the workplace, along the lines shown by

Freeman, Blasi, and Kruse (2007).

   In any case, if shared compensation schemes affect employees’ willingness to engage in

production issues, it makes sense to couple such schemes with programs that devolve

workplace decisions to workers. Firms that give workers financial incentives but that do not

empower them to make decisions are unlikely to benefit from the incentive system. Firms that

give workers decision-making authority but no financial incentive risk workers making

decisions that are not in the firms’ interest. Thus, we expect financial sharing systems to be

complementary with systems of shared decision-making, and for shared compensation and

decision-making to produce higher outcomes together than they do separately.

Extent of Shared Compensation and Decision-Making Systems

   How extensive are shared compensation and decision-making systems? How has their

prevalence changed over time?

   These basic questions are difficult to answer because until the General Social Survey asked

about the systems in 2002 and 2006 there was no single nationally representative source of data

on the extent of shared capitalism. Most administrative-based or establishment-based

compensation surveys cover a single form of pay – such as defined contribution pension funds,

401k plans, or profit-sharing – without information on the overlap with other forms of financial

sharing. Since workers receive several forms of pay related to performance, simply adding the

numbers under each separate category will overstate the total number of workers having shared

compensation pay systems. The employment cost index includes bonuses and profit-sharing

but excludes stock options and related programs and provides no information on pension funds

invested in the firm. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) conducted a national benefit survey
                                                                                                     7

in 2000, but this focused primarily on retirement and health benefit plans. The BLS’s 1999

survey of the incidence of stock option based compensation did not ask about other types of

shared compensation plans.

    Employee based surveys can resolve the overlap problem but suffer from measurement

error, particularly of the size and nature of benefit programs. In their study of pensions held by

older workers, Gustman and Steinmeier (1988, p 40) report that “discrepancies between firm

provided and administrative records ... and respondent reports ... are large for many

respondents”. Opinion surveys typically find that 10 or so percent of workers report that their

firm is employee-owned, which far exceeds any plausible estimate from administrative records

(Freeman, Kruse, Blasi, Mackin, 2000). Many workers may interpret having a 401k plan that

invests in their firm, or individual ownership of shares, as employee ownership when in fact the

firm is owned by shareholders rather than workers. Still, by piecing together data from several

sources, and comparing the results with the GSS, we can get a general picture of the extent and

growth of new forms of compensation.

    Table 1 estimates the proportion of the private sector work force that had a financial stake

in the performance of their firm in the late 1990s from the sources described in Appendix Table

A. Approximately 25 percent of the work force had a stake in their firm through some form of

ownership. The main vehicle for employee ownership has been the Employee Stock Ownership

Plan (ESOP). The National Center of Employee Ownership (NCEO) estimated that in 1998

some 8,500,000 workers were employed in over 11,400 ESOP and related stock bonus plans

with combined assets of around 400 billion.1 This is about 8% of the US private sector work

force. In addition, the NCEO estimates that 7 to 10 million workers receive stock options as

part of all employee stock option plans, for another 8% or so of the private sector work force.

1
 More recent figures from NCEO indicate that in 2002, some 8.8 million workers were enrolled
in ESOP plans, and around 15 million participated in stock purchase plans.
                                                                                                       8

This estimate contrasts with the employee survey conducted by the BLS, which found that in

1999, 1.7% of all employees, or 5.3% of employees of publicly traded companies received

options grants in 1999. Some of the divergence is likely due to differences in the timing

covered by questions. Since companies may not give out broad based options each year, the

number of employees who “regularly” receive options is greater than those who might receive it

in one particular year. An additional 10% or so of the work force received special opportunities

to buy company stock.

   Profit sharing differs from employee ownership because it depends on accounting profits

rather than share values. Employees at Amazon.com would receive nothing in profit shares

when the firm has not turned a profit but would have gained from ownership of options, as the

share price of the company increased rapidly. Most profit sharing is deferred, with the profit

share put into an employee retirement account (PSCA, 1993; BLS, 1998). Gain-sharing plans

typically tie employee compensation to a group-based operational measure -- such as physical

output, productivity, quality, safety, customer satisfaction, or costs -- rather than to a financial

measure such as profitability. We estimate that about 25% of American workers are paid in

part with some form of group or company financial incentives.

   The third major way in which firms pay workers based on firm performance is through non-

ESOP defined contribution pension plans, such as 401k plans. In 1997 55% of full time

employees had 401k plans (approximately the same proportion had any form of defined

contribution pension). While we lack estimates on the proportion of workers with 401k or other

defined contribution funds invested in their firm, estimates of the proportion of 401k assets in

company stock hover around 20%. On the basis of these figures, roughly 11% (= .55 x 20) of

retirement pay depends on company shares. Absent better information, we assume that this is

the proportion of workers who depend substantially on company shares for retirement pay.
                                                                                                     9

       Because workers who receive one form of shared compensation may also receive another

form, we cannot add these separate estimates together to obtain the proportion of the work force

whose compensation depends on company performance. We must subtract the proportion with

an overlap in coverage. Making such an adjustment, we estimate that about 45% of workers

have a substantial portion of their pay varying with company or group performance. This

proportion is almost identical to estimates of shared compensation programs from the 2002 and

2006 General Social Survey.2

       Figure 1 shows that the forms of variable pay have increased rapidly. The proportion of

private sector employees with ESOPs rose from 0% in 1975 to 4% in 1980 to 8% in the 1990

but then stabilized in the 1990s. By contrast, the proportion receiving stock options rose greatly

in the 1990s. A William Mercer company study found that the proportion of firms granting

options more than doubled between 1993 and 1998. Figures for large electronics firms show a

fourfold increase between 1994 and 1997. In 1999 39% of the Inc magazine 500 fastest

growing privately held firms offered options to workers; in 1999, the figure was 26%.3 A

Federal Reserve Board Survey of 125 large firms found that 23% had introduced stock option

programs for regular employees between 1996 and 1998, while 37% had broadened the

eligibility of their existing program.4 Profit-sharing plan or gain-sharing plans increased over

the period among large firms. The 45% of Fortune 1000 firms that reported profit/gain-sharing

systems in 1995 was up from 26% in 1987. Finally, fixed contribution pension plans grew in

the 1990 as well. Assuming that investment in company stock fell less rapidly or did not fall at

all, more workers had part of their retirement income tied to company performance.



2
    http://www.nceo.org/library/gss_2006_tables.html
3
    See NCEO, Employee Ownership Report Jan/Feb 2000, p 10
4
    Lebow, et al , table 3.
                                                                                                 10

   In short, although measures of variable compensation are incomplete, there is no gainsaying

that shared compensation mechanisms linking rewards to firm or group economic performance

rose in the 1990s and to some extent in the 1980s as well.

   Over roughly the same time period that compensation practices were changing, employee

involvement committees, teamwork, and other forms of empowering workers became the

cutting edge of labor relations in the US. Freeman, Kleiner and Ostroff’s (2000) analysis of

firms found a large increase in the number using various forms of employee involvement

activity between 1983 and 1993. Osterman’s 1994 survey of establishments found that 55

percent used work teams, 34 percent had Total Quality Management (TQM), and 41 percent

had quality circles, with most introduced in the late 1980s/early 1990s. One-third of the

workers in the 1995-1996 WRPS reported that they served on employee involvement

committees, defined broadly to include TQM, QC, and related groups; and 55 percent reported

that their firm had such committees (Freeman and Rogers, 1999).

Shared Compensation System and Employee Involvement

   Does the data support the prediction that financial sharing and employment involvement are

complementary ways of organizing work?

   Table 2 presents data from the WRPS on modes of compensation and shared decision-

making through employee involvement committees. With respect to compensation, we asked:

   On your main job do you ... Participate in an employee stock ownership or ESOP plan? ;

Work in an employee-owned company? ; Receive any bonuses based on profit sharing? ;

Receive any bonuses based on meeting workplace goals?

   Because the WRPS did not ask detailed questions about modes of financial sharing -- for

instance distinguishing 401k plans or stock purchase plans -- nor differentiate between gain-
                                                                                                     11

sharing and individual bonuses, the data is not ideal. Still, aggregated into broad categories, it

gives evidence on the coverage among workers of group incentive pay or ownership plans.

   The first column of Table 2 records the distribution of non-managerial workers according to

their modes of compensation. It shows that 54% of the sample reported at least one of the

variable forms of compensation, and that the incentive-based systems of pay were more

common than the ownership-based systems. The figures for ESOPs and ownership and

incentive bonuses are higher than those in Table 1 (in part perhaps because the WRPS covers

larger firms) with the result that the proportion of workers covered by at least one form of

shared compensation exceeds the estimate in Table 1.

   The final line in Table 2 records the proportion of non-managerial employees who serve on

employee involvement committees: 29.9%. Since the WRPS contained a full module on these

committees, and asked workers details about how the committees operated and what they

thought about them (see Freeman and Rogers, 1999, chapter 4), this is likely to be a reasonably

accurate measure, at least for the sample covered.

     The second column in Table 2 gives the percentage of workers on EI committees who are

paid with different forms of variable pay while the third column gives the percentage of

workers not on EI committees paid by the same forms. Overall, 66% of workers on EI

committees have some form of shared compensation compared to 34% of workers who are not

on those committees. A similar pattern is found for each of the individual forms of pay. The

difference in the distribution of compensation between workers with EI and those without EI

are statistically significant in this comparison, and remains so in analyses that control for

diverse covariates. Thus, the WRPS confirms the prediction that employee involvement

programs will be closely tied to financial sharing arrangements.
                                                                                                    12

    Figure 2 shows the complementarity among the forms of shared compensation and

employee involvement from a different perspective. It contrasts the proportion of workers

having various combinations of incentive pay, financial sharing, and shared decision-making

with the proportion that we would expect if the probability of having the different forms was an

independent draw from separate urns. Over twice as many workers report having all three

forms than would occur if they were independent, and more workers have neither financial nor

incentive systems nor EI committees than would be expected. The concentration of frequency

at the extremes is consistent with the hypothesis that these forms of workplace organization and

compensation are complementary.

   Table 3 examines the characteristics of workers and firms with shared compensation

systems and employee involvement activity. It reports the proportion of workers with specified

demographic characteristics in the sample and in two polar cases: workers who have an

ownership stake, profit/gain-sharing, and shared decision-making through EI committees; and

workers with none of the systems. The pattern is clear. Workers at companies with shared

decision making and compensation systems are better educated, more likely to be in the upper

quartile of the wage distribution, more likely to be male, and more than twice as likely to be

salaried than workers with none of the shared systems. In addition, the workers with all three

forms of sharing are disproportionately professionals, sales workers, and skilled trades persons,

and are disproportionately employed in manufacturing and finance, insurance, and real estate,

and are twice as likely to be in firms with over 1000 employees than those without any of these

programs. The bottom part of Table 3 shows that firms that share financial rewards with

employees and who have EI committees also have other “good” labor practices: personnel

policies, open door policies, town meetings and employee committees beyond EI committees.
                                                                                                   13


Relation to outcomes

   To see whether shared compensation practices and employee involvement activities affect

worker attitudes and behavior, we examine seven measures of attitudes and behavior from the

main body of the WRPS and two measures from the second wave of the survey5 that fit broadly

into four areas: productivity, satisfaction with workplace relations, attitudes toward the

company, and worker retention.

   The measures relating to productivity are the most problematic because the WRPS contains

worker reports on productivity-enhancing activity but not on actual productivity. The survey

asked workers how often they made productivity related suggestions and how often

management heeded them, coded on a four point scale, from least (1) to most (4). Since for a

suggestion to have an effect on productivity there workers have to make the suggestion and

management has to act on it, we took the product of these two responses as the first measure of

productivity-enhancing activity. This gives a variable that ranges from 1 to 16. The survey also

asked workers how much influence they exercise over workplace practices. This is our second

measure of productivity related activity. Our third measure, from the second wave of the

survey, asked workers to rate fellow employees on their concern for the success of the company

and willingness to take on new responsibilities and to work hard using a school grade scale

from A to E, which we coded as a rating from 1 to 5. These three measures are broadly

informative about the extent to which workers engage in productivity-enhancing activities at

their workplace.

   To determine how workers feel about their job, we selected four variables: whether workers

looked forward to going to work in the morning versus wishing they didn’t have to go; how

they rated labor-management relations at their firm; their satisfaction with the influence they
   5
    One-third of the WRPS respondents were asked a short follow-up set of questions,
constituting a smaller second wave sample. See Freeman and Rogers (1999).
                                                                                                       14

had at their workplace; and how they graded management’s treatment of employees using the

school grade scheme. We chose these variables to investigate whether shared compensation

and decision-making create a work atmosphere where workers feel that their voice is heard and

where management treats them fairly.

    To measure the general attitude that workers have towards their firm, we took a question on

the loyalty workers felt toward the firm and another on the degree of trust they had that the firm

would carry out its promises to workers. For worker retention, we use a question that asks how

likely an employee will remain at the same company.

    Finally, as a broad summary statistic of worker attitudes and possible behavior, we

constructed an average outcome measure that includes the productivity indicators, workplace

satisfaction, and attitude toward the firm, and likelihood of staying with the company, with the

variables given equal weight6.

    What does the data show about the relation between shared compensation and shared

decision-making practices and these outcomes?

    Row 1 of Table 4 reports the coefficients from a regression of our overall outcome measure

on the forms of compensation and employee involvement, and on an extensive set of covariates

that include the characteristics of workers (age, gender, etc) and of their firm (size, industry) as

described in the table footnote. In addition, the covariates include measures of labor relations

policies toward workers as groups and as individuals beyond shared capitalism and employee

involvement. These measures are based on the presence of particular policies at the firm and on

workers’ assessment of their effectiveness, as reported on the WRPS.7 We give the highest

score when firms have many practices that workers view as effective and lower scores when

6
  Since all other variables here are in a 1-4 scale, we multiply the 0-1 likelihood of staying with
the firm by 4 to ensure all variables get roughly an equal weight in the overall outcome
measure.
7
  Questions on the labor relations policies can be found in Freeman and Rogers (1999).
                                                                                                         15

firms have few practices or when workers view their practices as less effective. With these

measures of human resource practices in the equation, our estimates attribute to the shared

compensation and decision-making variables only the portion of the outcomes above and

beyond those associated with these other attributes of firms.

   Line 1 of the table shows that performance pay (PP), employee involvement (EI), and

ownership stake (OS) variables have statistically significant effects on the average outcome.

The table also shows that while shared decision making structures have an independent effect

on outcomes, the impact of compensation practices appears to be contingent on such decision

making structures. The firm has to empower workers to make decisions if it expects to gain

from shared compensation and ownership structures, consistent with the hypothesis that such

shared compensation schemes actually have incentive effects.

   We tested for complementarities by including interaction terms in the regressions – i.e., a

term for the presence both of an ownership stake and employee involvement committee, a term

for ownership and profit/gain-sharing, etc. Statistical tests reject the null hypothesis that there is

no added effect on outcome from complementarity between PP and EI at the 6% level and

reject the null of no interaction effects between PP and OS and EI and OS at weaker levels (15-

21%). Thus, the data support a complementary relation of the impact of the shared systems

variables on the average outcome.

   To examine the interactive effects of variables on outcomes more directly we replaced the

measures of each separate policy with mutually exclusive variables representing each possible

combination of practices, and regressed outcome variables on this new set of independent

variables. Rows 2 –13 of table 4 gives the regression coefficients on dummy variables

representing all the combinations of EI, Ownership, and Performance Pay. Here, EI means “EI

only,” “P” means “Performance Pay only,” “P,EI” means “Performance Pay and EI” and so on.
                                                                                                      16

Row 2 gives the coefficients on these variables on our overall outcome measure. Succeeding

lines give coefficients on separate outcomes grouped into our three categories.

   These calculations show that EI has a substantial and statistically significant link to all

outcomes, whereas the compensation variables by themselves have limited importance. But the

threefold combination of EI, ownership and performance pay is always statistically significant

and represents the numerically largest value in the overall outcome regression and in all of the

regressions for separate outcomes save one. To give a sense of the magnitudes of the effect, we

note that the standard deviation in the average outcome (row 1) is around 0.64 (see Appendix

B). The presence of EI by itself is associated with a 0.43 standard deviation gain, while the

presence of EI, O and P are associated with a gain of 0.66 standard deviation compared to

companies without any of the shared compensation and decision making schemes. The average

productivity variable shows a gain of 0.59 standard deviations for EI only and a gain of 0.76

standard deviations the EI/P/O combination.

   Looking at the underlying variables, the table shows that EI is critical for practices to affect

productivity related measures. Complementary compensation variables boost the productivity

indicators (productivity related suggestions, peer rating of effort, and the extent of influence in

productivity decisions) only when coupled with EI decision-making structure. In contrast,

attitudes toward companies are affected by shared compensation structures that include both

ownership and performance pay separately from EI. Finally, for the measures of worker

satisfaction EI always matters while compensation structures matter independently for some but

not all variables. In all cases, the combination of EI, ownership, and performance pay is

significant and quantitatively greater than individual effects and often than the sum thereof.

   The human resource policy variables enter significantly in our regressions, so that our

results on shared compensation and decision-making systems are an “add on” effect. The
                                                                                                      17

regressions in table 5 show that the efficacy of the human resource policies themselves is

related to the shared compensation and decision-making systems. The WRPS asked workers

about the effectiveness of four group-based HR policies: town meetings, open door policies,

employee committees independent of EI, and about HR policies toward individuals as a group.

We regressed workers’ assessment of the effectiveness of these programs on our shared

compensation and decision-making variables and a full set of demographic and company

controls. The regressions show that the efficacy of the human resource policies is higher in the

presence of shared compensation and decision-making systems with a pattern quite similar to

that found in Table 4. Since our measure of HR policies in those regressions included a

weighting of the variables by their effectiveness, at least part of the effect credited to HR

policies might be due compensation and decision making structures increasing their

effectiveness.

Probing the results

   Even in the presence of the proxies for human resource and personnel policies, the

regression results could reflect an unobservable latent variable that is correlated with the EI and

compensation policies, which would bias upwards the estimated impact of shared compensation

and decision-making on outcomes. “Good” firms, in particular, are likely to have both worker

friendly practices and policies and have workers who are reasonably satisfied with conditions,

and may be more likely to attract and retain more productive workers as well.8 Absent good

exclusion restrictions (variables which impact the incidence of the policies without directly

impacting outcome) we probe this possibility by exploiting the multiple outcomes that the

WRPS obtained for each person. We focus on the productivity variables on the grounds that

they are the most problematic measures and thus more likely to fail to stand up to probing than
   8
     The term “good” is only being used as a shortcut for a firm having a set of practices that
tend to produce a higher level of outcome in terms of worker satisfaction and participation.
                                                                                                        18

some of the others. We use a two-equation model to estimate the effect of the policy variables

on productivity net of the composite worker satisfaction variable. To the extent we expect the

general or attitudinal outcomes (such as company loyalty, job satisfaction, and worker-

management relations) to reflect an omitted “company effect,” using those variables as controls

better isolates the impact of EI and compensation structures on the productivity outcomes.

   However, simply including the attitudinal outcomes as independent variables in regressions

does not recover a lower bound on the effect of shared compensation and decision-making on

productivity because the measures of attitudes will be correlated with the error term in the

regression for productivity. To see this, let Y1i measure productivity, and Y2i be worker

satisfaction; ai is the latent company effect; X i is the vector of controls. Consider two equations:

   1) Y1i =b1(X i) + g1Di + (c1ai + e1i),

   2) Y2i =b2(X i) + g2Di + (c2ai + e2i)

   Our model allows F(ai, Xi) F(ai, Di), F(e1i, e2i) to be arbitrary. We assume that there is a

single unobservable factor ai correlated with the treatment status, Di, while the error e is

uncorrelated with treatment status. Moreover, the joint distribution of the error e and the

covariates Xi is independent of the treatment status.

   Substituting the second equation into the first gives the following:

   3) Y1i = (b1 – (c1/c2)b2)Xi + (c1/c2)Y2i (g1 – (c1/c2)g2)D i +(e1 – (c1/c2)e2)

   But if we regress Y1 on X, Y2 and D, we would not recover the desired lower bound g1 –

(c1/c2)g2 because our regressor Y2 is correlated with the error term e1 – (c1/c2)e2.

   Netting the productivity measures of the overall job satisfaction involves a two-step

procedure. The first step uses moment restrictions implicit in the single factor model to identify

the relative importance of the latent factor on the various outcomes. The second step uses this to

“net out” the latent factor. The formal derivation of this is in the Dube (2003). Here we
                                                                                                    19

describe the method. First we note that if we knew c1/c2, the following regression would

recover the lower bound on b1, g1 – (c1/c2)g2):

   4) Y1i – (c1/c2)Y2i = (b1 – (c1/c2)b2)Xi + (g1 – (c1/c2)g2)D i +(e1 – (c1/c2)e2)

   However, since we do not know (c1/c2), we must estimate it in another step. Under the

assumptions about the covariance structure invoked above, it can be shown that:
                                                                                      ½
   5) (c1/c2) =   ( [V(Y1i|X,D=1) –   V(Y1i|X,D=0)] / [V(Y2i|X,D=1) – V(Y2i|X,D=0)] ) .

   We estimate the equation above to recover (c1/c2) in step one, which is then used to estimate

the primary regression to recover a lower bound on b1, i.e., (b1 – (c1/c2)b2). Because (c1/c2) is

estimated, the OLS standard errors in the primary regression are not valid. Therefore, we use

bootstrapped standard errors for this estimation.

   Table 6 gives the coefficients from this exercise using the average of our productivity

variables as the dependent variable and the average of our satisfaction variables as the control

for the firm being ‘good”. The results show that even attributing all of the link between job

satisfaction and shared compensation variables to a latent variable does not eliminate the effect

of EI and the EI, P, O combination of policies on productivity outcomes. Moreover, the effects

of the EI, P, O combination continue to be larger than those of EI in isolation, supporting the

assertion that the compensation variables matter in conjunction with EI. While this single

omitted factor model cannot provide the confidence of an experiment, it is the toughest hurdle

that we could set up using unobservables and the main results pass it. At the minimum, it shows

that the policies impact productivity beyond their impact on worker satisfaction.

Propensity score test

   We also probe our results using propensity scores that relate the presence of the shared

capitalism pay and decision-making policies to covariates and then comparing outcome

variables within groups with similar propensity scores. Estimation involves collapsing the
                                                                                                     20

covariates into a single function – the propensity score, which is the probability of treatment

given the covariates. As demonstrated in Rubinstein and Rubin, the outcome conditional on the

propensity score is stochastically independent of the covariates.9If within the groups that have

similar probabilities of EI and shared compensation chance determines which workers have EI

and shared compensation and which do not, the propensity score technique identifies the effect

of the policies on the outcomes.

    Propensity score analysis can illuminate the patterns in the data in another way. Propensity

score techniques enable us to see whether there is enough overlap in observations with respect

to propensity scores (and hence the covariates) to make this analysis credible. Since the

estimator is a weighted average of within-propensity-score differences in mean outcomes, it

compares “similar companies” in coming up with the treatment effect estimate. Say that the

covariates X i that predict whether or not a worker has EI or receives shared compensation pay

are completely non-overlapping between workers with those policies and those without the

policies. Then identification of the treatment effect relies on extrapolation of the data to cover

the range of the covariates, and should be viewed with suspicion.

    We use a probit to estimate the propensity score for each of the following “treatment”

variables – EI only, P, O only, and EI,P,O. For each of these cases, propensity score strata are

created, and we check to see if the covariates are balanced (which they are). We then use

propensity-score matching to pick with replacement the closest untreated company for each

treated one. Table 6 reports the propensity score estimates of three of the policy categories – EI

only and EI,P,O. We find that the propensity score based coefficients are quite similar to the

coefficients using OLS, and are statistically significant at the 10% level for EI and EI,P,O

9
  Formally, let D measure the presence of the policies of interest, X be the covariates and Y be
the outcome variable and p(X) be the probability that an observation has the policies, then Σp(X)
(E(Y1i | p(X), D=1) - E(Y1i | p(X), D=0))w(p(X)) =
    Σp(X) (b1(X i,Di=1 ) – b1(X i,Di=0 ) + g1 )w(p(X)) = g1 + E X(b1(X i,Di=1 ) – b1(X i,Di=0 ))
                                                                                                    21

combinations. The results continue to hold when we look at differences between similar groups

of companies – all of which increases our confidence that shared compensation and decision-

making policies have real impacts on worker contributions to company performance.

Establishment data

     As noted, the measures of productivity in the WRPS are based on worker responses about

activity rather than on measured productivity for their establishment or workplace. To obtain

an alternative view of the link between shared compensation and decision-making on outcomes

at the establishment level, we examine data from the 2003 California Establishment Survey

(CES). This survey provides information on 1,080 establishments in 2003.10 It asked about the

use of shared stock ownership (ESOP and stock options) and profit sharing and about

organizational, including the use of “employee involvement” programs such as quality circles

and quality management programs. The CES asks about stock options besides ESOP’s but not

whether the companies are employee owned; and about profit sharing but not about gain

sharing or bonuses. With respect to output measures, the CES includes managements’

assessments of the extent of employee decision-making, product/service quality, and financial

performance, given on a 1 to 4 scale and employee retention, defined as 1 minus the annual

turnover rate.

     Table 7 shows the distribution of profit-sharing and stock ownership in the CES, with the

summary statistics weighted by firm size to give estimates of the proportion of overall



10
   This is a dataset of private sector businesses designed by the UC Berkeley Institute of
Industrial Relations, and conducted by the UC Berkeley Survey Research Center between May
and October of 2003. The sample included private and non-profit establishments with five or
more employees in California and excluded government agencies, public schools or
universities, and agriculture, forestry and fishing. The unit of observation was an establishment
(ie a single physical location at which employees work and business is conducted). A total of
2,806 establishments were sampled, with 2,200 meeting the eligibility criteria. The response
rate was 49.1 percent, giving the sample of 1,080 establishments.
                                                                                                    22

workforce in these programs. The incidence of EI is somewhat larger in the CES than in the

WRPS, while the shared compensation figures are somewhat lower—though they are similar to

other establishment level sources. But the incidence of EI by profit-sharing and ownership (not

shown in the table) has a pattern comparable to that in the WRPS. Appendix table B gives the

means and standard deviations of the outcome measures for the CES.

   The CES allows us to test whether shared compensation and shared decision-making are

associated with better establishment outcomes. To assess the impact of compensation and

decision-making on establishment-level outcomes, we regressed the management reported

measures of outcome on the same set of disaggregated combinations of EI, ESOP or stock

option ownership, and profit sharing variables used in the table 4 analysis of the WRPS. The

regressions include controls on firm size, age of establishment, two-digit level industry

dummies, four-part occupational distribution (share of workforce that is managerial, clerical,

sales, or blue-collar), share of workforce with college degrees, and share with collective

bargaining contracts. We also estimate the impact of the shared compensation and decision-

making variables on a summary outcome, which is simply the average of the four variables.

   Table 8 reports the results. Row 1 shows a pattern of regression coefficients for the impact

of shared compensation and decision-making variable on the average of all outcomes in the

CES data that resembles closely that found for their impacts on the average of all outcomes in

the WRPS data. By itself, EI has a positive statistically significant effect; but the combination

of EI, P and O has an impact two times that of EI by itself. This corresponds to a 0.58 standard

deviation gain—similar to the findings in WRPS. Row 2 shows that a formal EI program is

associated with managers reporting greater employee decision-making, but the combination of

performance pay, ownership and formal EI program has the greatest impact on employee

decision making, though its difference from EI by itself is numerically small. Row 3 of the table
                                                                                                    23

shows that the combination of EI and some type of shared compensation leads to the largest and

statistically significant effects on quality and financial performance. Row 4 shows that EI

increase employee retention; and that the combination of ownership, performance pay and EI is

associated with greater retention than other configurations.

   In sum, the results from the establishment survey support the finding from the WRPS that

shared compensation and decision-making systems are complementary ways to increase

participation and productivity at the workplace.

Conclusion

   This paper has found in two separate data sets, the worker-based WRPS and the

establishment based CES that: shared capitalist modes of compensation are complementary in

the sense that they more likely to be found together than if firms chose them independently; that

shared capitalist modes of pay are positively associated with shared modes of decision-making;

and that shared compensation and decision-making are complementary in the sense that they

have larger impacts on outcomes than they have separately. Although our results are based on

correlations rather than experimental variation, they are robust to some statistical tests for

unobserved “firm effects”. Since it is hard to square the effects of shared compensation

systems with theories of behavior in which free-riding is important, our findings point to

possible importance of corporate culture and related behavioral economic factors in

determining employee activity.
                                                                                                                                      24




Figure 1: Growth of Shared Compensation Systems

        Percentage of Wage and Salary Workers                   Percentage of Fortune 1000 Firms with
                      With ESOPS                                         Profit/Gain Sharing

   9                                     8          8         50                                    46
   8
   7                                                          40
   6
                                                              30             26
   5                           4
   4
                                                              20
   3
   2                                                          10
   1                  0
   0                                                           0
        Year       1975      1980       1990      1998                     1987                    1996


         Percantage of 350 Major Firm s Granting                    Percentage of Full Tim e Workers With
              Broad Based Stock Options                                          401K Plans


   20                                                         60                                     55
                                             15               50             41
   15
                                                              40
   10                                                         30
                  6
                                                              20
    5
                                                              10
    0                                                          0
                 1993                     1998                              1991                    1997



SOURCE: ESOP Employees from NCEO Employee Ownership Report, Jan-Feb.'00, p.9; Broad Based Stock Options: from Mercer&Co.
Executive Compensation Research Topics RT#10 - May26, 1998, p.5; Fortune 1000 Firms with Gain/Profit-Sharing from Employment Policy
Foundation "US Wage and Productivity Growth," 1998; Workers with 401K plans from US Statistical Abstract, 1999, Table 622
                                                                                                                   25


Figure 2: The Distribution of Shared Compensation and Decision-Making Systems


     50.00%

                                    44.90%                                Actual
     45.00%                                                               Predicted

     40.00%
                     36.20%
                                           34.60%
     35.00%

                      28.9
     30.00% 28.90%


     25.00%
                                                          22.50%
                                                                21.30%
     20.00%


     15.00%


     10.00%                                                                                8%

      5.00%                                                                      3.70%


      0.00%

              % of Workers        % of Workers           % of Workers           % of Workers
              with No Sharing     with Only One          with Two               with All Three
              System System       Sharing System         Sharing Systems        Sharing Systems
SOURCE: Calculated from WRPS (Workers Representation and Participation Survey). The predicted values treat
the proportion of workers with each of the shared systems as independent events. Thus, if 1/2 of the workers had
an EI system and 1/10th had some ownership, the predicted proportion with both systems would be 1/20th, the
predicted proportion with neither system would be 9/20ths and the predicted proportion with only one of the two
would be 1/2. The actual proportions are taken directly from the data.
                                                                                                                    26




Table 1: Percentage of Employees/Firms With Pay Related to Company/Group
         Performance


      Stock Ownership Programs                                      25% of nonagricultural
                                                                    work force
      Profit or Gain Sharing                                        25% of US work force

      Defined Contribution Pension Funds Invested heavily in        11% of US work force
      Company Stock
      Total With Any Form of Shared Compensation                    45% of US work force
      adjusted for overlap



SOURCE: For details, see Appendix Table A.

NOTE: If workers were covered by only one form of variable pay, our estimate would be the sum of the estimates
for the bold categories in the table: 61%, of which 50 percentage points consists of ownership and incentive pay.
But there is considerable overlap in coverage. On the basis of the the WRPS figures in table 2, we estimate that
the proportion of workers with any form of performance pay and ownership exceeds the sum of the proportions
covered by each form separately by 33% = (41.9+29.6)/53.8. Thus, we reduce the 50% to 38%. We do not have
data on the overlap with the estimated 11% of workers with 401k or other plans with sizable amounts of company
shares, but anticipate that this will be modest, giving us the 45% in the text.
                                                                                                        27




 Table 2: Proportion of Workers with Shared Compensation Systems, full sample, and by
         presence of Employee Involvement


                                           Full Sample (%)     With EI (%)    Without EI (%)
       Any Compensation Structure          53.8                66.1           33.9


       Performance Pay                     41.9                53             37
          Profit Sharing                   28.9                39.9           24.1
          Gainsharing                      26.2                32.8           23.3

       Ownership                           29.6                40.2           25
         ESOP                              23                  34.5           18
         Employee Owned                    11.2                13.1           10.4

       Employee Involvement                29.9                100            0



SOURCE: WRPS Survey, in What Workers Want. For exact wording of relevant WRPS questions, see Appendix
B1.
                                                                                                28




Table 3: Demographic, Occupational, Industrial and Firm Level Characteristics by
         Extent of Shared Compensation Schemes


 A. Demographic, Occupational and Industrial Characteristics

                                                   Full Sample   Nothing   Everything P,O,EI)
    College Educ.                                  0.26          0.21      0.35
    High Wage                                      0.24          0.19      0.38
    Male                                           0.54          0.50      0.64
    Salaried                                       0.31          0.22      0.46
    Age                                            37.81         36.27     38.39
    Occupations:
      Professional                                 0.24          0.20      0.27
      Clerical                                     0.19          0.20      0.14
      Sales                                        0.10          0.07      0.16
      Manuf. Representative                        0.03          0.01      0.04
      Service Worker                               0.10          0.14      0.04
      Skilled Tradesman                            0.15          0.15      0.17
      Semi-skilled Worker                          0.10          0.11      0.10
      Laborer                                      0.09          0.11      0.08
      Other                                        0.01          0.01      0.01
    Industries:
    Agriculture./Forestry/Fishing                  0.02          0.02      0.02
    Mining                                         0.01          0.01      0
    Construction                                   0.05          0.06      0.04
    Manufacturing                                  0.27          0.23      0.39
    Transport/Public Utilities/Communications      0.09          0.06      0.08
    Wholesale Trade                                0.05          0.04      0.05
    Retail Trade                                   0.16          0.18      0.12
    FIRE                                           0.08          0.06      0.16
    Health Services                                0.11          0.13      0.06
    Business Services/Law                          0.07          0.07      0.05
    Educational, social services/membership orgs   0.05          0.09      0.01
    Hotels                                         0.01          0.02      0.01
    Amusement/Recreation Services                  0.00          0.01      0.00
    Personal Services                              0.01          0.01      0.00
    Misc.                                          0.00          0.00      0.00
    Other                                          0.01          0.01      0.01
    No Answer                                      0.02          0.02      0.01
                                                                                                        29




Table 3: Demographic, Occupational, Industrial and Firm Level Characteristics by
         Extent of Shared Compensation Schemes (Continued)


 B. Firm characteristics

                                                 Full Sample    Nothing      Everything P,O,EI)
      Firm Size:
       <25                                       0.00           0.00         0.00
       25-99                                     0.21           0.27         0.09
       100-499                                   0.25           0.27         0.21
       500-999                                   0.11           0.10         0.09
       >1000                                     0.44           0.36         0.60
     Personnel Dept                              0.71           0.61         0.87
     Open Door Policy (Individual)               0.87           0.81         0.92
     Grievance Procedure                         0.36           0.34         0.44
     Town Meeting                                0.49           0.34         0.76
     Open Door Policy (Groups)                   0.66           0.56         0.83
     Employee Committee                          0.40           0.28         0.61

 SOURCE: a) SOURCE: WRPS, What Workers Want. For full distribution, see Appendix Tables A1 and A2; b)
 WRPS, What Workers Want. For full distribution, see Table 3.9.
                                                                                                                       30




Table 4: Regression Estimates of the Impact of Ownership, Performance Pay and EI on
         Outcomes


                                   EI            P            O        P,O       P,EI         O,EI        P,O,EI
1.Average, All Outcomes:         0.09 **      0.11 ***     0.07 **
                               (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.04)

2. Average, All Outcomes:     0.28 ***        0.11 **      0.01        0.18 ***   0.26 ***     0.26 ***     0.42 ***
                            (0.06)          (0.05)       (0.07)      (0.06)     (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.06)
Productivity Related Outcomes:

3. AVERAGE                       0.44 ***     0.09         0.01        0.01       0.38 ***     0.42 ***     0.57 ***
                               (0.07)       (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.07)     (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.07)

4. Productive Suggestions        0.55 ***     0.15 *      -0.02       -0.04       0.46 ***     0.53 ***     0.77 ***
                               (0.09)       (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.10)       (0.11)       (0.10)

5. Overall Influence at Job      0.35 ***     0.03         0.04        0.09       0.32 ***     0.32 ***     0.39 ***
                               (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.09)       (0.09)       (0.08)
5. Effort of Fellow
Employees †                      0.07         0.09         0.01        0.05       0.06         0.12         0.35 ***
                               (0.10)       (0.09)       (0.10)      (0.15)     (0.12)       (0.17)       (0.11)
Worker Satisfaction Related Outcomes:

6. AVERAGE                       0.19 ***     0.06         0.06        0.09       0.17 ***     0.19 **      0.33 ***
                               (0.06)       (0.05)       (0.07)      (0.06)     (0.06)       (0.08)       (0.06)
7. Overall Satisfaction with
Workplace Influence              0.26 ***     0.07         0.04        0.11       0.26 ***     0.18         0.35 ***
                               (0.07)       (0.07)       (0.09)      (0.08)     (0.08)       (0.11)       (0.08)

8. Overall Job Satisfaction      0.14 *       0.07         0.04        0.14 *     0.05         0.23 **      0.24 **
                               (0.08)       (0.07)       (0.10)      (0.08)     (0.09)       (0.11)       (0.09)
9. Management-Employee
Relations                        0.17 *       0.02         0.09        0.02       0.19 *       0.13         0.38 ***
                               (0.09)       (0.07)       (0.09)      (0.09)     (0.10)       (0.13)       (0.10)
10.Composite "Grade" for
Management †                     0.16         0.09         0.11        0.09       0.21         0.36 **      0.40 ***
                               (0.12)       (0.11)       (0.14)      (0.15)     (0.13)       (0.17)       (0.13)
                                                                                                                             31




Table 4: Regression Estimates of the Impact of Ownership, Performance Pay and EI on
         Outcomes Continued)




                                  EI            P            O        P,O         P,EI          O,EI         P,O,EI

       Attitudes towards Company:
11. Reported Loyalty
Towards Company               0.17 **        0.07          0.08       0.17 **      0.24 ***     0.11           0.29 ***
                            (0.08)         (0.06)        (0.09)     (0.08)       (0.08)       (0.11)         (0.08)
12. Reported Trust
Towards Company               0.30 **        0.11          0.24 *     0.21 *       0.23 *       0.20           0.34 **
                            (0.11)         (0.10)        (0.13)     (0.12)       (0.12)       (0.16)         (0.13)
13. Likely to Keep
Working in Company            0.10 **        0.11 ***     -0.02       0.21 ***   0.14 **        0.13 **        0.18 ***
                            (0.04)         (0.04)        (0.05)     (0.04)     (0.05)         (0.06)         (0.05)

 NOTES: (1) All regressions include controls for: age, education, sex, race, experience, union membership, tenure, firm
 size, occupation (9 categories), industry (15 categories), salaried/non salaried status, as well as individual and group-
 based human resource practices; “AVERAGE” Productivity is a composite based on “ productive suggestions” and
 “overall influence at job,” and “AVERAGE” Satisfaction is a composite based on “Overall satisfaction with
 workplace influence,” “Overall Job Satisfaction” and “Management Employee Relations.” (2) Robust standard errors
 are within parentheses. (3) Statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *,
 respectively. (4) All regressions use WRPS sample weights (5) Other variables not used for the “AVERAGES” if they
 were from the smaller Wave 2 subsample as indicated by (†).

 SOURCE: WRPS Waves 1 and 2.
                                                                                                                    32




Table 5: Regression Estimates of the Impact of Ownership, Performance Pay and EI on
         the Effectiveness of Human Resource Practices


                            EI          P        O        P,O     P,EI       O,EI       P,O,EI

Effectiveness of Group
based HR Policies
 "Town Meetings"           0.10       0.05     0.11       0.16     0.22 ** 0.22           0.36 ***
                         (0.10)     (0.10)   (0.13) *** (0.10)   (0.10)    (0.14)       (0.10)
 Open Door Policies
 for Groups                0.14 *     0.06     0.02       0.12     0.19 ** 0.36 *** 0.41 ***
                         (0.08)     (0.08)   (0.11)     (0.09)   (0.08)    (0.11)  (0.08)
 Employee
 Committees                0.32 *** 0.17       0.17       0.20     0.15       0.27 **     0.42 ***
                         (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.13)     (0.12)   (0.12)     (0.13)      (0.12)
Effectiveness of
Individual based HR
Policies                   0.32 *** 0.17       0.17       0.20     0.15       0.27 **     0.42 ***
                         (0.11)    (0.11)    (0.13)     (0.12)   (0.12)     (0.13)      (0.12)

NOTES: (1) All regressions include controls for: age, education, sex, race, experience, union membership, tenure,
firm size, plant size, occupation (9 categories), industry (15 categories), and salaried/non salaried status. (2)
Robust standard errors are within parentheses. (3) Statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% levels is
indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. (4) All regressions use WRPS sample weights.

SOURCE: WRPS Wave 1
                                                                                                                         33




Table 6: Robustness Checks--Controlling for Company Effect in Regressions, and Estimates
         using Propensity Score Matching


                                                                                                       Controls for
                                                                                                        "Company
                                EI             P         O     P,O     P,EI        O,EI         P,O,EI     Effect"

  OLS estimates:
  1. Average Productivity     0.41 ***    0.08      0.02      0.03      0.4 ***    0.43 ***    0.56 ***    N
                            (0.07)       (0.05)    (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.08)      (0.09)      (0.07)

  2. Average Productivity
  (after subtracting          0.24 *** 0.02          0.06     -0.05     0.26 *** 0.26 ***    0.3 ***       Y
  weighted “Average         (0.07)    (0.06)       (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.08)    (0.09)    (0.08)
  Satisfaction”)
  Propensity Score Matching Estimates:

  3. Average Productivity     0.38 ***     -         -         0.01     -           -           0.62 ***   N
                            (0.08)         -         -       (0.08)     -           -         (0.12)
  4. Average Productivity
  (after subtracting
  weighted “Average           0.26 ***     -         -        -0.05     -           -           0.35 **    Y
  Satisfaction”)            (0.06)         -         -       (0.08)     -           -         (0.14)

  NOTE: (1) All regressions use controls for: age, education, sex, race, experience, union membership, tenure,
  firm size, plant size, occupation (9 categories), industry (15 categories), and salaried/non salaried status. (2)
  Bootstrapped standard errors are within parentheses (100 replicates). (3) Statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and
  10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. (4) “Average Productivity” is a composite variable based
  on “ productive suggestions” and “overall influence at job”; “Average Satisfaction” is a composite variable based
  on “Overall satisfaction with workplace influence,” “Overall Job Satisfaction” and “Management Employee
  Relations” (see Table 5).

  SOURCE: WRPS Wave 1
                                                                                              34




Table 7: Extent of Participation in Employee Involvement and Shared Compensation in
         Establishment-Level Data, California Establishment Survey 2003


                                               Proportion of Workers Participation in …
                                                    Stock                             Stock
                                  EI                Ownership        Profit Sharing Options


None                              64.15%            89.26%          78.32%         88.97%
 Under 25%                        6.79%             5.11%           4.68%          4.39%
 25% to 49%                       6.47%             1.36%           2.68%          1.29%
 50% to 74%                       2.20%             1.18%           1.71%          0.64%
 75% to 99%                       1.65%             0.92%           1.23%          0.46%
 All                              18.74%            2.17%           11.39%         4.25%
Some                              35.85%            10.74%          21.68%         11.03%

SOURCE: California Establishment Survey 2004
                                                                                                                       35




Table 8: Regression Estimates of the Impact of Ownership, Performance Pay and EI on
         Outcomes in Establishment-Level Data


                                 EI            P          O        P,O         P,EI        O,EI     P,O,EI
1. Average Outcome             0.12 **      0.01       0.09       -0.09        0.14 **      0.22 *** 0.23 ***
                             (0.05)       (0.07)     (0.06)      (0.08)      (0.06)       (0.06)     (0.07)

2. Extent of Participation
in Decision-Making        0.28 ***          0.15 *     0.13 **     0.13        0.23 ***     0.24 ***     0.36 ***
                        (0.05)            (0.08)     (0.07)      (0.09)      (0.07)       (0.08)       (0.08)
3. Quality Performance    0.12              0.03       0.08       -0.03        0.22 **      0.35 **      0.27 *
                        (0.09)            (0.12)     (0.11)      (0.17)      (0.11)       (0.13)       (0.14)
4. Financial Performance 0.13              -0.04       0.15       -0.31        0.21         0.33 **      0.32 *
                        (0.11)            (0.25)     (0.13)      (0.19)      (0.13)       (0.14)       (0.17)
5. Employee Retention     0.06              0.05       0.10 *      0.07        0.06         0.08         0.14 **
                        (0.04)            (0.07)     (0.05)      (0.07)      (0.05)       (0.07)       (0.06)


NOTE: (1) All regressions include controls for: firm-size (5 categories), 2-digit industries, percent of workforce
with college degrees, percent of workforce managerial/clerical/sales/blue-collar, percent of workforce unionized,
and age of establishment. (2) Robust standard errors are within parentheses. (3) Statistical significance at the 1%,
5% and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. (4) Average Outcome is constructed by averaging
across the four specific outcomes.

SOURCE: California Establishment Survey, 2004.
                                                                                                36

                                            References

Akerlof, George and Janet Yellen, 1990, “The Fair Wage-Effort Hypothesis and Unemployment,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2): 255-283.

American Compensation Association, 2000, Compensation Survey:
  www.acaonline.org/resources/generic/html/aca-salarysurvey-99-2000.html.

Association for Quality and Participation Survey, “The rise of broadly granted employee stock
   options”: cited by NCEO.org/library/option fact.html.

Black, Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch, 1997, “How to Compete: The Impact of Workplace Practices
   and Information Technology on Productivity,” NBER Working Paper # 6120, August.

Blasi, Joseph and Douglas Kruse, 1991, The New Owners: The Mass Emergence of Employee
   Ownership in Public Companies and What it Means to American Business, New York, NY:
   Harper Business.

Brickley, J.A., and Hevert, K.T, 1991, “Direct Employee Stock Ownership: An Empirical
    Investigation,” Financial Management, Summer: 70-84.

Capelli, Peter and David Neumark, 1999, “Do ‘High Performance’ Work Practices Improve
   Establishment-Level Outcomes?” NBER Working Paper # 7374, October.

Chandler, Alfred, 1977, The Visible Hand. Cambridge, MA: Bellknap Press.

Collins, Dennis, 1998, Gainsharing and Power: Lessons from Six Scanlon Plans, Ithaca, NY and
   London: Cornell University Press, ILR Press.

Dube, Arindrajit, 2003, “Identifying a lower bound on the Treatment Effect with Multiple
   Outcomes” Working Paper.

Economic Benefit Research Institute, 2000, EBRI Issue Brief # 218, February.

Economic Policy Foundation, 1998, “US Wage and Productivity Growth” Washington, April 16.

Freeman, Richard and Joel Rogers, 1999, What Workers Want, New York, NY: Russell Sage and
   Cornell University Press.

Freeman, Richard and Morris Kleiner, 1998, “The Last American Shoe Manufacturers: Changing the
   Method of Pay to Survive Foreign Competition,” NBER Working Paper # 6750, October.

Freeman, Richard, Morris Kleiner and Sherrie Ostroff, 2000, “The Anatomy and Growth of
   Employer Involvement Programs,” NBER Working Paper # w8050, December.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier, “What People Don’t Know About Their Pensions and
   Social Security: An Analysis Using Linked Data from the Health and Retirement Study,” NBER
   Working Paper # 7368, September.

Hewitt Resources: The Hewitt 401k Index observations: www.hewitt.com/resc/resc055.htm
                                                                                                  37

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw and Giovanna Prennushi, 1997,“The Effects of Human Resource
   Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,” American Economic
   Review, 87(3): 291-313.

Kardas, Peter, Adria L. Scharf and Jim Keogh, 1998, “Wealth and Income Consequences of
   Employee Ownership: A Comparative Study from Washington State,” Draft, Washington State
   Department of Community, Trade, and Economic Development.

Kato, Takao, 1999, “Report on Changing Participatory Programs in Japan,” NBER, Mimeo.

Kruse, Douglas, 1993, Profit Sharing: Does It Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
   Institute for Employment Research.

Lawler, Edward E., Susan A. Mohrman, and Gerald E. Ledford, 1995, Creating High Performance
   Organizations, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lazear, Edward, 1999, “Output-based pay: Incentives or Sorting?” NBER Working Paper #7419,
   November.

Lebow, David, Louise Sheiner, Larry Slifman, Martha Star-McCluer, 1999, “ Recent Trends in
   Compensation Practices” Federal Reserve Bank, July 15.

National Center for Employee Ownership, 2000, Employee Ownership Report, Jan/Feb.

Newsweek, 1999, Newsweek Poll, June 24-25: www.pollingreport.come/workplay.htm.

Osterman, Paul, 1994, “How Common Is Workplace Transformation and Who Adopts It?,”
   Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 47(2):173-88.

Profit Sharing Council of America, 1993, 36th Annual Survey of Profit Sharing and 401(k) Plans,
   Chicago, IL: PSCA.

Schaller, W.L., 2001, “Jumping Ship: Legal Issues Relating to Employee Mobility in High
   Technology Industries,” Labor Lawyer, Summer.

Simon, H, 1957, “A Formal Theory of the Employment Relation,” Chapter 11 in Models of Man:
   Social and Rational, New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 1998, Employee Benefits: 1997 Edition, Washington, D.C.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1999, Statistical Abstract 1999, Table 622.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1999, “Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Establishments,
   1997,” Press Release USDL-99-02, January 7.

US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1997, Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Establishments.

Watson, Wyatt, 2000, “Survey of Top Management Compensation,”
  www.watsonwyatt.com/homepage/us/new/pres_rel/Jan00/execpay_2.htm.
                                                                                                                     38


Appendix Table A: Calculating the Percentage of Employees/Firms With Pay Related to
Company/Group Performance

Stock Ownership Programs (about 25% of nonagricultural work force)
1. Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPS)and Stock Bonus Plans (1998)
(8.5 million workers)                                                                  8% of nonag empl

2 All Employee Stock Option Plans (1999)             (7.0 - 10.0 million workers)      8 % of nonag empl

3. Receive Stock Options or opportunity to buy company stock (1999)                    26% of work force

4. Workers Eligible for options from 1352 large firms, 1999                            19% of covered

5. Firms Offering Stock-Based Compensation, ACA Compensation Survey 1999-2000
                                              Nonexempt                        Exempt
                                         Hourly nonunion Salaried     Salaried officers/execs
Stock Option                             22              26             66              94
Co Stock Purchase                        57              56             63              64
Stock Grant                                6              6             22              48
Phantom Stock                              1             1               5              16
Co Stock via 401k                        68              72             73              72

6. Fortune 1000 companies offering options to 60% or more workers                      13%

Profit/Gain-Sharing (around 25% of US work force)
7 Workers in Medium and Large establishments with deferred profit-sharing, 1997        19% of work force

8 Profit/Gain Sharing in Fortune 1000 (1996)                                           45% of firms

9 Firms with some profit-sharing, 1993-1998                                            33%-40% of firms

10 Receive bonus based on own performance or company performance                       43% of work force

Defined Contribution Pension Funds Invested in Company Stock (11% of work force)

11 Employees with 401k plans                                                           55% of full time workers in priv.
                                                                                       nonfarm estab.
12 Estimated Proportion of 401k Assets in company stock
         a) EBRI estimate, 1998                                                        17.7%
         b) Hewitt estimate, 1999                                                      23.3%
13. Savings and thrift plans, % of workers in plans that allow for investment in company stock
          Firm contribution                                                            42%
         Worker contribution                                                           46%

Overall Variable Pay Practices, FRB Survey

                                                              All Workers       Managers          Professionals
14. Percentage of 125 Major Corporations (1999)
         Any Type                                                      88%             85%              69%
         Stock Options                                                 34%             33%               7%
         Profit-Sharing                                                50%             48%              44%
         Performance bonus                                             75%             69%              41%


SOURCE for Appendix A:
Line 1: National Center for Employee Ownership, Employee Ownership Report, Jan/Feb 2000, p 9
Line 2: National Center for Employee Ownership, private communication
Line 3: Newseek Poll, June 24-25, 1999 www.pollingreport.come/workplay.htm
                                                                                                                 39

Line 4: Watson Wyatt, Survey of Top Management Compensation,
www.watsonwyatt.com/homepage/us/new/pres_rel/Jan00/execpay_2.htm
Line 5: ACA, Compensation Survey, of 2,683 US companies;208 Canadian Companies. See
www.acaonline.org/resources/generic/html/aca-salarysurvey-99-2000.html. Number of responding firms ranged from
516 to 896
Line 6: Association for Quality and Participation Survey, cited by NCEO.org/library/option fact.html, “The rise of
broadly granted employee stock options”.
Line 7: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Establishments, 1997, table 1; sum of
percent reported deferred profit-sharing in various forms.
Line 8: Economic Policy Foundation “US Wage and Productivity Growth” Washington, April 16, 1998
Line 9: US Chamber of Commerce (1988); Doug Kruse, 1993, pp 8-10.
Line 10: Newsweek Poll, June 24-25, 1999 www.pollingreport.come/workplay.htm
Line 11: US Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract 1999, table 622
Line 12: Economic Benefit Research Institute, EBRI Issue Brief Number 218, February 2000
Hewitt Resources: The Hewitt 401k Index observations, page 2 www.hewitt.com/resc/resc055.htm
Line 13: US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employee Benefits in Medium and Large Establishments, 1997, table 155
Line 14: Survey by FRB, Lebow, Sheiner, Slifman,Starr-McCluer, table 1.
                                                                          40


Appendix B Means and Std Deviations of Outcome Measures in WRPS and CES

                                                Mean   Std. Dev
WRPS Outcomes

Average Outcome                                 2.84   0.64

Productivity AVERAGE                            2.65   0.74
Productive Suggestions                          2.45   0.96
Overall Influence in Job                        2.87   0.85
Effort of Fellow Employees                      2.34   0.60

Satisfaction AVERAGE                            2.74   0.63
Overall Satisfaction with Workplace Influence   2.92   0.85
Overall Job Satisfaction                        2.42   0.86
Management-Employee Relations                   2.87   0.94
Composite "Grade" for Management                1.88   0.79

Reported Loyalty towards Company                3.34   0.82
Reported Trust Towards Company                  3.10   0.90
Likely to Keep Working in Company               0.58   0.49


Effectiveness of:
"Town Meetings                                  3.01   0.77
Open Door Policies for Groups                   3.18   0.72
Employee Committees                             3.15   0.68
Individual based HR Policies                    3.00   0.82

CES Outcomes

Average Outcome                                 1.85   0.40

Extent of Participation in Decision-Making      0.53   0.40
Quality Performance                             3.36   0.65
Financial Performance                           2.79   0.89
Employee Retention                              0.71   0.67
                                                                                                               41


  Appendix C
  Table C1: Relevant WRPS Questions for Table 2
  For compensation practices, the following question was asked:
  D16. On your (main) job, do you ... (READ ITEMS, IN ORDER) (answer yes/know/don’t know)
  d16a. Receive any bonuses based on profit sharing?
  d16b. Receive any bonuses based on meeting workplace goals?
  d16c. Participate in an employee stock ownership or ESOP plan?
  d16d. Work in an employee-owned (company/organization)?

  For Employee Involvement, the following two questions were asked. Only those answering yes to q24 were
  coded as being in EI programs.
  q23. Some companies are organizing workplace decision-making in new ways to get employees more
  involved — using things like self-directed work teams, total quality management, quality circles, or other
  employee involvement programs. Is anything like this now being done in your (company/organization)?
   1 Yes (GO TO Q24)
   2 No
   9 Don’t know/refused
  q24 (ASK ONLY IF RESPONSE TO Q23 = 1) Are you personally involved in any of these programs at
  work?
   1 Yes
   2 No - GO TO Q27
   9 Don’t know/refused - GO TO Q27

  Table C2: Relevant WRPS Questions for Tables 4, 5, 6
  Questions asked to respondents, and definitions of various indices:
  All the four point outcome variables were reordered (so that more is better) for the regressions. Below we
  report the actual questions used in the Survey, as well as different weighting schemes when appropriate.
  Unless otherwise reported, all “don’t know” responses are coded as missing data.

  OUTCOME VARIABLES:
  1) “Loyalty to Company”:
  q9c. And, how much loyalty would you say you feel toward the (company/organization) you work for as a
  whole—a lot, some, only a little, or no loyalty at all?
   1 A lot of loyalty
   2 Some loyalty
   3 Only a little loyalty
   4 No loyalty at all

  2)”Trust towards Company”:
  q10a. (ASK OF FORM A ONLY) In general, how much do you trust your (company/organization) to keep
  its promises to you and other employees? Would you say you trust your (company/organization)? (READ)
    1 A lot
    2 Somewhat
    3 Only a little
    4 Not at all
    9 Don’t know/refused (DO NOT READ)

3) “Index Rating of Management”: This was constructed by taking the summated ratings (where A=5,...,F=0) on
the following three questions, and then scaling by 4/15 to make the final outcome on a 1-4 scale.:

  16A. If you were to rate the performance of management in your company on a scale similar to school grades
  ( A for excellent, B for good, C for Fair, D for Poor and F for failure ) what grade would you give
  MANAGEMENT in the following areas? (ROTATE ITEMS)
  * Concern for employees
  * Giving fair pay increases and benefits
                                                                                                              42

* Willingness to share power and authority

4) “Management Employee Relations”
q11. Do you think relations between employees and management at your (company/
organization) are BETTER than average, WORSE than average, or about the SAME as in
other places?
 1 Better
 2 Worse
 3 About the same
 9 Don’t know/Refused

5) “Job Satisfaction”: (This was coded as follows, “1" was coded as 4 “8" as 2.5, and “2" as 1.)
q8. On an average day, what best describes your feeling about going to work? Would you say
you usually… [READ AND ROTATE CATEGORIES 1 AND 2]
 1 Look forward to it
 2 Wish you didn'  t have to go
 8 Don’t care one way or the other/mixed feelings (VOLUNTEERED)
 9 Don’t know/refused

6) “Overall Reported Satisfaction with Influence”
q14_1,2,3,4.Now I want to ask about your involvement in decisions on the job. Overall, how satisfied are you
with the influence you have in company decisions that affect your job or work life? Would you say you are …
(READ)
 1 Very satisfied
 2 Somewhat satisfied
 3 Not too satisfied
 4 Not satisfied at all
 9 Don’t know/refused (READ)

7) “Effort of Fellow Employees” (Wave 2) : This was constructed by taking the summated ratings (where
A=5,...,F=0) on the following questions and then scaling by 4/15 to make the final outcome on a 1-4 scale.:

16B. If you were to rate the performance of employees in your company on a scale similar to
school grades (A for excellent, B for good, C for Fair, D for Poor and F for failure) what
grade would you give EMPLOYEES in the following areas? (ROTATE ITEMS)
*Willingness to work hard; *Concern for the success of the company; *Willingness to take on new
responsibilities

8) “Overall Influence at Job:” This is a summated rating of 3 questions. But there are two versions asked
depending of the 1st of second random half of form A.
q12a. (ASK OF FORM A ONLY) (Now I want to ask about your involvement in different decisions on the
job.) How much direct involvement and influence do YOU have in (ITEM)? (A lot, Some, Only a little, No)
direct involvement and influence at all? (ASK ITEMS a-d ONLY OF THE FIRST HALF OF THE
FORM AND ITEMS e-h ONLY OF THE SECOND HALF OF THE FORM). (Responses: 1 A lot of
direct involvement and influence, 2 Some direct involvement and influence, 3 Only a little direct involvement
and influence, 4 No direct involvement and influence, 5 Does not apply (VOLUNTEERED), 9 Don’t
know/refused)
q12aa. Deciding HOW to do your job and organize the work
q12ab. Deciding what TRAINING is needed for people in your work group or department
q12ab. Deciding what TRAINING is needed for people in your work group or department
q12ae. Setting GOALS for your work group or department
q12ad. Deciding how much of a RAISE in pay the people in your work group should get
q12ae. Setting GOALS for your work group or department

9) “Suggestions” : This is a weighted summated rating index. The primary question is:
                                                                                                            43

q17. (IF S6=4) How often, if ever, do YOU make suggestions to your supervisor or to
management about how to improve quality or productivity? Would you say you make
such suggestions ...(READ)
 1 Often
 2 Sometimes
 3 Hardly ever
 4 Never
 9 Don’t know/refused (DO NOT READ)

This was weighted by the perception of how often these suggestions are listened to. The question is:
q18. (IF S6=4) When you, or other employees like you, make suggestions about improving
quality or productivity, how often does management take them seriously? Would you say
management ... (READ)
 1 Almost always
 2 Sometimes
 3 Hardly ever
 4 Never… takes them seriously?
 9 Don’t know/refused (DO NOT READ)

9) “Worker Retention” is a variable that takes on 0 or 1 depending on whether the respondent says s/he is
likely to remain with the company (i.e., responses 1 and 2) to the following question:

q7. Which ONE of the following four statements best describes how you think of your
CURRENT job? Is it...
1 A LONG-TERM job you will stay in?
2 An opportunity for ADVANCEMENT in this SAME (company/organization)?
3 Part of a CAREER or profession that will probably take you to DIFFERENT
companies?,
4 A job you will probably LEAVE that is NOT part of a career?
5 Other
9 Don’t know/refused

10) “Overall Outcome” is an averaged rating of all the previous variables (scaled to a 1-4 scale) with the
following caveats. (9) and (7) were asked of different people so we combined them to make a single question
about influence. Also, (3) and (8) were asked of a subsample, so these were not included. (However, we did
construct the same variable including (3) and (8) for the subsample: results were similar).

11) The Effectiveness of various HR programs came from the following questions:

Individual:
q29. On a different subject, I want to ask how problems involving INDIVIDUAL
EMPLOYEES are solved at your workplace. Which of the following, if any, does your
(company/organization) have? (READ AND ROTATE) (Responses: 1 Yes, 2 No, 9 Don’t know/refused)
q29a. A PERSONNEL or human resources department
q29b. An OPEN DOOR policy so employees can tell upper management about problems with their immediate
supervisors
q29c. A GRIEVANCE procedure that uses an outside referee or arbitrator to settle disputes

q32. OVERALL, how effective is your (company'
                                            s/organization'
                                                          s) system for resolving the
problems INDIVIDUAL employees have at work? Would you say it is… (READ)
 1 Very effective
 2 Somewhat effective
 3 Not too effective
 4 Not effective at all
 9 Don’t know/refused (DO NOT READ)
                                                                                                               44

The HR_Individual control variable for the outcomes regression was constructed by summing over q29a
through q29c, and multiplying the sum by q32.

Group:
q36. Now let'  s talk about company policies regarding wages, benefits, and other things
affecting employees as a GROUP. Which of the following, if any, does your
(company/organization) have to deal with issues that affect employees as a group? (First,)
(is/are) there... (READ) (Responses: 1 Yes, 2 No, 9 Don’t Know/Refused to Answer)
q36a. Regular "town" meetings with employees, called by management
q36b. An open door policy for GROUPS of employees to raise issues about policies with upper management
q36c. A committee of employees that discusses problems with management on a regular basis

q37. (ASK FOR EACH ITEM WHERE Q36=1) How effective (has/have) (ITEM) been in
resolving group problems or concerns – very effective, somewhat effective, not too
effective, not effective at all? (Responses: 1 Very effective, 2 Somewhat effective, 3 Not too effective, 4 Not
effective at all, 9 Don’t know/Refused to answer)
q37a. the “town” meetings
q37b. the open door policy
q27c. the employee committee

The HR_Grp control variable for the outcomes regression was created by summing up the (weighted)
incidences of the various group based HR policies, i.e., q37a*q36a + ... + q37c*q36c.

Table C3: Questions from CES (for Table 8)
QL5a: What percentage of NON-MANAGERIAL AND NON-SUPERVISORY workers are involved in
regularly scheduled meetings to discuss work-related problems:
* none of them,
* less than
* more than 75% but less than all of them
* all of them? %

QL2a: How about the quality of product or service? Would you assess this quality at your workplace as:

* A lot better than average
* Better than average
* Average
* Below average
* A lot below average

QL2b: How about financial performance? Would you assess this quality at your workplace as:
* A lot better than average
* Better than average
* Average
* Below average
* A lot below average

QD3:
How many employees at this location left the worksite in
the past year? (We divided this by the number of employees to get the attrition rate, and took 1-attrition rate to
be the “retention rate.”
