NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DAYS OF HAZE: ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION DISCLOSURE AND INTERTEMPORAL
AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR
Joshua Graff Zivin
Matthew Neidell
Working Paper 14271
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14271

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Joshua Graff Zivin and Matthew Neidell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Days of Haze: Environmental Information Disclosure and Intertemporal Avoidance Behavior
Joshua Graff Zivin and Matthew Neidell
NBER Working Paper No. 14271
August 2008
JEL No. D80,I18,Q53
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of informational regulatory approaches by analyzing the
impact of smog alerts issued on consecutive days on discretionary outdoor activities in Southern California.
Short-run adjustments to transitory risk entail costs that are likely to influence the set of evasive actions
pursued by those at risk. Our results confirm that the cost of intertemporally substituting activities
is increasing over time: when alerts are issued on two successive days, any response on the first day
has largely disappeared by the second day. Small reprieves from alerts, however, reset these costs.
Our findings imply that a time-varying decision rule that accounts for multiple day air quality forecasts
may improve social welfare.

Joshua Graff Zivin
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 West 168th Street, Room 608
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
jz126@columbia.edu
Matthew Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu

Introduction
Informational approaches to regulation have emerged as an important tool in the
health and environmental policymakers’ arsenal. The US Environmental Protection
Agency requires the public reporting of toxic chemical emissions from industrial
facilities in the Toxics Release Inventory. Massive information campaigns have been
waged to warn susceptible consumers about the risks of consuming fish contaminated
with high levels of mercury. Warning systems in many cities around the world inform
citizens when air quality falls below a certain targeted level. The principal supposition in
each of these cases is that individuals appropriately adjust their behavior in response to
this information.
Both long-run adjustments to permanent risk and short-run adjustments to
transitory risk entail costs that are likely to influence the set of evasive actions pursued by
those at risk. For episodic risks, such as those associated with poor air quality,
contaminated drinking water, or tainted food, the costs of responding should, in part,
depend on the frequency with which warnings are issued. For example, imagine a poor
air quality spell that lasts for ten consecutive days. The intertemporal costs from
forgoing one day of outdoor time on the first day of the warning episode are likely to be
much lower than the costs on the tenth day of that episode.1 While a growing body of
evidence suggests that individuals engage in protective actions in response to announced
risks2, very little has been done to directly examine the role of intertemporal avoidance
behavior. Since climate change is expected to increase the frequency and duration of
1

Similarly, the costs of eliminating tomatoes from your diet during a salmonella outbreak may be quite low
for the first few days, but as one exhausts their repertoire of tomato-less recipes the costs of avoidance
become steadily higher.
2
See, for example, Ahituv et al. (1996), Bresnahan et al. (1997), Jin and Leslie (2003), Mullahy (1999),
Shimshack et al. (2007), Philipson (1996), Smith and Johnson (1988), Viscusi et al. (1986).

3

such episodic events, understanding these dynamic responses is of growing policy
importance.
In this paper, we investigate the dynamics of informational regulatory approaches
by analyzing the impact of smog alerts issued on consecutive days on outdoor activities
in Southern California. California state law requires a stage 1 air quality episode warning
(“smog alert”) when ground-level ozone3, a pollutant linked to numerous health
conditions, such as asthma, pneumonia, and bronchitis, is expected to exceed a particular
level. Southern California provides an ideal setting to examine this research question
because the notoriously poor air quality results in frequent smog alerts that are broadly
disseminated across various media channels. Moreover, previous work has demonstrated
that individuals respond to single-day alerts, suggesting that people value the information
content provided by the warning system (Neidell (forthcoming)). Our goal is to expand
that analysis by exploring the behavioral dynamics of consecutive day alerts and thus
shed light on the role of private mitigation costs under this regulatory approach.
Since a smog alert is issued if the underlying air quality index exceeds a particular
threshold, we identify the effect of smog alerts using a regression discontinuity design.
The threshold is not predicated on air quality levels associated with a non-linear change
in the health of those exposed, so days just at or above this threshold can be viewed as
otherwise equivalent to days just below it, and any difference in outdoor activities at the
threshold can be attributed to the alert. Frequent ozone forecasting mistakes also
strengthen this design, as days that may appear somewhat different ex-ante often end up
identical ex-post. As a measure of outdoor activities, we use daily attendance from 1989

3

Ground level ozone is distinct from stratospheric ozone (the “ozone layer”), which affects the amount of
ultra-violet radiation that reaches the earth.

4

to 1997 at two major outdoor facilities in Southern California -- the Los Angeles Zoo and
the Griffith Park Observatory.
Our results demonstrate that when an alert is issued on one day only, attendance
at the Zoo and Observatory decreases by a statistically significant 15% and 8%,
respectively. The response to an alert on the second consecutive day, however, falls to a
statistically insignificant 5% and 0%, respectively. Furthermore, the response at the Zoo
drops to zero when an alert is issued for three consecutive days. When we examine the
response for more vulnerable groups, such as children and the elderly, we reassuringly
find a larger response to warnings, but still find a decreased response on the second day,
albeit a less dramatic drop than that found for others. Interestingly, a one-day reprieve
from smog alerts is sufficient for responses to rebound in magnitude to the first day
response at the Zoo. Together, these results confirm that the cost of intertemporally
substituting activities is increasing over time, but that small reprieves reset these costs.
Since the recreational activities we examine are more discretionary than other
types of outdoor activities, our empirical analysis provides a conservative test for
diminishing responses over time. That is, if individuals are unwilling to bear the costs of
avoiding the zoo for the second day in a row, it seems very likely that individuals
deciding about less discretionary activities, such as agricultural harvesting, will not
respond to an alert on the second consecutive day because the costs of avoiding this
activity are likely to be even higher.4
Our findings imply that a time-varying decision rule that accounts for multiple
day air quality forecasts may be optimal. One possibility would be to publicly
4

For less discretionary outdoor activities, there may also be no response to an alert on the first day. If
interventions are justifiable for these activities, informational approaches to regulation will clearly be
suboptimal.

5

disseminate multi-day smog alert forecasts to allow individuals to make more informed
decisions about re-organizing their schedules. Since people respond to alerts and not the
underlying index (Neidell (forthcoming)), however, a more efficient policy may be to
issue an alert on the worse of the two days.5 If the first day has worse air quality, the
welfare impacts are the same under the status quo or the dynamic decision rule. But if
the second day has worse air quality, the dynamic decision rule improves health
outcomes relative to the status quo but at the same cost. If such a policy is impractical,
the response dynamics suggest that an adjustment to the alert threshold could lead to
second-best welfare improvements.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background
information on air quality and smog alerts. Section 3 describes the data and section 4
presents the empirical strategy. Section 5 shows the results and section 6 concludes.
2. Background Information on Air Quality
Human exposure to ozone irritates lung airways and has been linked to many
short-run health conditions, including asthma. Symptoms can occur in as quickly as one
hour of exposure, (U.S. EPA (2006)), suggesting an important role for interventions that
can alter short-run exposure. As a result, ground-level ozone is a criteria pollutant
regulated under the Clean Air Acts, with ambient air quality standards for both 1-hour
and 8-hour concentrations of ozone.
The process leading to ozone formation makes it highly predictable and relatively
straightforward to avoid. Ozone is formed from interactions of nitrogen oxides and
volatile organic compounds in the presence of heat and sunlight. Ozone formation also
5

Responding to alerts and not levels is consistent with rational optimizing behavior if the costs of acquiring
the index are sufficiently high, though we view this as unlikely since it is readily available in the
newspaper.

6

increases with solar radiation. Because of this process, ozone levels tend to peak in the
summer and during the hottest times of the day, allowing future levels to be predicted
using weather forecasts. Since ozone breaks down rapidly indoors where there is less
heat and/or sunlight,6 people can limit exposure by going indoors.
To provide local air quality information to the public, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency developed a uniform system to measure air quality levels for the
major pollutants regulated under the Clean Air Act. The pollutant standards index (PSI),
renamed the Air Quality Index in 1999, ranges from 0-500 and is indexed so that a value
of 100 corresponds to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards.7 This index is then
broken down into categories as follows: 0-50 good; 51-100 moderate; 101-200
unhealthful; 201-275 very unhealthful; and 275+ hazardous. In order to provide ample
notification for the public to react, the PSI is typically forecast one day in advance. Cities
with more than 350,000 residents are required to report this information (U.S. EPA
(1999)), usually found in the weather section of the local newspaper.
In addition to the federal rules governing ozone forecasts, California state law
requires an air quality episode to be declared when ozone is forecast to equal or exceed
0.20 parts per million, the equivalent to 200 on the PSI.8 Since air quality episodes have
only been issued for ozone, and ozone is a significant contributor to urban smog, these
episodes are typically referred to as “smog alerts.” Smog alerts are much more widely
disseminated than the PSI; they are announced on both television and radio. When an

6

For empirical evidence on the low correlation between indoor and outdoor ozone, see Chang et al. (2000).
The AQI includes two new criteria air pollutants, 8-hour ozone and PM 2.5, as well as a new category,
“unhealthy for vulnerable groups” (151-200). Given the timeframe of this study, we rely on the PSI for our
empirical analysis.
8
Additionally, a stage II air quality episode is issued when the ozone forecast exceeds 250 PSI or 0.30 parts
per million, but this only occurred once over the time period studied.
7

7

alert occurs, susceptible members of the population, including children, the elderly, and
those with a history of respiratory illness, are encouraged to remain indoors and shift
outdoor activities to night time. All other members of the population are advised to avoid
rigorous outdoor activity during daylight hours. In addition, schools are directly
contacted and advised to eliminate outdoor activities, such as physical education classes,
recess, and sports practices.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) is the agency
responsible for providing air quality forecasts and issuing smog alerts for Southern
California. Given the wide geographic range covered by SCAQMD9 and the
considerable spatial variation in ozone levels within this region, 38 distinct forecasts are
created for each of the source receptor areas (SRAs) within SCAQMD. Air quality
forecasts are produced by noon the day before in order to leave enough time to
disseminate the information. SCAQMD staff contact a set list of recipients, including
local schools and newspapers, when an alert is issued. An aggregate version of this
information is further circulated through local media. The Los Angeles Times, for
example, limits air quality forecasts to 10 air monitoring areas (AMAs) in SCAQMD by
focusing on the maximum forecasted value of the SRAs within an AMA.
Given the reporting process and the factors believed to affect ozone formation, the
model used for issuing an alert can be summarized as:
(1)

alertat = 1{maxat(ozonefst = f(weatherfst,ozonest-1,srt)}≥0.20}

where the subscripts a, s and t indicate AMA, SRA, and date, respectively, sr is solar
radiation, and 1{•} is an indicator function equal to 1 when the forecasted ozone exceeds

9

SCAQMD covers all of Orange County and the most populated parts of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San
Bernardino Counties.

8

0.20 part per million and 0 otherwise. Alerts for ozone are only issued from March
through October, compatible with the seasonal patterns of ozone.
3. Data
A. Outdoor activities
As mentioned earlier, we use daily aggregate measures of attendance at two
outdoor facilities -- the Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens (“Zoo”) and Griffith
Park Observatory (“Observatory”) -- within the boundaries of the SCAQMD as our
measure of time spent outdoors. Although focusing on two specific facilities limits the
external validity of our analysis, these data provide several advantages over alternatives
such as time use surveys. First, because they are administrative data, they are likely to be
free of recall errors that arise in survey data. Second, the exact dates are available in the
attendance data, which is critical for our regression discontinuity design. Lastly, and
perhaps most importantly, these data are available over a long period of time in which
there is substantial variation in ozone levels, forecasts, and smog alerts. Descriptive
statistics for each are shown in Table 1.
The attendance data used in this paper span the period 1989-1997, but are
collected in a slightly different manner at each location. The Zoo charges an admission
fee, with the register linked to an automated system that tracks attendance. Attendance at
the Observatory is free-of-charge, with attendance entered by hand in daily log files
based on figures recorded from two turnstiles that people use to enter the grounds.
The Zoo, because it charges varying admission fees, also allows us to identify
attendance by age groups, including adults, children under 2, children aged 2-12, and
seniors aged 62 and up. These distinctions are especially useful since they allow us to

9

test for a differential effect of warnings among children and the elderly, both of whom are
more susceptible to the ill-effects of ozone on average.10,11 The Zoo data also allows us
to identify attendance by Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association (GLAZA) members.12
Since GLAZA members are typically local residents who may find it easier to switch
activities on high ozone days, we will focus on this group to further examine how the
‘costs’ of averting behavior influence pollution exposure.
It is also important to note that, while the Zoo is only open during the day, the
Observatory is open during the day and evening, with night time visits popular for
stargazing.13 Our data do not allow us to identify time of visit, so to the extent that
individuals view daytime and nighttime activities at the observatory as substitutes and
thus shift their outdoor activities to the night when ozone levels are substantially lower,
the behavioral response to alerts measured at this location may be underestimated.
B. Air Quality Information
In accordance with the availability of attendance data, we collect air quality
information from 1989-1997. The smog alert status and forecasted ozone for each of the
facilities is assigned based on the 1-hour ozone forecast for the relevant AMA from the
Los Angeles Times. The ozone forecast is reported in PSI units and is converted to a
parts-per-million (ppm) measure, consistent with the units of measurement for observed

10

A concern with using children is their responses to alerts could be a function of the state-wide rule
requiring schools to reschedule outdoor activities. To address this, we perform this analysis using only
days during the summer months when children are unlikely to attend school.
11
Note that not while all Zoo attendees are counted in the total attendance figures, not all are broken down
into these age groups because some enter as groups (such as school field trips) or under promotional
packages. Of the separately identified age groups, adults make up 57 percent of all daily admissions,
children 2-12 make up 28 percent, children under age 2 make up 11 percent, and seniors make up 3 percent.
12
GLAZA members do not pay an admission fee per visit.
13
The Zoo is open everyday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., with the closing time extended to 6 p.m. from July 1 to
Labor Day. The Observatory is open from 2 p.m. to 10 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and 12:30 p.m. to 10
p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. When school lets out, it is open from 12:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. everyday.

10

ozone. Since we do not have information on the AMA in which an alert is issued, we use
the selection rule described in equation (1) to assign alert status. We confirm the validity
of this approach by using an administrative file from SCAQMD that contains the dates
that smog alerts were issued, but does not identify the AMA to which they correspond.
We repeat this exercise by assigning alert status based on the maximum ozone forecast
reported in the Los Angeles Times. A comparison of the two measures suggests that the
selection rule is quite rigorously followed: there are only 7 inconsistencies in the 2138
data points available.
Data on frequency of alerts is also shown in Table 1. Alerts themselves are not
very common events in the AMA of the Zoo and Observatory, with single day alerts
occurring 5.6 percent of the time, two consecutive alerts occurring 2.3 percent of the
time, and three consecutive alerts occurring 1 percent of the time. However, given the
serial correlation in meteorology (and hence ozone), successive days with alerts are quite
common conditional on an alert being issued the previous day. An alert was issued on
the day after an alert 41 percent of the time, while an alert was issued the day after two
consecutive alerts 44 percent of the time. This variation is essential for obtaining precise
estimates of the impact of successive alerts.
C. Other sources
Time spent outdoors is likely to be influenced by weather and perhaps other air
quality measures, including observed levels of ozone. To control for these confounding
factors, we include measures of daily 1-hour ozone, 8-hour carbon monoxide (CO), 1hour nitrogen dioxide (NO2), maximum temperature, precipitation, maximum relative
humidity, resultant wind speed, and average sky cover from sunrise to sunset in percent

11

(0=clear, 1=overcast) in our main regression specification. Pollution data are obtained
from the California Air Resources Board air pollution monitoring network.14 The
weather data come from surface summary of the day (TD3200), maintained by the
National Climatic Data Center.15 Daily climate and air quality data are assigned to each
venue using measures from the closest pollution and weather station. Means for each are
also shown in Table 1.
4. Empirical Strategy
We begin by presenting the static model of how alerts impact attendance:
(1) log(attendancet) = alertt α0 + ozoneft β0 + Xt δ0 + εt
where attendancet is aggregate attendance at the Zoo or Observatory on date t. Because
the Observatory is open during the evening when ozone levels are lower and responses
may be smaller than at the Zoo, we estimate this model separately for both places. alertt
is a dummy variable indicating whether a smog alert is issued in the AMA of the outdoor
facility. ozonef is the ozone forecast, which invokes the RD design. We focus on
estimating a specification linear in the ozone forecast since previous evidence found that
estimates are insensitive to the functional form of this variable (Neidell (forthcoming)).
Xt are potential confounding variables, including meteorological and pollution variables
that affect the quality of the outdoor experience; holiday, summer schedule, and day of
week dummies to account for changes in leisure time; and year-month dummy variables
to account for both seasonal and temporal patterns in outdoor activities, air quality, and

14

This data is available at http://www.arb.ca.gov/aqd/aqdcd/aqdcddld.htm.
This data is available at http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-win/wwcgi.dll?wwAW~MP~AP. Data on
humidity and sky cover are more frequently missing than the other weather variables. To prevent a loss in
sample size, these missing values are imputed using a best-subset regression with the other weather
variables and observed ozone as covariates. Regression results are, however, insensitive to excluding the
imputed values.

15

12

weather. εt is an error term clustered on the ozone forecast to account for the fact that the
covariate determining treatment is discrete rather than continuous (Card and Lee
(forthcoming)). If α0 < 0, this indicates outdoor attendance decreases when alerts are
announced.
To estimate the impact of two consecutive days of alerts on attendance, we
expand the model as follows:
(2) log(attendancet) = alertt α0+ alertt-1 α1+ alertt*alertt-1 α01+ ozoneft β0 + ozoneft-1 β1 +
Xt δ0 + Xt-1 δ1 + εt
We interact contemporaneous with lagged alert to allow the impact of an alert issued
today to vary depending on whether an alert was issued yesterday.16 To infer the impact
of multiple day warnings, we take the derivative of (2) with respect to contemporaneous
alerts: δlog(attendancet)/δalertt= α0 + alertt-1*α01. The impact on attendance of a onetime alert (alertt-1=0) is α0. The impact of an alert on attendance on the second day of
two consecutive days of alerts (alertt-1=1) is α0+ α01. This forms the basis of our main
empirical tests.
Although individuals are unlikely to go to a specific outdoor venue on successive
days, using aggregate responses still provides a valid test. To see this, imagine
individuals have a sequence of outdoor activities for the next two days {O1, O2}, and do
not substitute outdoor activities across days. The alternative choice on each day is an
indoor activity. Individuals do not have the same ordering of activities across the two
days, so some have {Zoo, Observatory} and others have {Observatory, Zoo}, for
example. If people respond to an alert issued on the first day, O1 will decrease, so both
16

Xt-1 includes lags of all variables where appropriate; for example, we do not include lagged day of week
dummies since this is perfectly correlated with current day of week dummies (and would result in a
singular matrix).

13

the Zoo and the Observatory experience a decline in attendance. If people do not respond
to an alert issued on the second day, O2 will not change, so both the Zoo and the
Observatory experience no change in attendance. Therefore, with enough variation in the
ordering of {O1, O2} across individuals, using aggregate attendance is adequate for
performing this test.
We also present a three-day model to explore the impact of a longer string of
alerts:
(3) log(attendancet) = alertt α0+ alertt-1 α1+ alertt-2 α2 + alertt*alertt-1 α01 + alertt*alertt-2
α02 + alertt-1*alertt-2 α12 + alertt*alertt-1*alertt-2 α012 + ozoneft β0 + ozoneft-1 β1 +
ozoneft-2 β2 + Xt δ0 + Xt-1 δ1 + Xt-2 δ2 + εt
To derive hypothesis tests comparable to above, we again take the derivative of (3) with
respect to contemporaneous alerts: δlog(attendancet)/δalertt= α0 + alertt-1*α01 + alertt2*α02

+ alertt-1*alertt-2 α012. α0 is the impact on attendance of a one-time alert (alertt-1=0,

alertt-2=0). α0 + α01 + α02 + α012 is the impact of an alert on attendance on the third day
of three consecutive days of alerts (alertt-1=1, alertt-2=1). In this model we can also
assess the impact from a one-day reprieve from smog alerts (alertt-1=0, alertt-2=1) to
determine the “rebound effect” (α0 + α02).
5. Results
Estimates based on equations (1) and (2) are presented in Table 2. Columns (1)
and (3) present results from the static model for the Zoo and Observatory, respectively.
The estimates suggest that attendance declines by 15 and 5 percent across the two
facilities, with both estimates statistically significant at conventional levels.17

17

Note that these estimates differ slightly from Neidell (forthcoming) because they focus on a sample
without missing lagged variables.

14

Columns (2) and (4) present results from the two-day model. Estimates of the
response to an alert on the second day of two consecutive alerts falls to 5 and 0 percent
across the two facilities (α0 + α01), respectively, neither of which is statistically
significant.18 These estimates suggest that when alerts are issued on two successive days,
any response on the first day has largely disappeared by the second day, suggesting
individuals appear to disregard the second-day warning.
The coefficient on contemporaneous alert is unchanged for the Zoo but goes up
from 5 to 8 percent for the Observatory, suggesting that the impact of a one-time alert is
greater than that found in the basic static model. This is as expected because the static
model averages the impact from alerts across all days regardless of previous alert status.
Thus, given the diminished behavioral response on the second day of an ozone warning
spell, the estimated impact from an alert in the static model must be below the estimated
impact from a one-time alert in the dynamic model. Moreover, this suggests that
estimates from a static model, by ignoring the dynamics of air quality, are biased, though
in our specific case the bias does not appear substantial.
Table 3 presents results that explore the impact from three consecutive days with
alerts. We present results from the static and two-day model again but using the same
sample as the three-day model to ensure that our comparisons across models are based on
the same dates.19 The results from the static and two-day model are largely unchanged
from Table 2, shown in columns (1) and (2) for the Zoo and (4) and (5) for the
Observatory. The response at the Zoo from three consecutive alerts (α0 + α01 + α02 +

18

This decrease in responses from the first to second day across both facilities is statistically significant at
the 5% level according to a joint test of significance when estimating the models simultaneously.
19
Our sample size decreases in the three-day model because we are limiting our attention to observations
that contain three lags of all time-varying covariates.

15

α012) now falls to positive one percent, and is again statistically insignificant. For the
Observatory, the estimate climbs somewhat to 5 percent, though it remains statistically
insignificant. These estimates further support the notion of diminished responses to
successive warnings.
Interestingly, we also find evidence that a short reprieve from smog alerts results
in responses that rebound in magnitude to the first day response, at least for the Zoo. The
response to a contemporaneous alert preceded by no alert and then an alert (α0 + α02) is a
statistically significant 18 percent, which is comparable to the one-time only alert
response of 13 percent. The magnitude of this rebound effect seems to suggest that most
of the foregone utility associated with recreational abstinence on the first day of the alert
was recaptured during the air quality reprieve on the second day, allowing potential
visitors to reschedule activities again on the third day. The absence of such a rebound
effect at the Observatory may, in part, be a reflection of a generally lower response to
alerts as compared to the Zoo.
As robustness checks for our main results, we examine whether responses vary by
the age and residential location of the individual, shown in Table 4. Local residents
should find it easier to intertemporally substitute zoo visits and thus should exhibit a
stronger response than non-locals on successive days of smog alerts. Indeed, GLAZA
members, who are likely to be local residents, show a slight increase in response (though
statistically insignificant) to two consecutive alerts, with the response to an alert rising
from 18 to 21 percent from a one-time alert to a second consecutive alert. However,
GLAZA members appear to ignore the alert on the third consecutive day of an alert spell,

16

suggesting that the intertemporal costs of activity substitution are even high for local
residents. The rebound effect remains prominent for this group.
We also expect more vulnerable individuals to show less of a drop off in
responses since the benefits from avoiding exposure are larger for them, which is
generally what we find. The most vulnerable groups -- seniors and children under 2 -display a drop off in response to a second consecutive alert that is considerably smaller
than the drop off for adults. This difference becomes more pronounced when we look at
the third day response, where adults show a further diminished response to the alert while
seniors and young children ratchet up their response. The pattern for children 2-12
mirrors that of adults, though they are less likely to attend on any given day of a warning
spell. While the lack of statistical precision in our estimated responses for each group in
Table 4 limits our abilities to generate strong inferences, the pattern of results is
consistent with economic theory: the response to alerts is greatest for those with the
smallest costs or largest benefits associated with behavioral change.
6. Conclusions
Information disclosure has been touted as the new wave of environmental
regulation and yet little is known about how people respond to this type of intervention.
The limited knowledge we have is based on a static view of information, where
individuals respond to data in a somewhat isolated fashion. At least for episodic events,
this approach appears misguided. Our results reveal a response dynamic whereby
behavioral changes to a smog alert depend, in part, on the prior history of such alerts.
Individuals appear quite responsive to alerts on the first day they are issued, but much
less so on subsequent consecutive days. Such a pattern is logical if the costs of activity

17

substitution are increasing as the duration of the spell increases, but the size of the dropoff found here is surprising given the nature of the activity studied. If individuals can’t
seem to bear the increased costs of staying out of the zoo for two consecutive days, how
might the response look for a less discretionary activity like harvesting crops or
professional landscaping?
We note two potential limitations of our analysis. One, the media may decrease
their efforts to publicize an alert on the later days of a string of consecutive days. While
we can not verify the extent of this directly, there is one piece of evidence that suggests
this is not a major concern: the rebound effect once individuals have had a day off from
smog alerts. The rebound effect is nearly equal in magnitude to the impact from a onetime alert. Therefore, unless the media follows the same publicizing pattern – advertise
heavily the first day, lightly the second day, heavily the third day – it seems unlikely that
less media coverage can explain away the impact from two consecutive alerts.
While we maintain several notable advantages of the uniquely collected data, a
second limitation concerns the generalizability of our findings: actions that occur in
Southern California may not extrapolate well to other parts of the country. While we
cannot directly assess this with the data used in this analysis, we note that daily outdoor
time in Los Angeles County is comparable to the rest of the country. Based on
computations from the American Time Use Survey (maintained by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics), mean daily outdoor time in Los Angeles County is 43 minutes compare with
45 minutes elsewhere. Whether changes in outdoor time in response to external stimuli
are comparable across places is unknown and beyond the scope of this paper.

18

In terms of policy implications, regulators concerned about social welfare might
worry about such diminished responses due to increased private costs because of the
benefits associated with exposure avoidance. Smog alerts are triggered when the
underlying ozone forecast index exceeds a threshold, but the ill health effects associated
with ozone exposure continue to climb at concentrations above this threshold. Since
individuals respond specifically to the alert but not to the underlying index itself, they
appear to view the benefits associated with exposure reduction as constant with respect to
the ozone forecasts that generate an alert. Whether this is due to cognitive limitations,
the increased costs of uncovering the underlying index, or some sort of framing effect
created by the very existence of the alert cannot be determined in our analysis.
Nonetheless, it points toward the need for more sophisticated approaches to regulation
through information that embeds behavioral dynamics into decision rules to achieve
welfare improving outcomes, especially as the new era of global warming makes poor air
and water quality spells longer and more frequent.

19

References
Ahituv, Avner, V. Joseph Hotz, and Tomas Philipson (1996). “The Responsiveness of the
Demand for Condoms to the Local Prevalence of AIDS.” Journal of Human
Resources 31(4): 869-97.
Bresnahan, Brian, Mark Dickie, and Shelby Gerking (1997). “Averting Behavior and
Urban Air Pollution.” Land Economics 73: 340-357.
Card, David and David Lee (forthcoming). “Regression Discontinuity Inference with
Specification Error.” Journal of Econometrics 142(2) 655-674
Environmental Protection Agency (1999). “Guidelines for Reporting of Daily Air Quality
– Air Quality Index (AQI).” EPA Document #454-R-99-010, Research Triangle
Park, NC.
__________(2006). Air Quality Criteria Document for Ozone. Washington, DC:
Environmental Protection Agency.
Jin, Ginger and Philip Leslie (2003). “The Effect of Information on Product Quality:
Evidence from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 118(2): 409-451.
Mullahy, John (1999). “It'll Only Hurt a Second? Microeconomic Determinants of Who
Gets Flu Shots.” Health Economics 8(1): 9-24.
Neidell, Matthew (forthcoming). “Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The
Effect of Ozone on Asthma Hospitalizations.” Journal of Human Resources.
Philipson, Tomas. 1996. “Private Vaccination and Public Health: An Empirical
Examination for U.S. Measles.” Journal of Human Resources 31(3): 611-30
Shimshack, Jay, Michael Ward, and Timothy Beatty (2007). “Mercury Advisories:
Information, Education, and Fish Consumption.” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management. 53(2):158-179
Smith, V. Kerry, and Reed Johnson (1988) “How Do Risk Perceptions Respond to
Information? The Case of Radon.” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(1): 1-8.
Viscusi, W. Kip, Magat, Wesley A., and Huber, Joel C. (1986). “Informational
Regulation of Consumer Health Risks: An Empirical Evaluation of Hazard
Warnings.” RAND Journal of Economics 17(3): 351-65.

20

Table 1. Summary statistics
Alerts
Alert (%)
Two consecutive alerts (%)
Three consecutive alerts (%)
Attendance
Zoo (n=1878)
adults
children <2
children 2-12
seniors
GLAZA members
Observatory (n=1554)
Covariates
ozone 1-hour (ppm)
ozone 1-hour forecast (ppm)
maximum temperature (°F)
precipitation (inches)
relative humidity (%)
average cloud cover sunrise to sunset (%)
resultant wind speed (mph)
carbon monoxide 8-hour (ppm)
nitrogen dioxide 1-hour (ppm)

mean

std. dev.

0.056
0.023
0.010

0.230
0.149
0.099

4,809.7
1577.5
304.3
780.5
82.3
725.0
5,853.1

3,189.5
1691.4
367.0
781.2
51.5
538.7
2,394.5

0.078
0.115
82.3
0.216
89.7
0.448
5.682
2.310
0.073

0.038
0.046
9.7
1.615
7.1
0.297
2.362
1.244
0.032

21

Table 2. Impact of two consecutive day alerts on attendance
1

2

3

4

Zoo
Observatory
First day response
-0.152**
-0.154**
-0.049*
-0.077**
(α0)
[0.039]
[0.039]
[0.021]
[0.023]
Second day response
-0.049
0.002
(α0+α01)
[0.075]
[0.048]
Observations
1878
1878
1554
1554
R-squared
0.76
0.77
0.69
0.69
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors clustered on ozone forecast in
brackets. α0 is the coefficient on contemporaneous alert and α01 is the coefficient on
contemporaneous interacted with once lagged alerts. All regressions include an indicator
for summer schedule, day of week dummies, year-month dummies. Columns 1 and 3
include contemporaneous ozone forecast, quadratic in maximum temperature, percent of
sun cover, precipitation, resultant wind speed, maximum relative humidity, observed
ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogren dioxide, and an indicator for holiday; columns 2 and 4
include these same variables and alerts once lagged.

22

Table 3. Impact of three consecutive day alerts on attendance
1

2
3
4
5
6
Zoo
Observatory
First day response
-0.155** -0.154** -0.132**
-0.03
-0.048* -0.058*
(α0)
[0.038]
[0.040]
[0.039]
[0.021]
[0.020]
[0.025]
Second day response
-0.063
-0.124
0.001
0.052
(α0+α01)
[0.069]
[0.062]
[0.050]
[0.056]
Third day response
0.011
-0.046
[0.106]
[0.062]
(α0+α01+α02+α012)
Rebound effect
-0.182*
0.052
[0.089]
[0.071]
(α0+α02)
Observations
1809
1809
1809
1347
1347
1347
R-squared
0.77
0.78
0.78
0.66
0.67
0.67
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors clustered on ozone forecast in
brackets. α0 is the coefficient on contemporaneous alert, αij is the coefficient on alerts
lagged i time interacted with alerts lagged j times, and α012 is the coefficient on
contemporaneous interacted with once and twice lagged alerts. All regressions include
an indicator for summer schedule, day of week dummies, year-month dummies.
Columns 1 and 4 include contemporaneous ozone forecast, quadratic in maximum
temperature, percent of sun cover, precipitation, resultant wind speed, maximum relative
humidity, observed ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogren dioxide, and an indicator for
holiday; columns 2 and 5 include these same variables and alerts once lagged; columns 3
and 6 include these same variables and alerts twice lagged as well as all pairwise
interaction between contemporaneous, once lagged, and twice lagged alerts.

23

Table 4. Impact of consecutive day alerts on attendance by demographic (Zoo only)
1
GLAZA

2
Adults

4
5
Children 2- Children <
12
2
First day response
-0.178**
-0.140**
-0.143*
-0.207**
-0.148*
(α0)
[0.054]
[0.042]
[0.062]
[0.043]
[0.061]
Second day response
-0.212
-0.074
-0.092
-0.090
-0.115
(α0+α01)
[0.124]
0.065
[0.073]
[0.108]
[0.139]
Third day response
0.046
-0.045
-0.148
-0.072
-0.339**
(α0+α01+α02+α012)
[0.158]
0.127
[0.129]
[0.179]
[0.125]
Rebound effect
-0.257*
-0.217*
-0.274**
-0.349**
-0.172
(α0+α02)
[0.120]
[0.088]
[0.083]
[0.137]
[0.169]
Observations
1804
1809
1806
1805
1804
R-squared
0.66
0.87
0.69
0.81
0.72
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors clustered on ozone forecast in
brackets. α0 is the coefficient on contemporaneous alert, αij is the coefficient on alerts
lagged i time interacted with alerts lagged j times, and α012 is the coefficient on
contemporaneous interacted with once and twice lagged alerts. All regressions include
an indicator for summer schedule, day of week dummies, year-month dummies. All
regressions include contemporaneous, once lagged, and twice lagged ozone forecast,
quadratic in maximum temperature, percent of sun cover, precipitation, resultant wind
speed, maximum relative humidity, observed ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogren dioxide,
and an indicator for holiday, as well as once and twice lagged alerts.

24

3
Seniors

