NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BORROWING ABROAD:
THE DEBTOR'S PERSPECTIVE

Richard

N. Cooper

Jeffrey

D. Sachs

Working Paper No. 1)421

NATIONAL BUREAU OF. ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 198)4

This

paper was presented at the Conference on Developing Country
Debt at the World Bank, Washington, D.C., Spring 198)4, and is
forthcoming in G.W. Smith and J.T. Cuddington (eds.), International
Debt and the Developing Countries. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
project in Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1427
August 1984

Borrowing Abroad:
The Debtor's Perspective

ABSTRACT

This paper addresses the question of external borrowing from the

perspective of the borrowing country. The first section sketches a formal
framework for optimal borrowing by a developing country, as seen from the

planner's point of view. The next three sections use this framework for the
development

of three important limits on external borrowing: the problem of

solvency, the problem of liquidity and the problem created by the possibility of

repudiation. The fifth section relates external

borrowing to macroeconomic

management of the borrowing country, and the sixth section pulls together the
many factors that suggest that external debt of a country should be subject to

central management or at least surveillance. Following that, we offer some
guidelines for limits to the magnitude of external debt, and then discuss the

character or mix of external debt. In an appendix, we present various
simalation exercises for optimal debt management in a discrete—time
infinite—horizon setting.

Richard N. Cooper
Jeffrey D. Sachs
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

(611) 95—5016 (Cooper)
1495_)4112 (Sachs)

June 198I
Draft

BORROWING ABROAD: THE DEBTOR'S PERSPECTIVE
Richard N. Cooper and Jeffrey D. Sachs
Harvard University

Introduction
External Debt has risen to the top of the agenda of international monetary

economics in recent years. This is partly because developing countries have
become much more dependent on external funding for their economic development
during the past decade than they were before, and partly because a growing
number of countries have experienced difficulties in servicing their external

debts since 1981. This paper addresses the question of external borrowing from
the perspective of the borrowing country, with a view to discovering principles
or guidelines that might be helpful to such countries in managing both the level
and the character of their external debt.

The plan of the paper is as follows. The first section sketches a formal
framework for optimal borrowing by a developing country, as seen from a

planner's point of view. The next three sections use this framework for the
development of three important limits on external borrowing: the problem of
solvency, the problem of liquidity and the problem created by the possibility of

repudiation. The fifth section relates external borrowing to macroeconomic
management of the borrowing country, and the sixth section pulls together the
many factors that suggest that external debt of a country should be subject to

central management or at least surveillance. Following that, we offer some
guidelines for limits to the magnitude of external debt, and then discuss the

—2—

character or mix of external debt. A brief concluding section pulls some of the
strands together.

The

first four sections are more formal and algebraic in their approach to

the subject. That will appeal to some readers and offend others. It is offered
here not merely to appeal to those who prefer a formal approach to a subject

that

lends itself to formal analysis. It

also suggests a format that can be

adapted to the formal planning models used by many developing countries. An
appendix offers a numerical illustration of how the framework can he used.
The final four sections are written to be accessible to a wider audience, and to
offer some judgments on issues that are not fully covered in the more formal

treatment. Our discussion throughout on the links of borrowing and monetary
policies is necessarily brief, and we point the reader to Dornbusch's (198)4)

contribution in this volume for a detailed treatment.

Strategies for International Borrowing

We approach the management of international borrowing as a formal problem
of dynamic resource allocation. (The formal approach taken here follows closely
the treatment in Sachs, 1982a and 198)4, wherein further details may be found.)

Admittedly, a formal approach may neglect some aspects of the borrowing
decision; we take up some of these in later sections. The formal approach,
however, has the advantage of showing how a quantitative assessment of borrowing

may be made using standard models of development planning. This section
illustrates how such development models can be used.

All models of optimal borrowing have two features. First, they set out a

—3—

dynamic budget constraint, which describes the country's long—term options with
respect to foreign borrowing.

Second, they specify a planning function or

social welfare function, which describes in a dynamic setting the desirability
of various possible paths for consumption and output over time.

The borrowing

problem is solved in a formal way by maximizing the social welfare function
subject to the dynamic budget constraint.

We shall also insist upon a third feature, which is sometimes missing in
borrowing models, namely optimal implementation of a borrowing strategy. The
solution of a borrowing model typically yields a path of investment,
consumption, and foreign indebtedness that maximizes the social welfare

function. But, it may remain silent on what policies are needed to achieve that

path. Will the path result from decentralized market forces, with direct
private—sector access to foreign capital? Or does the path require active
government intervention in the borrowing process? In sum, in addition to
studying the correct path for borrowing, we must ask how that path may in fact
be reached.

This section sets out the three key elements of the formal borrowing

problem: the budget constraint, the welfare function, and the instruments for
policy implementation. Later sections are devoted to a more refined treatment
of these elements that address special features of the actual borrowing
process.

—It—

A.

The Dynamic Budget Constraint

Many features of an economy determine how much and on what terms it may

borrow from the rest of the world. Potential lenders as well as equity
investors must assess the country's future ability and willingness to service

its external obligations. New credit may be limited because creditors doubt
that the economy can ever earn sufficient foreign exchange to repay a new loan.

In this case, the country is said to be rationed by a
Alternatively, the country may

constraint.

be deemed unsuitable for loans because of

short—run difficulties, even though its long—run prospects are bright. In this
case, the lending is bound by a liquidity constraint. Finally, the country may

have foreign exchange earnings sufficient to honor its obligations, but may be
deemed unwilling to do so, because debt repayment is too onerous or because it
is holding out for some sort of debt relief.

Lending may therefore be

constrained by repudiation risk.

The country's capacity to borrow will therefore reflect creditors'

concerns about solvency, liquidity, and repudiation risk. The interaction of
these constraints determines the dynamic budget constraint facing an econormj.

For analytical simplicity, we consider each of these factors in turn. In
truth, a full model of optimal borrowing must consider them together.

The Solvency Constraint

Even assuming no liquidity or repudiation risks, country borrowing is

bound by its long—run capacity to service its debt. From the creditors' point
of view, long—run solvency does not mean that the debtor nation must have the

—5—

prospect to become a creditor nation in the long—run (i.e. actually repay- its

debt). All that is required is that the debtor have the future resources to
service its debt, without the need to borrow forever in order to make interest

payments. To take two extreme cases, a $1 million loan has a market value of
zero if the debtor must forever borrow new money to service the loan, while the
loan is worth a $1 million if the country always services the debt out of its

own earnings, even though it never repays the principal.
The country's resources for external debt servicing each period may be
measured by its trade surplus, TBt (when TBt < 0, the country is running a

trade deficit). If the maximum discounted sum of current and future trade
balances, max

.t(l+r)

(i-t)

TBt, is less than the current debt, the country

can never service the debt out of its own

resources

(r is the real interest

rate, assumed to be constant unless otherwise specified). It will have to
borrow forever, and in an amount growing at the real interest rate, in order to

continue debt servicing. Let Dt be the stock of debt at the end of period t—l,

so that (1+r)D is the debt due as of period t. The solvency constraint can be
stated simply as the requirement that:

(1)

(l+r)D < max

=(1+i.)

—(i—t)

TB.

To gain some insight to (1), let us turn to the goods market. Suppose as a
first illustration that the country produces a single tradeable good, with real

GDP given by- Q. Output is a function of the capital stock Kt, with
evolves according to the path of investment, with

d is the rate of depreciation and

=

(l_d)K

+

=

I'

F(K).
where

is gross capital formation (public plus

private). The trade balance is TB. =

—

— C, where

is gross domestic

—6—

Interest

rate on
loans

max =0 (1+r)

Figure 1. Loan Supply with No Liquidity or Repudiation Risk

(1+r)D0

—7—

consumption (public plus private). Let

be the subsistence or minimal level

of consumption possible in period t, so that

is maximized with C =

C1

Then, from (i)
(2)

max =t(14)

(l+r)Dt

—(i—t) (Q.—I.) —

=(1+1')

—(i—t)—

C.

The first term on the right—hand side of (2) is the maximum discounted sum of

Q. —

I.,

and nay be considered the productive wealth of the economy, in dynamic

terms. The second expression is the discounted sum of minimum consumption
expenditure. In words, the solvency constraint is that the economy's debt
must be less than or equal to productive wealth net of minimum consumption

expenditure. For simplicity in the discussion that follows, we set

= 0 in

(2), and simply compare the external debt with the economy's productive wealth.

Re—introducing

in the later discussion is straightforward.

If a country is always willing to repay its debt if it can repay it, and if
it can always borrow freely subject to the condition that it remain solvent,

then (i) or (2) defines the loan supply schedule to the country. In particular,

it can borrow to the point where (1+r)D just equals max

(ignoring •).

This

=t(1+r)_(1t)(Qi_hi)

loan supply schedule is shown in Figure 1. We return

later to more refined measures of solvency, that take into account traded
versus non—traded goods, and the public versus private sectors.
There are two important qualifications that must be added to equation (2)

and Figure 1. Note that if Q. —

I.

grows in the steady state at a rate n

greater than r, then the economy faces no solvency constraint. The sum
=t(1+r)_(1_t)(Qi_hi) is infinite (i.e. the economy's productive wealth is

infinite). Starting from level of debt D, the economy has the future

—8--

resources to repay the debt! Curiously, even if the win country is not
growing at a rate n greater than r, there nay be no solvency constraint if

lender countries are growing at n greater than r. This situation can arise if
creditors are always willing to make new loans to debtors to enable the debtor

to service its debt. In such a Ponzi scheme, the borrower's debt grows at the
rate of interest (and becomes infinite), but since the lenders' economies are
growing even faster, the debt remains a small (and even decreasing) fraction of

the creditors' wealth. As long as the creditors' economies are always growing
at n >

r,

such a Ponzi scheme is viable forever. The debtor cannot repay its

debt but never has to! No creditor calls in his loan, on the belief that future
lenders will keep the debtor afloat.2
Note, therefore, that a rise in the real interest rate r above the growth
rates of debtor and creditor countries can have a profound effect on the

debtor's solvency constraint. When r is low, there may be no solvency
constraint on borrowing, while when r is high there surely is. Thus, the rise
in real interest rates after 19T9 may have severely jolted long—term
expectations about the debtor country's capacity to repay debt.

The Liquidity Constraint

In some theories, solvent countries can always borrow up to the point of
the solvency constraint. We suspect that a borrowing limit may be reached far
below the solvency limit, because creditors fear liquidity problems of heavily
indebted countries, and because they fear debt repudiation by these countries.
A liquidity constraint nay (but need not always) occur when a country owes more

—9—

in a given period then it can service in the absence of new loans.

Specifically, if c percent of outstanding debt is coming due in period t,

amortization payments are cD and interest payments are rD, so that total debt

servicing is (r+a)Dt. It may well happen that (r+a)D exceeds

when

Q

(especially

represents tradeable goods alone rather than total GDP), even though

(l+r)Dt

=t( r)_(1_t)(Qi_Ii). That is, the country faces a cash flow problem,.

though it is solvent by long—run criteria.
In normal periods, such a country will be able to borrow (r+z)Dt —

in

order to honor its current debt service obligations. However, the loan markets
may not function well under a variety of circumstances, arid the country may find

itself unable to borrow. This rationing may result when each bank's lending
decisions are importantly affected by the actions of other banks. For example,
suppose that bank—capital regulations restrict each bank to make loans to the
country in amounts L less than L, where L <

(r÷cL)D

—

Then, no single bank

can lend enough to the country to allow the country to honor its current debt

servicing. Two things can happen. Perhaps n banks will each make loans L such
that riL

(r+a)D -

They should be happy to do so, because the country is

fundamentally healthy (i.e. solvent).

On the other hand, if each bank suspects.that other banks are not going to

make new loans, a panic may ensue. Assuming that no other banks are extending
loans, it is rational for each individual bank to stop as well since its loan

of size L is not big enough to keep the country solvent. Thus, two equilibria
are possible, one in which the country is able to refinance its debt and the
other in which it is forced into arrears by the inability to obtain new lending.

—10—

Once the arrears appear, the banks may feel vindicated in their decisions to

pull out of new lending. It may become ever more difficult for the country to
attract new loans, and an eventual debt rescheduling or moratorium, injurious to
creditor and debtor alike umy, In time, be necessary-.

There are several reasons other than bank—capital restrictions on new loans
why a panic might arise, some of which have been spelled out in other papers

(see Sachs, l981). A bank might be willing, individually, to loan the requisite
amount (r+a)Dt —

but only at a new interest rate r eh above the existing

rate r. The spread r —

r would

be necessary to compensate a new lender for

tying up a large fraction of bank capital. The rate r might be so high, therefore,
that a new loan at rate r pushes the country over the brink of insolvency.
Specifically, with a new loan Lt =

(r+a)D

-

at

rate r, indebtedness might

rapidly- rise above productive wealth. Once again, the individual bank would be
unwilling to lend in the event that the other banks also stop making loans.
It is not hard to think of other reasons why banks may be happy to make

small loans as part of a group, but not large loans when standing alone. For
example, a syndicate may have stronger bargaining vis—a—vis a debtor country
then a single bank alone. A bank may- therefore fear to be the only lender
because it realizes that its future bargaining position vis—a—vls the debtor may

be weak. Also, banks may feel that they are more likely to enjoy central bank
protection from default risk if other banks are also involved in loans to a

defaulting country. The central bank might be content to let a single
irresponsible bank fail, as an example to others, but not to jeopardize the
banking system by letting several banks fail.

—11—

The upshot of liquidity risk is that credit rationing nay be far more

restrictive than the limits of Figure 1. Healthy countries with heavy
debt—servicing obligations can suddenly find the spigot turned of f, perhaps
requiring them to sake rather drastic short—run adjustments.

Repudiation Risk
Countries nay be unable to obtain new loans because there is little

confidence that the debtor will choose to repay the debt. To fix ideas, suppose
that the debtor country owes Dt, and has productive wealth

>

If the

country defaults, the creditors receive a fraction y of W1, perhaps by direct

confiscation of the debtor country's assets. Moreover, the creditors can impose
sanctions on the defaulting country in the amount OW. These sanctions include

the direct seizure of assets, YW, and other penalties that nay be costly to the
debtor without yielding direct benefits to the creditors. Generally, then, we
may assume that the sanctions exceed the payments to the creditors (0 >

y).

Consider the default decision. A repudiation of debt yields a gain of

and a loss of OW to the debtor, and a net loss to the creditor of D(l_Y).
For debtors and creditors within a closed economy, 0 is generally near 1.0,
since creditors can

use

the legal system to seize much of their debtors' assets

in the event of a repudiation. When 0 = 1, debt repudiation will make sense
only when

>

i.e. when the debtor is insolvent. In the international

setting, the seizure of assets on a large scale is very difficult and sanctions
such as trade embargoes against a defaulting country may have only limited

effect. Thus, 0 is generally much smaller than 1.0, so that it may

be

true that

—12—

Dt > OW even when Dt is much less than W.

The penalty function and institutional setting together determine the loan

supply schedule to a debtor country. In one extreme case, closer to 19th
century bond—financing than to 20th century bank—financing of LDC loans, there
is little negotiation between creditors and debtors before a loan is defaulted.

Debtors simply compare Dt and OW, and repudiate when Dt > OW.

Farsighted

creditors therefore restrict loans to assure that D OW, and therefore shrink
the loan supply relative to that of Figure 1.
When active negotiation is possible between creditors and debtors, the

situation is far more complicated. Suppose that Dt >

OWL,

so that the debtor

has an incentive to repudiate the debt. Both creditors and debtors also have an
incentive to agree to debt relief in lieu of a complete debt repudiation, since
both sides can be left better of f with debt relief instead of default. In the

event of default, the creditor receives yW and the debtor loses
o >

y.

with

Clearly, if instead of default, an agreement is reached in which the

debtor pays OW of the debt while the creditors agree to forego retaliation, the
creditors are better off by (O_1)w, and the debtor is left as well off.
Alternatively, if the debtor agrees to pay 1W to the creditor in exchange for
no retaliation, the creditor is as well off as with repudiation, while the

debtor is better of f by the amount (O_Y)w. Any payoff by debtor to creditor
between yW, and QW, with no sanctions imposed by the creditors, therefore
leaves both sides better of f than with an outright repudiation.

Inevitably, then, in the event that indebtedness approaches or exceeds the

repudiation threshold OWL, there will be a strong incentive to negotiate. In

—13—

general, economic theory cannot precisely specify the outcome of these

negotiations, but standard ndels of bargaining can give us some indication of
likely results. In the Nash bargaining solution, for example, there exists a
so—called "threat point," which is the outcome if negotiations break down. Let
us assume that debt repudiation occurs in the absence of successful negotiation,

so that the creditor gets YW, and the debtor ends up with (i_O)w A successful
bargaining outcome is a payoff P, that leaves the creditor with P and the debtor
—

with

F, and in which the creditor agrees to impose no sanctions on the

debtor. Let U be the utility level of the creditor, and V be the utility level
of the debtor. The creditor's gain in utility from a successful negotiation is

u() —

u(yw),

and the debtor's gain is V(W_P) —

V[(i_e)w1.

In the Nash

bargaining solution, the product of the gains to the debtor and creditor is

maximized, subject to P D. That is:
(3) p maximizes [u(P) —

U(yw)I

{V(w_P) —

V[(i_O)w1}

Suppose, for example, that both creditor and debtor are risk neutral, so
that LJ(P) =

F, V(w_P)

—

F, etc. Then, we maximize (P_1W)(OW_P) subject

to P D. The payoff schedule is then:

(it)

P =

p =

Dt

for

(O+y)w/2

for

(O+1)w/2
>

(8+y)W/2

Thus, for small levels of debt, the country has no bargaining power, and the

payoff equals the entire debt due. However, as

rises above OWt/2, the

—14—

country ends up paying only (6+Y)W/2. Note that the payoff rises with a and y.
Thus, as the creditor is able to impose large penalties on the debtor (high a)
and to seize a large amount of assets (high y), the creditor's bargaining power,
and ultimate payoff, are raised.

Now, it zkes sense to suppose that a potential creditor understands its
prospects in the event of negotiations, so that it limits its debt exposure

to levels that the country will choose to repay. In this case, the required
debt servicing will be kept below (O-I-Y)W!2. Note that the lower is the creditor's
ability to retaliate in the event of repudiation, as measured by 0 and 1, the

tighter is the lending limit that creditors will impose. At least in the absence
of uncertainty, borrowers are better off with higher 0 and 1, since the
existence of large penalties for repudiation frees up capital inflows.

B.

The Planner's Problem
We have so far discussed three aspects of loan supply to a borrowing

country. While a country's ability to repay debt is probably a necessary
condition for it to attract new loans, its willingness to repay, and ability to

do so on a short—term basis are probably even more important. Our next task is
to study the optimal

Suppose

borrowing choice in light of these constraints.

that the goal of debt policy is to maximize

a social

welfare

function that depends on the consumption flow over time. Specifically, we write
debtor utility V as:

(5)

V =

C. is real consumption (either per capita or aggregate) in period i, and U(C)

is an instantaneous utility in period t, with

U' >

0 and

U 0. Intertemporal

—15—

utility is given by a discounted sum of instantaneous utilities, where 5

measures the rate of subjective time discount. A function like (5)

is

really an

economist's presumption about what borrowing policy should be about, and much

less a statement about the actual determinants of borrowing policies. The goals
of planners or economic authorities might be much more concerned with the growth
of GD?, the use of debt to stabilize a political regime, or even nationalist
sentiments against foreign indebtedness, rather than a careful calculation of

intertemporal consumption possibilities. Since our topic is an analysis of
appropriate borrowing strategies rather than an empirical account of actual
borrowing behavior, we choose to proceed with (5).

Under certainty, and with no liquidity or repudiation risk, the optimal
borrowing problem is

(6)

v =

subject to:

(a) K1 = K(l—d)
(b)

=

F(K)

(c) Dt+i =
Cd)

+

(l+r)Dt +(I) —

urn (l+r)_tDt = 0

t+

Ce) K0, D0 given
Condition (d) is a convenient way to impose the solvency constraint on borrowing.
Implicitly, we are taking the case in which n <

r,

so that foreign borrowing is

limited by the future capacity to repay debt. In that case, (d) is equivalent

—16—

to the condition (2) described earlier. Rather than proceeding to a complete
solution of (6), we shall simplify the problem further. (The complete solution
is found numerically in the Appendix.) With optimal policies, the maximum value
V is implicitly a function of K0 and D0. We write this value at time zero as V
=

v(K0,D0).

Similarly, if the economy enters any period t with an inherited

capital stock K arid debt Dt. optimal policies from that period onward will

yield intertemporal utility of V(K,D). Now, consider the planner's problem at
time zero. He will choose values of C0 and 10, which then yield K1 and

via

(6)(a)—(c). Thereafter, he will continue to borrow optimally, so that from
period 1 onward, the economy achieves V(K1,D1). From the perspective of period
zero, utility is therefore V(K0,D0) =

u(c0)

+

V(K1,D1)/(l-i-iS).

The infinite—

horizon problem becomes a one—period problem as long as V(K1,D1) is known.
More usefully, we shall work with a two—period variant of the problem in

(6). We rewrite the planner's problem as:

()

subject

v(K0,D)

=

+

u(c0)

u(c1)/(i+)

+

to:

(a) K

t+1

(b)

=

= K (1—d) +
t

t = 0,1

F(K)

(c) Dt1 = (1+r)D +

(d)

It

(i+c)

—

K0,D0 given

We shall assume that the function V(K2,D2) is known, and study the optimal

choices in periods 0 and 1. In fact, for many of our results we will not need
to know V(K2,D2). In general, V(K2,D2) may be found by more powerful methods of

—17--

optimal control or dynamic programming, or the infinite—horizon problem in (9)
may

be

tackled head on, as in the Appendix.

Optimal Borrowing Without Liquidity or Repudiation Risks
In this section we study the optimal borrowing decision when borrowing is

limited only by a solvency constraint. The solvency constraint is implicitly

built into the V(K2,D2) function. Let W2 = max

2(l+r)_(1_2)(Qi_Ii). W2 is

implicitly a function of 2' so that the solvency constraint (l-i-r)D2 (

constraint on debt relative to the capital stock. When (l+r)D2 =

W2(K)

is a

W2(K2), consump-

tion rmist be zero forever into the future in order to service the debt, so that

v[K2,w2(K2)1 =

2(l+)_(1_2)U(O),

which is obviously a lower limit for V.

The optimal borrowing strategy is found by direct optimzation of (7). The
first—order conditions are:

(8)

(a)

u0(c0) =

A

(b) U1(C1)/(i+S) =

(c) FK(Kl) =

X/(1+r)

(r+d)

Cd) A is the marginal utility of wealth

The results of the optimization are straightforward and well—known. With a
perfect world capital market, borrowing and lending should be undertaken to

smooth the marginal utility of consumption over time. The marginal utility of
consumption in period i (Muc.) is given by U. (C.)/(i÷o)', where u1(c.) denotes

—18—

au(c)/ac1. The present—value price of output in period i is n. =
where

(i+r),

is the number of units of output which must be saved at time zero in

order to yield one unit of the good in period i. The consumption smoothing rule
is then:

(9)

MUC./'n. = A for all periods i

We have described the major implication of (9)

in

earlier work (Sachs, 1982b,

and Sachs, l98). Basically, it captures the old dictum "Finance a temporary
shock, adjust to a permanent shock." When output is temporarily depressed, A
does not change much, and according to (9),

the

MUC

should also remain

unchanged. This involves maintaining a high rate of consumption in spite of
temporarily low output, by accumulating debt. When output is permanently
reduced, A rises, so that MUC

in

every period should also rise. In effect,

consumption is reduced in line with lower permanent income, and the country
should not borrow in order to maintain a high rate of consumption.
(8)(c) expresses the second half of the standard borrowing strategy.

Investments should be undertaken to the point where the marginal product of
capital equals the world cost of capital, where the latter is measured as a

world real interest rate plus the rate of depreciation. In more complex
investment environments this rule would be re—stated as a rule to undertake all
investment projects with positive present value at the world interest rate.

Suppose that these guidelines are to be adopted. By what set of policy
rules can they be implemented? Under a set of restrictive conditions, the
guidelines are those that would be adopted by value—maximizing firms and

—19—

utility—maximizing households in a fully decentralized economy. The necessary
assumptions. are:

•

perfect foresight (or rational expectations under uncertainty);

•

the social welfare function V is also the representative household's
utility function;

•

unrestricted access of households and firms to the world capital
market;

•

no taxes on other distortions that cause the private marginal product
of capital to diverge from the social marginal product of capital
(FK);

*

no taxes or other distortions that cause the post—tax real interest
rate to diverge from the world real interest rate.

If these conditions hold, then the laissez—faire approach to foreign borrowing

will yield an optimal path of external indebtedness. When any of these
conditions is violated, the case for laissez—faire is substantially weakened.

Though nuch of the rest of the paper involves relaxing the assumptions needed to
justify laissez—faire, it is useful to mention a few examples of how these

assumptions may be violated. Some illustrative cases are described in Table 1.
We now turn to some key extensions of the basic model, still assuming the
absence of liquidity and repudiation risk.

Traded versus Non—traded Goods
Suppose, now, that the economy produces non—traded as well as traded goods.
Sectoral output is written as a function of sectoral capital stocks (labor input

—20—

is

T= FTT
(K )

supressed, but could be added easily): Q

Let

N= NN
(K

and Q

).

signify the relative price of non—tradeables in terms of tradeables in

period t. Consumption is divided between N and T subject to an interteniporal
social welfare function of the form V =

_0(l+fl_1U(C,C).

For simplicity,

all investment is assumed to use the traded good (here, too, extension to the

general case is straightforward). Let

i

be investment made in the non—traded

goods sector (using tradeable output) and
=

production, so that

K(i—d)

+

be investment in tradeable—goods

and K1 K(l—d) +

I.

balance is QT — cT — (1T + 1N) and non—traded good equilibrium is

The trade
= cN.

From the point of view of the solvency condition, productive wealth must

be redefined as productive tradeables wealth, max
External debt debt cannot exceed the present discounted value of net tradeables
production, since by definition only tradeables goods can be used for exports
to service the external debt.
Let us now consider the two—period borrowing problem with tradeables and
nontradeables:

max

(10)

TN

u(c0,c0)

+

TN
U(c1,c1)/(i÷S)

subject to:

Dt+1 =

(1+r)Dt

+

—

N_N
—
Ct
T
Kt+i =
N

Kt+i =

T

Kt(1_d)
N

K(1_d)

+

+

T

N

— (I÷I)

+

NT
V(K2,K2,D2)(1÷S)

2

—21—

T FT(KT)
t

N -

FN(KN
t

The solution to this problem is easily shown to be:
(l1)(a)

UOT = X

=

U1T

=

U1N =

(b)

N

X(i±5)/(i+r)
XP

TT

FK(Kl) =

(i+)/(i+r)

(r+d)

NNN
P1 FK(Kl) =

(r+d)

The main insight from this optimization is that current decisions regarding
consumption and investment mast involve forecasts of the future relative price

of non—tradeables, At time zero, for example, the investment in non—traded

goods should equate PF(K) with (r+d). It will likely be the case that P
will not equal P ,

with

the result that myopic expectations regarding

will

result in a misallocation of investment expenditure. We provide a quantitative

illustration o this point in the appendix.

Official Borrowing to Augment Private Savings
In many economies private investment is deemed insufficient to generate
desired growth rates in the economy, and the public sector is regarded as an
"engine of growth" through the role of augmenting the rate of capital

—22—

Table 1
Assumptions Underlying the Case for Laissez—Faire

Assumption

Examples of Violation

Perfect Foresight or

Households or firms may incorrectly extra—

Rational Expectations

polate current exchange rates and interest
rates into the future, particularly since

governments are fond of promising that there
will be no exchange rate changes.

Social Welfare Function

The government's planning horizon and rate of
time preference may differ from that of a

"typical household." Ideally, governments
may represent future generations that are
under—represented in the interests of current
households.

Access to World Capital Markets

Most LDC capital markets are highly
segmented, so that "free" access to the world

market may

imply a sharply different degree of

of access for different groups within the
economy, and may therefore have perverse
effects on resource allocation.

Equality of Social and Private

This assumption will be violated for public

Marginal Products of Capital

goods (e.g. physical infrastructure), providing a crucial reason for direct government
intervention in the investment process.

—23

Table 1, continued

Assumption

Examples of Violation

Similarly, tariffs and domestic taxes may
drive a wedge between market and shadow
prices.

Equality of Domestic and World

Taxes and subsidies on capital, market

Interest Rates

segmentation and a noncorspetitive financial

sector may all contribute to a major diver-

gence between the world cost of capital and
the domestic interest rate.

Also important, there may exist externalities
in the borrowing process so that individual
borrowers drive up the external cost of funds

for others. In this case, interest rates
will not equal the marginal cost of funds
to the country as a whole.

—24—

accumulation.

Underdeveloped domestic capital markets may cause private

savings, and hence private investment, to remain low. Fiscal expenditures on
investment goods may then form a significant share of total capital formation,
with foreign official borrowing playing an important role in the finance of
government investment, and taxes playing a crucial role in generating official

resources for debt servicing. Not surprisingly, the optimal borrowing strategy
must be re—computed under these circumstances, for debt—servicing capacity
depends not only on national wealth but also on the public sector's ability to

tax that wealth. When there are weaknesses (either political or economic) in
the government's authority to raise taxes, governments must be especially

cautious in their foreign borrowing. The following illustration underlines this
need for caution. (This section relies heavily on Sachs, 1984).
Suppose that because of an underdeveloped capital market, the private
sector in the developing country saves a fixed fraction of post—tax income,

rather than optimizing intertemporally. The government uses its taxing and
borrowing authority to supplement private saving. (See Arrow and Kurz, 1970,
Ch. VI, for a similar model of imperfect capital markets.) Private investors
have no direct access to the international loan market. The government taxes
domestic output at rate Tt, which may change over time. This rate must be less
than 1.0, and may be less than zero if the government is making net income

transfers to the private sector. There is no public consumption.
and private sector

With domestic output given by Q1, tax revenues are

savings are s(l_Tt)Q. Private consumption is given by
any

period,

the government borrows

the econonr is given r:

=

(l_s)(l_T)Q.

In

and repays (1+r)D. Total investment in

—25—

(12)

It =

s(1_Tt)Qt + TtQ + [Dt+i_(1+r)Dt]
(tax

(private
savings)

(net foreign

revenue) resource
inflow)

As written, it appears that all foreign borrowing is used for investment rather
than consumption, but this is true

only as an accounting matter. Suppose, for

example, that the government wants

to

raise private consumption while holding

investment levels fixed. It merely raises Dt+i while reducing
to keep

Tt sufficiently

constant; in that case the borrowing finances consumption 100% on the

margin.

Now, let us calculate the optimal financial policy of the government,
assuming again that it tries to maximize an interteinporal utility function of

the form u(c0) + u(c1)/(i+) + v(K2,D2)/(1+)2.

(13) The Basic Public Finance Problem with International Borrowing

max

u(c0)

+ u(c1)/(i+o) +

10,11,t0, 1
subject to

Q =

F(K)

K

=K(l—d)+I
t
t

t+l
=

It =

(l_s)(1_tt)Q

s(lr)Q

+ TtQt ÷ D1 — (1+r)D

As long as tax rates are completely flexible, the solution to this problem is
identical to the solution to (7), since the dynamic budget constraint facing

—26—

the government is no different whether it chooses

as before or Tt and

and

as here.

To find the tax rates corresponding to this optional plan, note that
C. =

(l—s)(1—T.)F(K.),

so that Ti

l—IC./F(Ki1[l/(l—s)1. Assuming that s is

fixed, a typical optimal growth path will involve a rising t •

Low tax rates in

the early period allow households to benefit early on from the growth that will

be achieved in periods 1 and 2. Higher taxes later on are necessary to service
the international debt.

Now let us introduce a simple yet crucial hitch into the model. Suppose
that the government can only raise tax rates to a limit I < 1, and that the

constraint is binding in the sense that the optimal T and/or T1 exceeds 1.
The first effect of the tax ceiling is to tighten significantly the solvency

constraint in (2). Debt repayment now depends on taxing authority as well as

national wealth. The new constraint is that D must be less than or equal to
the maximum level of tax revenues net of government investment. Government
investment is
(ib)

minus private investment, s(1_Tt)Qt. Thus,

Dt(l+r)

it is more

likely

(114) does not

=t(r)__t)IttQt

—

+

s(l_Tt)Qt]

that (114) rather than (2) holds as a binding constraint, since

imply that future consumption must equal zero when the constraint

binds. Nonetheless, in the examples that follow, we do not consider the case in
which (14) binds. We focus rather on the constraint T =

T,

assuming Dt remains

below the maximum level in (114).

Since the optimal tax path tends to involve rising I, a natural case to
consider is one in which the tax constraint does not bind in period 0 while it

does bind in period 1. Thus, we assume

<

and

=

r.

What are the

—27—

implications of the tax constraint? Basically, first—period consumption C1
remains "too high" relative to the plan that an unconstrained government would
choose, since the fiscal authority would like to raise taxes in the first

period but cannot do so. Therefore, the marginal utility of income in the
first period is too low, and the returns to investment in period 1, namely

should be given a weight less than 1.0 in project analysis. After some
algebra, we can prove:
(15)

FK(Kl) =

(r

+ d)

C

where C > 1.

We have the key result:

Under a regime of constrained tax levies, the marginal product of
capital should no longer be equated with the world market cost of

capital but rather should be kept g'ier, to reflect a lower
shadow value of first—period output.

If the government follows the standard rule FK(Kl) =

r

+ d, the country is led

to over—borrow, with the result that social welfare is reduced.
Let us consider a graphic case of this issue that follows the analysis in

Kharas (1981). Suppose that the government only cares about growth, in the
sense that u(C0)

u(C1)

0, and V(K2,D2) =

F(K2)

—

(1+r)D2.

The government is

trying to maximize second—period national income (net of international

indebtedness). If

is not constrained, T0 and

should be set at 1.0, with

government revenue plus net foreign borrowing used to equate FK(K2) with r +
according to the classical policy prescription.

Now suppose that t, t1

T < 1. Since consumption has no weight in

utility, it is optimal to set taxes at their maximum rate:
and 1(2 are given by:

=

. Then,

—28—

=

K2

=

(l+r){10
K0(1—d)2

—

[s(1—)

+

+

I0(i—a)

+

1F(K0)}

+

{I

[s('—)

—

+

flFIic0(l—d)

+

= 0, we find the optimal investment policy. After

By setting V/I0 =
some algebra, we find:

FK(Kl) =

(16)

(r+d)

r ÷ d; FK(K2) =

(r

+ d)

s(l—) +

d.

Once again, the country should not invest enough to equate FK(Kl) and r +

This model provides a powerful indictment against foreign borrowing, even
for productive investment projects, if the domestic fiscal system is not

equipped to handle rising debt—service ratios. Figure 2 illustrates how
aggregate growth is slowed by excessive borrowing in a tax—constrained regime,

for specific parameter values of the model. In the unconstrained regime,

optimal borrowing is at D, with growth at g*. In the constrained case, with a

low , the optimum is at

<

D,

with growth at g** <

g*;

and in the constrained

case with a high ,

the optimum is at D**, with growth at g***. If the

borrower with low

equates FK(Kl) with r +

constraint, the growth rate ends up at

d,

in spite of the tax

(corresponding to D), which is lower

than can be achieved with less foreign borrowing, g**.

Optimal

Borrowin with

Liquidity Constraints

Debt crises almost never involve the strict solvency constraint in foreign

borrowing. Well before consumption levels are driven to subsistence, countries
typically repudiate their foreign debt or succeed in gaining debt relief. Often

—29--

Growth
Rate
g*

g
g

X*
D2

3E**

2

*

2

First-Period Borrowing

Figure 2.

Foreign Borrowing and Growth in
Regime (Growth
in text)

a Tax—Constrained
as
is measured by F(K3) —

(1+r)D3,

—30—

a

debt crisis has little to do with fundamental solvency considerations but

rather turns on the short—run difficulties of debt servicing. In this section,
we explore how borrowing strategies should be modified when short—run liquidity

risks are present. We establish two principal results. First, the optimal
level of borrowing depends importantly on the probability of a cutoff in

lending. Second, the possibility of a lending cutoff increases the importance
of

the

naturity structure of the debt. The standard prescription that long—term

projects

should be financed with long—term loans grows in importance as the

probability of a lending cutoff rises.
We begin with an extremely simple version of the two—period model, with

physical investment ignored. The goal of borrowing is to maximize expected
utility.
(17)

subject

max E(V) =
EEU(C0) + U(C1)/(l÷) + V(D2)/(l÷o)21

to:
=

+

C1 =

+

C0

—

(1+r)D1

Borrowing constraint:
with probability it,

0 (i.e. no foreign borrowing)

with probability (i—TI), D not restricted

With probability it, the country is unable to obtain new finance

and the country must borrow

without knowing whether

in period 1,

will in fact be

available. At this point, we assume that iT is independent of the level of debt.
Below, we introduce the more realistic assumption that it rises with D1, i.e.

—31—

that high debt levels make potential creditors less likely to extend new debt.
Consider first the case when ii =

that U0(C0) =

U1(C1)(1+r)/(l+S)

0.

Then from our earlier results we know

and that u1(c1) =

_VD/(l+ó).

When iT > 0, we

must consider two outcomes: either the economy is liquidity constrained (denoted
by superscript L) or it is not (denoted by superscript N).

is borrowed

without knowing the outcome in the next period. Consumption turns out to be
C. = Q. —

(l+r)D.. if the borrowing constraint holds, and C =

Q. —

(l+r)D..

+ D.

if it does not.3 Clearly C > C. In case N, D is selected according to the

standard criterion u(c)

_vD(D2)/(l+).

In case L, we have u(c) >

is an increasing function of

Parenthetically,

By writing EV as U(C0) + ¶[U(c)/(i+6) + v(o)/(i+)2} + (i—x)Iu(c)/(i+)
+ V(D)/(l+t5)2], we find the optimal borrowing level

d(EV)/dD1
(18)

as the solution to

= 0:

d(EV)/dD1 = 0

> U0 = [(i+r)/(i+)I [irU + (i-it)U]

By totally differentiating this equation with respect to D1, D, and it, we can

find the dependence of
(19)

dD1/dit

on 'Ti.

After some algebra, we can show5

< 0

Thus, as the probability of a second—period lending cutoff rises, optimum
first—period borrowing should decline.

Liquiditj Crises and Borrowing Externalities
Should governments regulate foreign borrowing if liquidity crises are

possible? Under some special circumstances, the answer is no, though more

—32—

generally this form of market failure does provide a case for intervention. The
model we have just explored can justify laissez—faire, if the following
assumptions hold:

•

the private sector has rational expectations of a liquidity crisis;

o

the

•

the government can credibly commit itself to refuse to bail out

probability 1'

is

not a function of the overall level of borrowing;

private agents who find their credit cut off;
the liquidity crisis causes no widespread bankruptcies, or if
bankruptcies occur, they are handled efficiently, without social cost.
If these assumptions are maintained, then individual agents will choose their
intertemporal plans such that U0 =

E(U1)[(l+)f(l+r)1,

where E(U1) =

irU

+

(i—ir)U.

This is precisely the first—order condition found in (18).

All of these assumptions are highly suspect. Borrowers probably do not
have a good understanding of financial crises (neither do economists or

governments!), much less an ability to predict their occurrence. Moreover,
though it

is

hard to forecast, it is likely that the frequency of a loan cutoff

increases with the amount of debt outstanding. We have already argued that such
a crisis arises when no single lender is willing to lend the country as much as

it needs to remain current on debt servicing. That possibility cannot arise
when D1 is very low.
Third, when liquidity crises arise, governments are almost inevitably

called upon to act to bail out debt—ridden firms. As Diaz—Alejandro has
recently argued (l981i., p. 19 and p. 22), based on the experience of Argentina,

Uruguay, and Chile:

—33—

Whether or not deposits are explicitly insured, the public expects

governments to intervene to save most depositors from losses when

financial intermediaries run into trouble. Warnings that
intervention will not be forthcoming appear to be simply not
believable....

Foreign lenders take government announcements that it will not
rescue local private debtors, especially banks, with non—guaranteed
external (or domestic) liabilities even less seriously than
depositors take the threat of a loss of their money....Foreign bank
lending to both the public and private sectors of a country have
considerable leverage to convince governments to take over ex—post
bad private debts, especially those of financial intermediaries.

If the government is always expected to bail out bad debts, moral hazard

problems are rife. Debtors will no longer expect to feel the full brunt of the
crisis, since losses will be socialized (i.e. spread among borrowers arid non—

borrowers throughout the econortr). Obviously, over—borrowing may then arise.
The fourth assumption, that bankruptcies impose no social costs, is also

likely to be far off the mark. In an ideal legal system, over—extended debtors
would simply transfer their equity claims to creditors without a loss of

production in those firms still covering variable costs. In practice, when
firms go bankrupt, they often cease operations in the short or long run, leading

to unemployment of resources. Indeed, it is precisely because bankruptcies
impose heavy social costs that governments are obliged to extend debt relief.

—34—

It is not very easy to specify the appropriate borrowing strategy given the

above complexities. It is, however, worthwhile to take just one of the issues
and develop its implications analytically. Suppose that the model remains as in
(iT), but now with 'r an increasing function of D1. When we recalculate the

optimal borrowing level by setting d(EV)/dD1 = 0, we find:

U0 =

(20)

I(1+r)I(l+)1EU

+

(l-)U1

+

(d/dD1HV

-

where:
=

u(c)

+

= u(c)

+

—

and

v(o)/(l÷ô)

>0

Compare the expressions for U0 in (18) and (20). We see in (23) that U0 is
greater than E(l+r)/(l+ä)] NrU + (i—ir)U1 by a term that reflects the effect of
on it.

Basically,

(20) holds that r does not reflect the marginal cost of

external funds, since an increase in

also makes more likely a welfare—

reducing liquidity crisis.
If the marginal borrower behaves as if it

is

given, the private marginal

cost of funds (r) will fall short of the social cost, and over—borrowing will

occur. Laissez—faire is no longer first best, even if all of the other
necessary assumptions hold true. The optimal borrowing strategy is then to tax
foreign borrowing, so that private and social costs are aligned. The situation
is formally equivalent to the Bhagwati—Srinivasan (1915) argument for a
disruption—tariff when high export levels raise the possibility of foreign trade
retaliation.

—35—

Liquidity

Crises and Debt Maturities

The possibility of a loan supply cutoff provides an important reason for
matching the maturity structure of the debt with the gestation period of

physical capital investment. Suppose that an incremental investment opportunity
d11 becomes available in the problem in (20). We call the investment
"short—term"

if

it pays off in the next period and "long—term" if it pays off

in two periods. For the short—term case, we assume that the yield is (l+O)d11,

with 0 >

r.

For the long—term case, the yield after two periods is (l+0)2d11,

again with 0 >

r.

We also assume the existence of short— and long—term loans,

with the same interest rate per period. A short—term loan D requires
repayment (1+r)D1 in the next period. A long—term loan D requires repayment

2L

(l+r) D1 in two periods.
It is easy to prove the following results:
•

For any it,

the

short—term project should be undertaken with short—term

the

long—term proj ect should be undertaken with long—term

finance.

•

For any it,

finance.

•

The long—term project should not necessarily be undertaken with

short—term finance. This is true even though the project has positive

present value at the world interest. The project becomes more
desirable the lower is it and the greater is 0 relative to r.

The proof of these propositions is simple. Start at an equilibrium with no
investment. When maturities of I and D are matched, it is easy to show that
consumption plans can be left unchanged, and final indebtedness D2 can be

—36—

lowered, by undertaking the investment project. For the case of short—term
finance for a long—term project, the demonstration is a little more involved.

Basically, a liquidity crisis is more severe the larger is D1. If 0 = r, then
undertaking the investment yields no net benefits, but it does impose a cost by
raising D1 (and therefore raising the welfare loss in the event of a liquidity

crisis). Therefore 0 must be sufficiently above r to justify new borrowing.6
Generally, long—term debt reduces the costs of a possible lending cutoff.

This is for two reasons. First, and most obvious, for a given external debt,
the shorter is the maturity structure, the greater on average is the amount of

principal repayment in a given period. Therefore, the larger is the required
short-run cut in domestic spending if new lending suddenly ceases. Second, and
perhaps more important, a judicious use of long—term borrowing with short—term
lending (i.e., reserve accumulation) can help to obviate liquidity crises by

reducing the need to borrow in a given period. Suppose that without fear of a
debt cut off the optimal path of short—term borrowing would be
period and

in the first

in the next. Using long—term loans, this pattern can be

replicated without any second—period borrowing (assuming, as we have done, that
both short—term and long—term loans have the same interest rate per period).

The economy simply borrows ID1 +

D2/(l+r)1

in long—term funds, and puts D2/(l+r)

into reserves. The reserves have value D2 in the next period, and these
reserves are then drawn down to zero in the next period. Thus, it becomes
irrelevant whether new lending is or is not available in that period!

The fact that countries hold substantial reserves provides good evidence

that liquidity can be a serious concern. Governments borrow long—term to hold

—37—

reserves even though the cost of long—term finance is higher than the returns to

official reserves. This behavior makes sense if governments are willing to pay
a premium to assure the availability of foreign exchange in a given period.
Other evidence in this regard is that countries often pay commitment fees to
guarantee the availability of loans at a future date.

Borrowing Strategies When Debt Repudiation is Feasible
Now we turn to the case in which countries can repay debt in both the
short—term and long—term, but may be unwilling to do so (this section relies

heavily on Sachs and Cohen, 1982). The key to modelling debt repudiation is an

explicit assumption regarding its benefits and costs. The benefits are
straightforward: the borrower saves the real value of the outstanding debt,

which it no longer services. The costs are far more difficult to specify (see
Sachs, 1982, for a discussion of the historical experience). One aspect of the
costs may be a partial or complete inability to obtain new loans in the world

capital markets, at least for some time after the repudiation occurs. Another
aspect of the costs may be a direct seizure of the country's overseas assets,

including bank accounts, foreign direct investments, ships and aircraft. A
third and even more important cost may be a dramatic decline in the countrys
capacity to engage in trade, even if no net new borrowing is involved. Modern

trade is built on a sophisticated system of revolving trade credits. Even if a
country's net debt is zero, its gross stocks of trade—related financial assets

and liabilities are likely to be large. Because a borrower would have
difficulty arranging trade credits after a repudiation, the mechanics of trade

—38—

would be made onerous. Moreover, merchandise at ports ready to be dispatched to
the debtor country could be subject to seizure by creditors.

To introduce these elements, we assume that when a debt is repudiated the

creditors retaliate by imposing two costs: in all future periods, the
borrower's production is reduced, for given K, by a fixed fraction 3; and

second, the borrower is excluded from all further borrowing. Importantly, we
now assume that this retaliation yields neither costs nor benefits to the

creditors (or that the costs and benefits cancel). In terms of the discussion
in the first section, we set I = 0.
As an easy start, we begin with a simplified version of the international

borrowing model (we simply drop V(K2,D2)). The tax considerations are ignored,
so that we implicitly assume that domestic tax levies are not constrained.

Loans are made to the sovereign borrower in period 0. If they are not repaid in
period 1, the penalty is enforced and output is reduced by 0Q1. The borrower
makes the repudiation decision in period 1; there is no way that it can

pre—commit itself to a decision before the period arrives. Moreover, in this

section the possibility of a negotiated settlement is ignored. (The general
principles of credit rationing are the same when ex post facto negotiations are

allowed.) Since second—period utility is simply u(C1), the borrower compares
consumption levels with and without repudiation. With repudiation, C1 equals
— 8Q
C1 equals

=

(l—O)Q1.
—

(We denote this level as c.) With no repudiation,

(1+r)D1,

which we denote C. The borrower defaults whenever

exceeds C, and thus whenever (l+r)D1 >

XQ

There are two choices with respect to the timing of loans. The level of
credit

may be extended before or after the investment decision I is made.

—39—

We

shall see shortly that it is a great advantage to the country to be able to

choose 10 before going to the capital markets, since 10 may

then

be chosen to

make the credit terms on a given loan more favorable, or to increase the total

amount that the country can borrow. A more natural assumption, however, is that
loans are arranged first and that the government then allocates them to

consumption and investment. In this case the government will generally have an
incentive to renege on a promised level of 10 once a loan has been arranged,

even if ex ante it would be better off to fix I. Thus, promises concerning
will be unconvincing. We term the case in which I is set first the
"precommitment"

equilibrium, and regard the other case as the "standard"

assumption.

A linear model offers a vivid

illustration of the effects of repudiation

risk and of investment precominitment. Let:

(21)

Q0=Q

= + (l11)I,
v =

I

+
C0

According to (21), there is a quantity I of

return

investment projects with a rate of

I exceeding the world interest rate r. The rate of time discount

is

assumed to be greater than the world interest rate. In the no—repudiation
model, utility V is maximized by setting 10 =
undertaken).

! (all

investment projects are

Consumption is shifted entirely to the first period with no

consumption in the second (since 5 >

r and utility is linear). In sum:

—40—

(22) The Case of No Repudiation

+ (i+y)Ti/(i+p)

+

C0

10 = T
Cl = 0
=

C0

+

10

—

Q

Now, we turn to the "standard" case of the repudiation model. Once a loan
is arranged, the borrower will choose to set 10 =
= Q, and the debt ceiling is given by

Therefore

0,
=

since 'S >

X/(l+p).

y.
The complete

solution is:

(23) The Standard Repudiation Case

C0 = Q +

)(l+r)

10 = 0

Cl =

B1

=

—

X/(l+r)

Therefore, the presence of repudiation risk causes rationing of the borrower

(note that B1 is lower in (23) than in the previous equation). Investment is
reduced (all the way to zero in this example!) and consumption is pushed to the

second period. The presence of repudiation risk reduces the borrower's welfare
by restricting capital inflows.

—41—

Finally, we turn to the precornmitment case. It turns out that the borrower
may be able to raise its welfare by promising a high level of investment 10.

Higher 10 raises

and thus raises the penalty for repudiation, which equals

OQ1 When 10 is high, creditors are therefore more willing to lend, and the
credit constraint is eased. In this version, the borrowing country will
choose to precommit to 10 =

I

when I is close to (S, and when (S is much greater

than r. Specifically we find:

(2k) The Pre—Commitment, Repudiation Case
C0 =

Q

+

— 10

= 0 for (ô—r)O(l+y) <
10 =
C1 =

01

=

I

for ((S—r)O(l+y) >

(cS_y)(l+r)
((S—y)(l+r)

— XQ1

0Q1/(l+r)

Thus, the pre—commitment case

be the same

as

the no—pre—commitment case,

but might (and generally will) result in an equilibrium somewhere between the
textbook model and the standard repudiation model. Pre—commitrnent makes sense
when (S

r (that is, the rate of time discount is not too high), and when I >>

(that is, investment is quite profitable). Pre—cornmitnient allows greater
borrowing,

greater investment in profitable projects, and higher first—period

consumption.

r

—42—

Repudiation Risk with Uncertainty
So far, an actual default never occurs in the model, though the threat of
default has a profound effect on economic welfare and the nature of macroeconomic

equilibrium. Once uncertainty is introduced into the model, debt repudiations
will actually occur as random events. The presence of uncertainty has
several effects. First, the loan supply schedule becomes upward sloping, rather

-''

than perfectly elastic, up to a maximum debt level D. Second, and even more
4

vrrrrvr+
r1
'-'—U

f-h
S-'- I rir n+ I ir Q+rli ,--Fii

-

rn.-.r rrr rnrmi r n

m -cr

rcrn,

perverse in ways now described. A more complete treatment of debt repudiation
under uncertainty may be found in Sachs and Cohen, 1982, and Sachs, l984.
A recent theme of financial economics is that the various claimants on a
firm's income stream (e.g., the shareholders, bondholders, workers) have
differing interests regarding the firm's policies because alternative policies

affect the relative valuation of the different claims. Thus, the shareholders
may- urge policies that raise shareholder wealth at the expense of bondholder

wealth, as described in by Jensen and Meckling (1976). Or coalitions of' the
shareholders and banks may engage in policies at the expense of bondholders,
especially in the context of' bankruptcy actions (see Bulow and Shoven, 1978). A
notable feature of these examples is that the firm may pursue inefficient
policies that reduce the overall value of the firm, because some groups will

benefit even though other groups will be hurt more. A related theme is that all
groups are generally left better of f', ex ante, if the firm can he constrained

from pursuing inefficient policies.

Several direct analogies can be made to macroeconomic behavior by the

—43—

borrowing country. Like a firm, the country also has various claimants on the
income stream, including the government, domestic citizens, and international

creditors. Like the firm, the country may

be

led to select inefficient policies

to transfer income from the creditors to the "shareholders" (the government and

domestic private sector). Generally, the country would like to foreswear these
policies ex ante but may find it difficult to do so.
There are several areas of behavior in which timing and default risk

interact to produce bad macroeconomic choices. The earlier discussion of
investment pre—comrnitment can be thought of precisely in these terms. From an
ex ante point of view it is best for the country to choose a high level of

investment, because high investment relaxes credit ceilings. However, once a
loan package is arranged, the country prefers to raise first—period consumption

at the expense of investment. Since creditors understand this, they will tend
to discount initial promises of high investment plans, and indeed they will be
right.

A similar phenomenon occurs when countries borrow with long—term debt.
When a country owes long—term debt, each new amount of borrowing tends to reduce
the expected value of the original debt by making its eventual repudiation more

likely. In many cases, the borrowing country would like to be able to promise a
potential long—term creditor that it will not over—borrow once the long—term

debt is arranged. Such a promise would reduce the risk premium on the long—term

debt. However, there will generally be strong incentives, ex 2'

to

do

precisely the contrary. The result is, in general, that long—term debt will
command a high risk premium and that, as expected, over—borrowing will occur.

—44—

Market participants search for ways to reduce these deleterious incentives.
It may be the case that countries can establish reputations for maintaining

macroeconomic policies in line with announced plans. There is a growing
economics literature on establishing a reputation that may well give some

insights in this direction. Other specific actions, such as relying on
short—term borrowing rather than long—term borrowing, may reduce some of the

incentive problems. In domestic capital markets, and to a much smaller extent
in international lending, bond covenants can be used to pre—commit the borrower

to a future line of action. Smith and Warner, 1919, provide an excellent survey
of such covenants, indicating how they help to enforce an efficient borrowing

and investment plan by corporate borrowers. For example, covenants often
directly restrict dividend payments, which may be tantamount to requiring the

shareholders to invest rather than "consume" their loans. Other types of
provisions include restrictions on new borrowing, maintenance of the firm's
existing assets, financial disclosure requirements, and restrictions on merger

activity. Such provisions are typically unenforceable when foreign sovereign
borrowers are involved and thus are not part of most (international) syndicated
loan agreements.

Further Aspects of Managing Repudiation Risk
So far, we have derived the optimal borrowing behavior for an economy that

has the option of repudiating its debt. As in earlier sections, we should now
ask how these optimal borrowing policies can be implemented, What is the role
of the government in managing repudiation risk?

—45—

There is a profound externality in the borrowing process under repudiation

risk that leads governments into a central policy role. In many cases, a
default or debt repudiation by an individual agent affects markets judgments

regarding creditworthiness of the country as a whole. Most potential creditors
are unable to discern the ultimate causes of a default, and in particular
whether the action reflects a weakness of a particular debtor or is instead a
signal about government policy and economic health in the whole debtor economy.
An individual default raises subjective probabilities of structural weaknesses
or widespread mismanagement in an economy, and so causes credit to tighten for
all borrowers.

The implications of this spiliover are immediate. First, governments ——

even the most laissez—faire —- must assume some responsibility for honoring the
external obligations of bankrupt firms in the private sector. Second, creditors
act on the expectation of such actions, and indeed may withdraw credits from

countries when such actions are not forthcoming. Naturally, therefore,
governments must at the minimum undertake the prudential supervision of
private—sector foreign borrowing in order to safeguard the economy's

international creditworthiness. In some cases, it may be necessary to make
government backing explicit to facilitate the appropriate levels of inflow.
Even when all lending is to the private sector of an economy, creditors
will still be correct to aggregate the country's debt in assessing an economy's

incentive to repudiate. This is because a government always has ability to
nationalize a substantial part of the external debt, and bargain for the country

as a whole vis

vis the foreign creditors. This has been the experience of

—46—

several Latin American countries in recent years.

Since the risk of repudiation puts a limit on overall borrowing, the
interest rate on international loans may be a poor measure of the marginal cost

of funds to a borrowing country. Suppose that total lending is rationed at the
point D =

OQ/(l+r).

Those lucky enough to borrow at the world market rate will

pay a price r, while borrowers on the domestic market will be forced to pay a

higher price. The shadow price of capital appropriate for the marginal
investment decision will be the higher rate. Interestingly, an interest
equalization tax on foreign borrowing, raising its costs to domestic levels,

would improve the microeconomic allocation of investment funds without
necessarily increasing the overall supply of external credits.

We have already noted additional scope for active policies. Governments
may have an incentive to spur investment projects for the purpose of enhancing

creditworthiness. Another possibility is that governments act to change A, the
cost of repudiation. Outward—looking trade policies probably raise the costs of
repudiation by making the country more vulnerable to trade embargoes, credit

cutoffs, etc. Thus, a bonus to export—promotion policies may well be enhanced
access to world credit markets. To a limited extent, governments may also be
able to raise B by offering to collateralize loans. There are cases in which
planes and ships have been offered as collateral on trade financing.
The welfare effects of' policy—induced changes in B are not easy to discern.

On the one hand, higher B stimulates the inflow of capital by reducing the

likelihood of repudiation. On the other hand, if an econonr runs into severe
macroeconomic difficulties, the benefit of default is compromised by a high

—47—

value of 0. Analytical work suggests that there is likely to be an intermediate
value 0 <

0< 1 that maximizes the debtor's expected utility under repudiation

risk.

External Debt and Macroeconomic Policy
This topic is covered in detail by Dornbusch's (198It) paper in this volume.

Here we will focus on the possible complications for macroeconomic policy that

are created by: (1) the buildup of external debt; and (2) the presence of large
external debt.

Despite the freedom that countries have to float their currencies under
present international arrangements, most borrowing countries in fact fix their
exchange rates —--

to

another currency or to a weighted average of other

currencies. Often there are periodic adjustments of the central rate, but in
the short run, the exchange rate is fixed by

Under

the

central bank.

these circumstances external borrowing for local expenditure will

lead to monetary expansion. If undertaken freely and extensively, either by the
government

or by private economic agents, it interferes with monetary control,

since borrowing countries typically have little opportunity to "sterilize"
inflows of foreign exchange through domestic sales of securities or by other

means. Thus new external borrowing more or less directly increases the money

supply.

External debt that is acquired to cover directly the import of foreign

goods or services do not have these internal monetary effects. It is the
conversion to local currency at a fixed exchange rate that creates the
complication.

—48—

Of course, the counterpart in the short run to external borrowing for local
expenditure is an increase in international reserves, and these reserves are

available to finance imports. As monetary and income effects work their way
through the economy, the demand for imports will increase and reserves will be

drawn down, reversing the monetary expansion that initially took place. But
this corrective process is brought about by the monetary expansion itself, which

it might have been desirable to avoid under some circumstances. For this
reason, many developing countries operating under fixed exchange rates have
found it desirable to limit the inflow of foreign capital, especially that which

comes through the banking system. Unless their access to international credit
is restricted, banks and private firms with access to the international market

can escape the rigors of a tight domestic monetary policy. For example, a
multinational corporation that is denied credit at the local bank because of
monetary restriction can resort to borrowing from its head office or directly

from the international market and thereby bypass the local restrictions. In
sum,

a

commitment to a fixed exchange rate under these circumstances weakens

monetary control; its restoration may require limitations on capital flows.
A high level of debt, not just its rate of change, can also create
problems for monetary policy. This is especially true when it comes to rolling
over a large external debt or correcting a misalignment in the exchange rate.
Changes in the exchange rate under such circumstances can have important effects
on the balance sheets of' business and financial firms. In particular, a
currency devaluation can transmute overnight a solvent firm into a technically
insolvent one as the local currency value of external debt is raised.

—49—

This process is sometimes necessary and even useful. Firms may have
overextended themselves with foreign credit on the basis of an overvalued

currency. Their operating costs may have been artificially reduced, insofar as

they have imported inputs, by the overvalued currency. Currency devaluation
puts a halt to the process and introduces some useful economic discipline both
for the debtors and for the foreign creditors, who under bankruptcy proceedings
would normally share in some of the losses.
Governments are typically reluctant, however, to take steps that will throw

firms, especially major firms, into bankruptcy. The presence of extensive
external debt may therefore inhibit or force changes in exchange rates in order

to limit the financial difficulties of large firms. In 1967, for instance,
following the devaluation of sterling, Hong Kong at first devalued the Hong Kong

dollar. Not to have done so would have badly weakened the balance sheets of
some leading banks, which had assets in sterling, even though on other economic
grounds the devaluation was not justified (and, indeed, the action was reversed
after a few days when alternative methods for protecting the banks were worked

out). Similarly, some countries have put their local development banks into
technical insolvency by devaluing the currency. In this way also the presence
of external debt serves to limit macroeconomic policy.

Finally, a large external debt of the government itself reduces the

flexibility of fiscal policy. Large interest payments cannot be cut if the
government desires to retrench. A government that has made total budget
expenditures or the total budget deficit a target of eocnomic policy will have
to put all the more pressure on domestic expenditures to the extent that

—50—

external debt servicing is large. This is especially true following a currency
devaluation, when the local currency counterpart of external debt denominated in

foreign currency will rise in proportion to the devaluation. When framing
national stabilization programs, on the other hand, it must be recognized that

interest payments to foreigners do not stimulate the domestic economy. Thus,
interest on foreign debt should be treated differently from normal government
expenditures.

Is Laissez—Faire a Desirable Borrowing Strate&y?

A useful reference point for evaluating the debtor's policies toward
external borrowing is the complete freedom of all economic agents to

borrow abroad without restriction by the borrowing country. This regime
generally existed in the 19th century and continues to exist in some advanced

countries today, e.g. Canada and the United States. Under these circumstances,
creditors must assess and take the risks borrower by borrower, just as they do

with domestic loans. If a particular loan cannot be repaid, the external
creditors share the loss through bankruptcy without, in principle, affecting the
creditworthiness of other (independent) borrowers in the same country.

Perhaps regrettably, there are a number of reasons why the laissez—faire
approach is not at present likely to be suitable for most developing countries.
First, their governments have almost universally taken a strong hand in economic

management, including economic development. Government influence not only on
the macroeconomic environment but also on resource allocation is pervasive, to
the point where it is often difficult to say whether an enterprise's insolvency

—51—

is due to bad judgment on the part of management or due to government actions.
Under these circumstances, creditors will not view the individual projects as
independent but will attach a heavy weight to the "country factort' as such.

Second, even under true laissez—faire, creditors may find it prudent to
ration credit to individual borrowers because of the problem of adverse
selection in the presence of imperfect information (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981).
If the borrowing is truly and persuasively decentralized, the rationing will be
by individual borrower, not (in general) by country except insofar as there is

identifiable countrywide risk. But insofar as there is country—risk, as there
is bound to be for the first reason above, prospective debtors can enlarge their

access to credit by taking steps to reduce the perception of country—risk. One
part of this nay be, paradoxically, to exert closer control over the external
borrowing of economic agents.

Furthermore, many of the potential foreign borrowers in a country may be so
important for the continuing functioning of the national economy that bankruptcy

——

involving

a write down of the foreign debt —— cannot in practice be

contemplated. This is especially true of banks and of some other financial
intermediaries, as we have already seen. Both the external reputation of the
country and internal confidence in its institutions may be so closely tied to
particular firms that in practice the government must guarantee their external

debt or else avoid any actions that bring its servicing into question. External
creditors of the leading banks are thus guaranteed, whether formally or not, by

the national government, and their expectations reflect this fact. The same may
be true of other important commercial enterprises, including especially

—52—

government—owned enterprises. In short, bankruptcy of certain institutions
would have strong negative reputational externalities for the debtor country.
Knowing this, the government should monitor closely and perhaps even limit the
external indebtedness of these institutions.
The general point is that countries acquire reputations ——

for

prudence or

foolhardiness, for caution or boldness in economic planning, for market
orientation or dirigisme, and so on ——

that

are important to creditors in

assessing credit worthiness. Thus difficulties by some borrowers affect the
supply—of—funds schedule to the entire country (and, in periods of rapidly
moving crises, fraught by exceptional uncertainty, to neighboring countries as

well). In short, there is an informational or reputational externality arising
from the inability or unwillingness of lenders to make fine distinctions among

borrowers. This occurs in domestic markets as well. For example, virtually all
utility stocks are depressed in the United States due in part to the
difficulties of those relatively few utilities with nuclear power plants under

construction. These "pigeon—hole effects" dissipate over time as more
information becomes available, but perhaps only after a liquidity crisis,

discussed above, has occurred and much damage has been done ——

which in turn can

lead to self—fulfillment of pessimistic prophesies.

Direct Responsibility
There are three areas in particular where the government cannot really
escape responsibility for external borrowing and therefore must make decisions
on both the level and the character of external borrowing.

—53—

The first concerns borrowing by the government itself for the provision of
public goods and services. Much traditional external borrowing has been for
such purposes, and indeed the World Bank was created as a mediating lender in
part for the provision of funds for public investments.

Some public infrastructure, such as railroads, is potentially

revenue—producing. But much of it is not. The government must raise the debt
service through general taxation, with all the implications discussed above.
While the old borrower's guideline to match the maturity of the loan to the life
of

the project does not strictly hold when the project is not revenue—producing,

it

is a good rule nonetheless: long—term projects, whose contribution to GNP

and hence to taxable income is spread over many years, should if possible be

financed by long—term borrowing. Not doing so places more pressure on the
on the internal terms of trade to generate the trade surplus necessary to
amortize the debt rapidly.

The main point is that governments of developing countries are likely
to be borrowing abroad to finance public infrastructure, and perhaps operating
expenses as well, and they must take a position on the amount and character of
their external debt.
PL second reason is the widespread government oinership of

revenue—generating commercial enterprises ——

the so—called parastatals. Rare is

the country that does not have some parastatals, and in many countries they

generate over half the output of the modern sectors of the economy. The
government, as chief or sole stockholder, cannot ultimately dissociate itself

from the parastatals, although varying degrees of association are possible. At

—54--

one end of the spectrum, parastatals can be chartered with a high degree of
independence with respect to all business decisions, with a top management that
has

independent standing and is compensated in relation to profitability of the

enterprise. Some British firms approach this model. It would make as clear as
possible to lenders that they are dealing with a commercial

enterprise with all

the attendant risks, and that it does not have the full credit backing of the

government. Even in such extreme circumstances, it is unlikely that a
government—owner could allow such a firm to go into bankruptcy ——
to its foreign creditors ——

without

at

some loss

damaging the reputation of the country and

especially the government as a borrower. This kind of linkage is not limited to
government—owned enterprises. Several U.S. banks went to considerable expense
in the mid—1910s to bail out insolvent or weak real estate investment trusts

under their sponsorship —— which were legally separate and could have been
allowed to fail, as many did ——

for

the sake of perserving their overall

reputation with both creditors and customers.

In any case most parastatals are not put at arms length from the government
that owns them, managers are not given full autonony, and managers are not

typically compensated on the basis of profitability of the firm. These factors
make it all the more difficult for a government to dissociate fully from the
economic performance of its state enterprises.

In the first place, government often uses parastatals to pursue social
goals other than profitability, so it is inapprorpiate to hold management
responsible for profitability, as would be the case with a privately owned firm.
Major investment plans must typically be approved by the relevant ministry, and

—55—

employment levels and practices are subject to government guidance (as is also
true, in lesser degree, of privately—owned firms in many
management is typically on salary ——

often

countries).

Secondly,

very low salary, compared with

compensation in privately—owned enterprises of comparable size —- and while
salaries are occasionally augmented by incentive bonuses, the bonuses are

typically not related to profitability. For these reasons, managers have no
direct incentive to gauge their borrowing to the requirements of profitability.
Indeed, since the main motivations of managers in parastatals in many countries
is some combination of personal enrichment (other than through direct
compensation) and political advancement, the principal incentive is toward

enlargement of scale rather than profitability. Yet enlargement of scale, if
not limited, is likely to lead to excessive external borrowing by the

enterprise. The now classic case is the rapid expansion and diversification of
the Indonesian national oil firm, Pertaniina, in the wake of its enhanced

borrowing power following the l914 oil price increase (Wellens, 19T6).

The

divergence of interest between managers and owners is of course not

limited to state—owned enterprises and can be
firms

found

in large privately—owned

as well. One study has shown that U.S. firms managed by owners, or under

close control of owners, tend to be more profitable than those in which the role

of owners is nre remote (McEachern, 1975).
For this reason too, therefore, governments will want to monitor closely
and perhaps even control directly the external borrowings of their parastatals.
Their managers under prevalent arrangements cannot be assumed to borrow abroad
to the socially optimal degree; in general, they will tend to over—borrow if

—56—

left unrestrained.

A third area where the government cannot in practice escape responsibility
f or the level and character of external borrowing concerns the local banks, and

perhaps other bank—like financial institutions. Banks are typically under heavy
regulation, presumably for protection of the public. Banks are, furthermore,
the repositories of public confidence in the functioning of an economic system.
If a major bank fails, it has potential ramifications going far beyond the
failure of one enterprise; both borrowers and lenders become much more cautious,
a development that on occasion is welcome but generally results in economic

recession and economic hardship. For this reason, governments must take an
active interest in the smooth functioning of the major banks under their

jurisdiction. This does not mean that they must protect bank managers against

their mistaken judgment; management can be dismissed. It does mean that the
mistaken judgments of bank management cannot be allowed to weaken the
institution at the expense of' depositors and creditors except at a cost that may-

go far beyond the institution in question. We are here speaking of the
financial system as a whole, and its major components. Minor banks whose fate
can be clearly separated from the financial system as a whole may be allowed to
fail.

The reputation and fate of the banks can influence a country's reputation

with foreign creditors as well. Chile in the late seventies was widely
applauded in some circles for its return to a relatively unregulated, free

enterprise system. Chilean banks had borrowed heavily in international markets
for relending in the local economy. When in 1982 a private bank became

—57—

insolvent, the government let it be known that the bank was private and

creditors had lent to it at their own risk. External credits to Chile
immediately dried up. Within a short interval the government felt obliged to
reverse itself and guarantee the external liabilities of the bank. Creditors
did not accept the dissociation of the government from the banks. Consequently,
the government must perforce be concerned with both the internal and the
external exposure of the banks. (Even a country as averse to governnient
interference as Switzerland has let it be known that the three largest banks
cannot be allowed to fail.)

Guidelines for External Borrowing
Given that the government should take a strong interest in the total level
and character of external indebtedness, what would be its guiding principles?
Unfortunately, it is difficult to lay down universally applicable quantitative

guidelines for external debt. Because reputation so heavily influences the
possibilities a country faces and the difficulties it is likely to encounter in
international financial markets, and because reputation is based on history,
experience, and prevailing ideological views in the borrowing country, each
country confronts a distinctive set of issues and problems.

Indicators such as the debt/GDP ratio or the debt—servicing ratio are often

used to signal when external debt is reaching dangerous levels. So long as such
indicators are widely used, they of course become important in establishing

creditworthiness. But unfortunately such indicators have little objective
basis, in that they can vary widely with safety, depending on the circumstances.

—58--

Table 2
Debt, GDP, GNP, and Debt Service in a Steady State

Debt/GDP

Exports/GDP

Debt Service
Exports

Debt
GDP
GNP
(relative to pre-debt GDP)

0

0.2

0

1.0

1.0

0

0.5

0.25

0.2

1.08

1.03

0.514

1

0.3

0.33

1.18

1.06

1.18

2

0.14

0.5

l.43

1.114

2.86

3

0.5

0.6

1.82

1.25

5.146

14

0.6

o.6

2.50

1.50

Quantitative assumptions: Return on investment = .15
Interest on debt = .1

10.0

—59—

For instance, Table 2 sets out a series of debt/GDP ratios and their implied
debt—servicing requirements, all on the assumption that the (constant) rate of
return on investment is 15 percent and the (constant) cost of borrowing in
world capital markets is 10 percent —— numbers that were plausible, even
conservative, for many

countries

in the late l9TOs.

The advantages of external borrowing so long as the return to investment

exceeds servicing requirements are quite dramatic. For instance, if the yield
on investment is 15 percent and the cost of borrowing is 10 percent a year, and
if external borrowing is the sole source of growth in output, a country can
increase its output to 2.5 times its initial level in steady state equilibrium
(where the debt remains outstanding but does not grow further), by borrowing an
amount equal to 14 times its post-borrowing GDP. Of course, under these
circumstances interest payments on outstanding debt will be very high, 140

percent of total output. Moreover, if import requirements are 20 percent of
GDP, the interest—servicing ratio (interest payments/total exports) will he
two—thirds. However, even after these large payments of interest to foreigners,
output available for the residents of the borrowing country (GNP) will be 1.5

times the initial, pre—debt level of GNP. This represents the net gains from
borrowing abroad, which as indicated can be dramatic. In this example, while
the final debt to GDP ratio is 14, total borrowings will be ten times the initial

level of GDP. Lower levels of borrowing will of course result in lower debt/GDP
ratios and lower debt—servicing ratios (see Table 2). The general point is that
quite high debt ratios are sustainable in long—run equilibrium provided the
country is not subjected to large uncertainty in output or exports.

—60—

A debt/GDP ratio of four, although sustainable on the assumptions given, is

far higher than anything we actually observe. Actual debt/GDP ratios even of
countries heavily in debt are in the vicinity of .6, well under unity. Israel
has the highest observed debt/GDP ratio, at 1.6, and much of Israel's external

debt is on concessional terms. Interest—service ratios as high as 50 percent
can be observed but are still well below the two—thirds given in the
illustration.

We may well ask why countries do not borrow even more than they have, for

the illustration suggests much higher sustainable debt than we observe. One
possible answer is that debt on a much larger scale would depress returns to
investment, so that the assumption made here of a constant return is

unrealistic. In fact, however, we have observed roughly constant returns to
investment (abstracting from economic cycles) over a long period of time. If
the debt is acquired quickly, diminishing returns are indeed likely to set in.
But that is less likely to be true of investments made over several decades,
unless the investment itself depresses the external terms of trade of the
borrowing country.

A second possible answer is that the cost of borrowing will rise with the
amount of outstanding indebtedness, or more generally, that countries are
rationed in their total borrowing well before the solvency constraint is

reached. This is particularly true if repudiation risk is a major concern of
the creditors. Again the pace of borrowing is important; a rapid increase in
debt is very likely to increase the cost to the borrowing country, but a slower,

more gradual increase is less likely to do so. Nonetheless, for debt/GDP ratios

—61—

much higher than is normal, a risk premium is likely to be added to interest
rates even if the buildup is gradual, and after a given debt/GDP ratio is
reached, the borrower may be frozen out of further borrowing.

A third possible reason is that debt must be serviced in tradeables, but
debt is often acquired to finance investment in nontradeables (although some
infrastructure investments—-- e.g. feeder roads or port facilities —— are

indirectly in tradeables, by lowering the domestic cost of getting exportables

to market). Several factors are important in determining the amount of
investment of external debt in nontradeables that is sustainable: the return on
investment in tradeables relative to the cost of investment, the share of
investment in tradeables as opposed to nontradeables, and the ability of the
government to raise revenues in tradeables in order to service debt acquired to
invest in noritradeables. If, as is likely, the investment in nontradeables will
require a decline in the domestic prices of nontradeables relative to
tradeables, the extent of decline that is tolerable may also influence the
amount of debt that can be acquired for this kind of investment.

These points can be illustrated with a numerical example. Suppose, as was
the case in Table 2, that the yield on investment is 15 percent in both the
tradeable sector and the nontradeable sector of the economy, and that the cost

of foreign borrowing is 10 percent a year. Suppose further that import
requirements are 20 percent of GDP, domestic expenditure out of disposable
income is initially evenly divided between tradeables and nontradeables, and the
price elasticity of substitution between tradeables and nontradeables in
domestic demand is —2, but that the structure of production is not influenced by

—62—

relative prices. The government must raise revenues to service the external
debt invested in nontradeahies, and it does so through lump sum taxation. On
these assumptions, and for the case in which external debt is twice GDP, Table 3
below shows the fall in the relative domestic price of nontradeables that must
occur in order to service the external debt (the overall debt—service ratio is
.5, from Table 2), given different shares of investment that is made in

nontradea'bles.T For instance, if 60 percent of the external funds are used for
investment in nontradeables, the relative price of tradeables will have to rise
by 13 percent to release enough tradeables from domestic consumption to pay

interest on the external debt. (An illustration of the time profile of the
relative price of nontradeables in an optimizing model is given in the
Appendix.)

If there are political limits to the permissible change in relative prices,
that may in turn limit the amount of external debt that can be invested in

nontradeables. On the assumptions here, the world price of exports and imports

are unchanged. Therefore, alteration of the internal terms of trade will
require either a currency devaluation, which will raise the local currency
prices of tradeable goods, or a decline in the local prices of nontradeables.
Either course poses difficulties of its own.

This illustration has assumed a debt/GDP ratio of two. A lower debt ratio
will reduce the required change in relative prices simply because it requires a

smaller increase in exports. This may be another reason for limiting external
borrowing for investment in nontradeables even when it augments GNP. A lower
demand elasticity of substitution will call for a larger change in relative

—63—

Table 3

Share of Investment
in Nontradeables
(percent)

Required Fall in
Relative Price of Tradeables
(percent)

0

—7'

20

2

1o

8

60

13

80

18

100

22

Note: See text and footnote 7'

for

assumptions.

—64—

prices, while allowing the composition of output to respond to relative prices
(assuming investment decisions are made over a period time) will work in the
other direction.

Finally, any practical limit to the taxing powers of government may in turn

limit the amount of investment in nontradeables. For instance, if 100 percent
of investment is in nontradeables in the example offered in Table 3, the
government must tax 20 percent of GDP (and 25 percent of GNP), valued at

—ht. rrirc

taxation

in crc1r-r tr

zvri 1-T-i

'r1 T-P 1-h rr-r'1

are 10 percent of GDP, the country will be unable to service external

debt if more than 50 percent is invested in the nontradeable sector.
A fourth possible answer to the question of why actual debt/GDP ratios are
not higher than they are is that countries face uncertainty in their output and

export receipts. If debt service takes priority and the country has exhausted
its reserves and lines of credit, any shortfall in exports must be met by

squeezing imports. In many developing countries this can be accomplished in
the short run only by cutting production. The necessity of cutting production
from time to time in response to unforeseen shortfalls in net exports in turn
will reduce the optimal level of foreign indebtedness. Usually a less costlyway of absorbing these shocks is to hold sufficient reserves to cover normal and

even some extraordinary variations in net exports. Such reserves typically will
earn a lower rate of return than could real investment under stable conditions,
but they protect the country from large losses when conditions are not stable.
One method for hedging against uncertainty in output and export receipts is
for foreign creditors to share the risks directly, as they would do with equity

—65--

investments. We believe that nst developing countries have paid too little
attention to the advantages of foreign direct investment ——

not only for sharing

risks, but also for the technolor transfer that they normally bring. More
accurately, many countries have been equivocal in their official stance toward
direct investment and ambivalence —— which is often understandable in historic

terms — does not provide the stable business environment in which foreign
investment thrives. The political ambivalence is a reality in many countries,
however; and so long as it is there, the scope for proportionately large inflows
of direct investment will 'be limited.

This brings us to the final section, a discussion of the appropriate mix of
foreign obligations.

The Mix of External Obliat ions
The discussion so far has been in terms of external debt in conventional

form: interest—bearing debt with a fixed foreign—currency value at maturity.
In practice, a borrower may face several different kinds of opportunity for

drawing capital from the rest of the world: (1) concessional aid, including
grants; (2) equity investment by foreigners, which may involve some managerial
control 'by foreigners (direct investment) or simply minority foreign

shareholders; and (3) interest—bearing fixed value obligations, which in turn
may be directly linked with imports (trade credits), may' involve shorter or

longer maturities, and may be denominated in local or foreign currency-. We
offer some observations on each of these forms of obligation, and on the mix
among theme

—66—

So long as domestic investment opportunities with expected rates of return
exceeding the cost of foreign capital are available, a country can always raise
its expected level of income by borrowing abroad, but it should be cognizant of

the constraints that we have discussed in previous sections. In particular, it
should take as much concessional aid as possible, provided certain conditions
are met —— and leaving aside the question of political overtones that often

pervade bilateral aid. First, the country is able to service the debt
adequately from tax and other government revenues. Second,
supplementary domestic financing of the aid—supported projects does not draw
domestic savings away from investments that offer far greater returns to the

country. Third, the aid is not so tied up with procurement and other conditions
that it turns out to be much less concessional than it seems at first glance.
Many governments seem to give much greater weight to obtaining low interest
rates, if necessary at the expense of higher purchase prices or lower quality

products, than is economically warranted. This can be a serious mistake, which
arises in accepting medium term trade credits as well as aid—financed projects.
Foreign equity investments have the obvious advantage over interest—bearing
obligations that they do not have to be amortized and that earnings are likely
to be positively correlated with the general economic performance of the

country. We believe that countries would be well advised to encourage direct
foreign investment so long as the attraction to foreign investors is not due

mainly to price distortions in the economy. In the presence of severe price
distortions, however, foreign investment can actually make the country worse off

(Brecher and Diaz—Alejandro, 1978). Given the high, selective import tariffs

—67--

and other price distortions in many developing countries, this is a serious
problem in evaluating all projects, not merely those undertaken by foreign
investors.

Direct investment in general has advantages that go beyond the provision of

foreign capital. It introduces technical know—how and useful managerial and

marketing skills. It nay also, in a world of imperfect capital markets, provide
access to additional debt capital for the country. It has the final advantage
that if the activity fails economically, there is no need to repay the capital,
since the foreign investor bears the commercial risk.

Equity investments also have some disadvantages. First, while earnings
will generally be high when the economy is doing well, remittances of earnings
may not

be

so strongly correlated with

actually be somewhat

domestic or export performance. They may

perverse, since earnings tend to be reinvested more readily

when the economy is going well. More important, foreign investors' behavior ——

like

that of domestic firms engaged in foreign trade —— may aggravate a

liquidity crisis

exporting capital if a devaluation of the currency (or the

introduction of exchange controls) is thought to be imminent. This can be done
either directly or by manipiilating the timing of receipts and payments

associated with exporting and importing. These swings can often be large
relative to the equity stake of the foreign investor. The host country then
faces a dilemma. Absence of exchange controls invites the speculative movement
of capital, but the imposition of exchange controls damages the country's

reputation as a debtor. If exchange controls are in place, they can be used to
discourage speculative withdrawals of capital, but it is difficult to control

—68—
firms that are heavily engaged in foreign trade.

Finally, it is a fact of life that foreign direct investment, involving
management control and foreign ownership of land, is politically sensitive in

many countries. Too such foreign investment may result in a political reaction
that damages the country's overall reputation as a borrower. In some countries
fear of arousing political sensibilities may be the most significant restraint

on direct investment. And, of course, fear of expropriation is one of the
factors inhibiting investment by prospective foreign investors.

Foreign purchases of non—controlling equity interests in indigenous firms
carries some but not all of the disadvantages of foreign direct investment, and

joint ventures are actively encouraged by many countries, But for a variety of
reasons, including the lack of well—developed equity markets, the scope for
equity investment in developing countries that does not involve some foreign
influence on management is quite limited.
Our principal focus above has been on interest—bearing obligations, and

there is little more to be said here. Trade credits, whether officially
guaranteed by the government of the exporting country or not, are often
considered as separate and distinct from bank term loans or other forms of

interest-bearing investment. They represent, as it were, a somewhat separate
"pool" from which borrowing can take place. Because they tend to be less
centralized in the borrowing country, however, they can offer a troublesome

surprise when they begin to dry up during a liquidity crisis. The country then
senses, perhaps for the first time, how large the total of trade credit is and
how difficult it is for the economy to function if such credits suddenly

—69—

disappear. For this reason, countries that have heavy

monitor

debt obligations should

their trade credits closely.

When it comes to debt maturity,

we ohaerved earlier that a serious mismatch

between the maturity of cicdits and the maturity of the projeets
financing increases the exposure of a
repay
For

a debt Ibefore the

tibey are

country to liquidity crisis. Having to

returns to the project can be realized can be costly.

this reason the id banke" rule of thumb that debt maturity should be

matched to maturity of the underlying investment is a sound one.

In principle, countries have the choice of borrowing in their own
currency or in some foreign currency. Borrowing in the home currency shifts to
the lender not only convertibility risk but also exchange risk, and he will
extract

a price for that In reality, few developing countries have a practical

Possibility of borrowing abroad in their home currency on any scale in the
absence of exchange rate guarantees. Indeed, even most developed countries are

limited to borrowing abroad in one of the four or five leading currencies rather
than their own.

Concluding Remarks

Actual

levels of external borrowing by developing countries are

considerably less than could in principle be serviced from productive

investments. This may

reflect

restraint on the part of borrowers arising from

concerns about their ability to raise the funds required for debt—servicing when
the

projects are

not

directly save or generate foreign exchange. It may also reflect concern

government_sponsored or are in sectors of the econormj that do

—70—

about taking on fixed external obligations in an uncertain world when the
capacity of the domestic economy to absorb shocks at low cost is limited.

But much of the reason for lower—than—sustainable external borrowing is no
doubt due to constraints imposed by lenders who fear that (1) mismanagement of
the borrowing economy may

reduce

returns on invetraents; (2) future difficulties

may lead the authorities to repudiate the debt, in whole or in part, openly or
(more likely) tacitly; or (3) waves of sentiment in world financial markets may

lead to periodic liquidity crises that prevent an otherwise viable economy from

servicing its debt. ku these factors lead to a supply—of—funds schedule
confronting each borrower that reflects borrowing costs that increase as a

function of outstanding debt and current borrowing levels. Beyond some (on our
calculation, modest) level, higher interest rates elicit no new lending at all.
From the perspective of debtors, with many productive investment
opportunities, the task is to lower and to flatten the supply of external funds

schedule that it faces. It can thereby increase its gross national product and
per capita income after servicing external debt.

How can it do this?

Since the main restraints on further borrowing seem to be concerns by

lenders, borrowers must pay attention to these concerns. We offer some
observations which flow from our earlier analysis of external debt.

First, the debtor can improve lender perceptions of its ability to pay by
concentrating its external borrowing on productive investments (rather than on
consumption —— even though, as we have seen, consumption loans are sometimes
perfectly sensible), especially investments that will generate foreign exchange.

To accomplish the latter aim, the pricing structure of the economy cannot be too

—71—

far out of line with that prevailing in world markets. Where

possible, the

debtor should become thoroughly committed to the investments in question so that
the scope for diversion of funds away from the project is limited. From this
point of view, World Bank or regional development bank loans and even
medium—term trade credits are seen as being in a different and (to the lender)
more comforting category than are straight term bank loans not linked to
projects or to procurement of project—related equipment.

Second, the debtor can improve lender perceptions concerning its
willingness to pay by raising the visible costs to itself that would be incurred
on non—payment. That could involve such traditional steps as offering central
government guarantees, posting collateral (e.g. reserves), pledging particular
export revenues, agreeing to third party arbitration or even to jurisdiction of
courts in the lending countries, and so on.

Receptivity to foreign direct investment is taken as a positive general
attitude toward foreign capital even when direct investment flows themselves are

small. The country can over time establish a reputation for punctiliousness in
servicing its debts. Since good reputation is itself an important asset,
especially in the world of finance, loss of reputation is one of the visible

costs associated with non—payment. Cooperation of international institutions
such as the World Bank and the regional development banks in the investment
planning and financing can also improve perceived willingness to pay, since each
country's relationships with these institutions is a continuing one, and no
government likes to be a pariah in organizations that they must deal with on a
regular basis.

—72—

Finally, to reduce the harm from liquidity crises, and hence also the
probability of a liquidity crisis, the country should recognize the advantage of
longer maturities of debt, and balance these advantages against the higher costs

of long—term debt. Similarly, the debtor should recognize the gains from
diversifying the sources and character of its external financial support as much

as possible. Although trade credits and direct investment are not immune

to

the

forces involved in a liquidity crisis, as we have seen, they are influenced by-

somewhat different factors, and thus may help to forestall a liquidity crisis.
When it comes to bank term lending, on the other hand, having a strong lead
bank whose leadership is accepted by other banks perhaps offers better assurance
against a liquidity crisis than does borrowing from a larger number of unrelated

banks. The former arrangement to some extent internalizes the externality that
generates liquidity crises.

The conventional indicators of capacity to handle external debt, such as
the debt—servicing ratio or the debt/GDP ratio, have little theoretical basis,

at least in the vicinity where they are generally observed. Nonetheless, they
have become important indicators in the eyes of lenders, with each borrowing
country measured both against other countries and against the borrowing

country's own past, and that makes them important to borrowers. A sharp
increase in these indicators is taken as a warning signal even when they are

relatively low. Expectations concerning appropriate levels can be altered only
gradually,
soundness

and in the context of other actions that persuade lenders of the
of

the borrowing.

—73—

Appendix

Simulation Models for Optimal Borrowing

This appendix illustrates the use of simulation techniques to calculate

optimal borrowing paths, While we rely on fairly simply dynamic models, the
methods may be directly extended to more complicated, multi—sector models.

Earlier stadies using the techniques in this appendix include: Blanchard
(1983), Sachs (1983), Bruno and Sachs (1983), Lipton and Sachs (1983),

Blanchard and Sachs (1983),

We illustrate three models from the text: (1) the one—sector optimal
borrowing model; (2) the two—sector (traded and non—traded goods) optimal
borrowing model; and (3) the one—sector model with a public sector facing tax
constraints.

We make only one amendment to the models in the text, namely that
investment imposes adjustment costs on the economy, so that the marginal product
of capital FK should adjust slowly rather than instantaneously to equal the

world cost of capital. In particular, following Hayashi (1982), we distinguish
between gross capital formation

and total investment expenditure

which

includes adjustment costs as well as the direct cost of capital goods.

Specifically, let i be the per—unit adjustment cost, so that
Now, we assume that 4'

is

=

+

-

not constant but rather a linear function of the rate

of capital formation, 4' =

(/2)(J/ic).

Thus, rapid investment rates impose

higher per—unit costs of adjustment than slow investment rates. The

-74—

accumulation equation is: Kt+i

=

Jil

=

depreciation. Since

Kt(1_d) +

where d is the rate of geometric

+ (412)(JIK)I, we may derive that

+ (K/4)ll+2$(It/Kt). Plugging this into the accumulation equation

yields:

K+i =

(Al)

=

where

K(l_d)

_Oc/4)

+ f(I,Kt)

+ (K/)v'1+2(It/Kt)

For later reference, we note that

en

+

=

—(l/)

is small,

+ (l/wl+2$(It/Kt)
0.

The infinite—horizon, one—sector borrowing problem is shown in Table Al.

The aggregate production function is Q(K). Implicitly, labor is held fixed
at

=

1.

Note that for completeness government expenditure has been placed in

the utility function. The entire system is set up as a Lagrangian and the
first—order conditions are solved in Part III of the table.

is the co—state

variable (or dynamic Lagrange multiplier) attached to D, so it represents the
marginal utility of wealth.

is the shadow value of installed capital. In

all, the system is a four—dimensional, non—linear difference equation system in

X, u.,, Kt, and D. We solve the system below, for particular numerical values.
It is easy to extend the model to include non—traded goods, with

sector—specific capital and freely mobile labor. Thus, we introduce production
functions QT = FT(KT,LT) and QN = FN(KN,LN).

L = LT + LN.

Capital

of the form

=

Full employment of labor requires

in each sector is governed by an accumulation equation

K(l—d)

+ f(I,K), where i = T,N.

For simplicity, we

treat all investment expenditure as drawing on the traded good (this can easily

be modified). Thus, the market—clearing condition for non—traded goods is

—75—

Table Al
The One—Sector Model

I.

Problem

max (1+sYtu(ct,Gt)
Gt t 'It
such that:
(a)

D

(b)

K

(c)

lim

Cd)

II.

Dt (l+r) +1
+G
+Ct —Q (K)
t
t
t t

t+l

f(I t ,K)

= K (1—d) +
t

t+l

—4-

Dt(1+r)

= 0

K0, D0 given

Lagrangian

£ =

(1+rt{u(c,G)

+ A[Ic1

—

K(l_d)

+
—

— Dt(l+r)

f(I,K)1}

III. First—Order Conditions

(a) a/aC=o=>u=p
(b) a/aD 0 > (l+r)J.1
(c)

Cd)
Ce)

= 0 =>

a/aK =

a =>

Xf1

=

Ci ,K) =

xtIl_d

+

fKt(1tKt

=

—

- Gt

—

Ct +

—76--

QN = cJ

where

-f

and GN are real consumption expenditures falling on N.
=

The debt accumulation equation is

Dt(l+r)

+

+ (I+i) —

+

Q(K,L).

The entire model, including Lagrangian and first—order conditions is shown in
Table A2.

Note that

is the co—state variable for the constraint that the non—traded

goods sector clears. It is easy to show that (O/11) is the shadow price of
non—traded goods relative to traded goods in the model. If the optimal
solution is to be decentralized via market forces,

NT

the

will be

ratio

..
.
The entire system is now implicitly a six—dimensional nonlinear
•

T

N

N T

All

difference equation system in the variables Kt, Kt, Dt, X and
of the other variables may be expressed in terms of these six variables.

The final model we consider is the one—sector, tax—constrained econon,
in which official borrowing is used to augment (sub—optimal) private savings,
but in which the maximum tax rate is constrained to be below some rate 't. As
explained in the text, private saving is assumed to be a constant fraction s of

after—tax income (l_t)Q, so that private consumption expenditure is

C =

(1_s)(1_t)Q.

Total investment expenditure is equal to private savings,

s(l_T)Qt, plus public savings, tQ —

— rD,

—

plus new borrowing

Dt

(in

the text, government consumption expenditure was ignored). Thus,

s(l—t)Q + (tQt_Gt_rDt) + (Dt÷1_D). Since s(l_T)Qt =
=

Q(1_T)

—

C,

we have

— C) + (TQ_G_) + (D1_D), which after rearrangement yields

the standard balance—of—payments identity Dt+1 =

It

(l+r)Dt

+

+

+ Gt —

is easy to demonstrate that if T = 1, in other words tax rates are

unconstrained, the optimization problem in which the government controls

Gt and Dt÷i — Dt amounts to precisely the same problem as in Table Al, where the

—77—
Table A2

The Two—Sector Model

I.

Problem

TNT

max

TNTNT

G ,G ,C Ct
such that:

(a) Dt+i =

(b)

(c)

Dt(l+r)

Q(K,l—L)
=

=

K(l—d)

(c) urn Dt(1+r)

+

NT

(i+I)

+

T +

Gt

T —

T

Ct

+
+

r(I,K)

i = N,T

t =
a

(d) DQ,K,K given
II.

£ =

(l÷t{u(c,c,G,G)
-

(i+i)

GT - 0T +

t

+

P[D+1

+

e[Q(K,l_L) - C - G] + AT[KT
t t+l
N
N
- K(l-d) - f(I,K)]}

+

D(1+r)

—

III. First—Order_Conditions
= 0 => U

(a)

(b)

N

U

t

m

(c) /aGIT=O=>U
=0t
t
(d)

/G=O=>UT=ut

—

t Q(K4fl
— K(l-d) f(I,K)]

—78--

Table A2, continued
= 0

(e)

()
(g)
(h)

/aK

>

= 0 =>

a/ai = 0

=>

= 0 =>

=

(l+r)U
A[l—d

—

f(I,K)1

Af1(I,K)

=

—Pt

=

—

I = T,N

= OtQN(K,L)

i

= T,N

—79—

government controls C,I, and G. In other words, when taxes are unconstrained,
the economy- can reach the first—best optimum of Table Al, even though private

savings are set in an ad hoc way as a fixed fraction of disposable income.
The more interesting case occurs when the tax constraint t is binding,
Let

and

be optimal in the solution to the problem in Table Al. If C

is controlled directly, C is simply set at C. If C is controlled via taxes,
1 —

or

[C/(l—s)Q].

If T > 1, the first—best solution is no longer

feasible when taxes are the control instrument. We now assume that for some

> . Thus,

period t,

we must find a second—best solution.

The tax management problem is shown in Table A3.

It is convenient to

re—write the tax constraint as a constraint on consumption, C.,

where

=

(1—s)(l--)Q.

Then we rewrite the first—order conditions (a) and

(e) and define a "notional" demand

such that U(C,G) =

.i•

C is the

level of consumption that would be chosen assuming that the tax constraint is

not binding in the current period. Actual consumption is given by C =

The problem in Table A3 presents a highly non—linear difference equation

system in four variables: D, K, ''

The other variables can all be

expressed as functions of these four variables.

The Numerical Simulations
We now proceed to numerical simulations of these optimal borrowing models.
For purposes of the simulations, we assume the following:

—80—
Table A3
Optimal Borrowing with Tax Constraints

(i+)
,Dt

max
Gt ,Tt

-t

U(C,G)

such that:
(a)

Dt+i =

(l+r)Dt

It

+

+ G

+ C

t

—
t

Q(K)

(b)

=

(c)

(l_s)(i_E)Q
=

(a)

+

K(1_d)

f(I,K)

I—'

D0, K0 given

II.

Lagrangian

t't

E(l+6)_t{U(C G ) +

£

0
+

A

— K (i—a)
t

t [K
t-fl

—

t IDt+l

—

(l+r)Dt

f(I t ,K)]

—

= 0 =>

Uc(Ct,Gt)

=

t

—

(b) f/aGt = 0

=>

(c)

0

>

(1+r)P

=

(i+S)1J

(d)

= 0 =>

At(l_d)

=

x_1(h1)

(e)

= 0 when

UG(Ct,Gt)

C <

and

=

> 0

— G

—
t

C

t

+ Q(K )]
t

+y[c — (l_s)(l_)Q(Kt)]}

III. First—Order Conditions
(a)

It

—

when C =

+

—81—

(Al) In the one—sector model:

=

U(c,G)
a =

=

log[CG(1_

0.5

r = .12

=o.6r

*5

=

= 0.1t5

.12

dl0
In the two—sector model:
T —
—

(KT(LT1_
t' t'

N —
1 =

\

t/

t'

+

U(C,C,G,G)

=

a

=

*5 = .12

4)

= 10.0

r

= .12

0.5

Two simulations

log[(C)l(c)2(G)3(G)123]

d=
a1

.10

= .25

a2
a3

=

.I1

= .13

a = .21

are performed. In the first, we begin with K0 below the

steady state level in the one—sector model and compare the adjustment costs in

the tax—constrained (
that the case t

= 1.0

= 0.)5) and tax—unconstrained model ( = 1.0).

Remember

in the model of Table A3 will give exactly the same

outcome as the solution to the model of Table Al. In the second simulation,
the process of capital accumulation in the traded/non—traded goods model is
studied.

—82--

Figure Al illustrates the basic proposition with respect to the fiscal

constraint: with low t, the country should not borrow as rapidly as on the
unconstrained path. The solid line is the debt/GDP ratio for the unconstrained
case, and the dotted line is the optimum path in the constrained case (the

economy is assumed to begin in 19T0 with D/Q equal to 0.38). When taxes are
unconstrained foreign borrowing is more rapid and stabilizes at a much

higher level of debt than in the tax—constrained case. Note that the optimal
path in the unconstrained case involves a very high D/Q ratio, a point we made

in the text in a static context. Figure A2 illustrates the path of physical
capital in the two economies. The counterpart of the larger foreign borrowing
in the unconstrained economy is more rapid capital formation and a higher
steady—state capital stock.

The two—sector model simulation is illustrated in part in Figure A3. Once
T
again, we assume that capital stocks klfl this case both K0 and

are

sufficiently low so that rapid accumulation of capital should take place in both

sectors. As shown in the Figure A3, the relative price of non—traded goods
declines over time, as the initial current account turns into eventual balance

and the initial trade deficit turns into long—run surplus. Figure A4 shows
the paths of

and KT. In the simulation shown, the optimal planner (or the

market, in its decentralized interpretation) has perfect foresight of the

long—run changes in N1T In practice, however, it is likely that many agents

NT

will underestimate the necessary long—run decline in P /P , and thereby
over—invest in the non—traded goods sector in the initial phase of adjustment.

Such over—investment would eventually necessitate even larger declines in

—83—
Figure Al

A Comparison of Optimal Foreign Debt Accumulation
in the Tax-Constrained and Unconstrained Models
Debt/GDP Ratio

.75

.65

55.

.50
.45.

I/
I
I

.35
1970

i980

1990

2000

D/Q (unconstrained)

D/Q (tax-constrained)

2010

2020

2030

Figure P.2
A Comparison of Capital Accumulation
in the Tax-Constrained and Unconstrained Models

Capital Stock

L.30

L.25

•0

L.20
I

I
II

I

I

'I

1970

1980

1990

2000

K

(unconstrained) —

K

(tax-constrained)

2010

2020

2030

—85--

Figure

A3

The Paths of the Current Account—GDP Ratio and
(Percentage Deviations from a Constant Baseline)

Current Acount/GDP Ratio

1.0
.5.

0.0
—.5.

—L0
S

—1.5-

—2.0

-2.5
—3.

1980

CA/Q _____________

2000

20±0

2020

2030

—86—

Figure A4

Paths of Capital Accumulation
for KT and KN
(Percentage Deviations from a Constant Baseline)

Capital Stock

.oa

.06

II

I

0.0'
1980

KT

1990

2000

20±0

2020

2030

—87—

along the adjustment path, in order to move

capital

and labor back to the

traded goods sector.

The simulation techniques outlined here can be extended to larger and more
realistic models that include Keynesian and monetary features not explored in

this paper (see Blanchard and Sachs, 1983, for an example). Such models should
prove fruitful in improving medium—term assessments of an economy's
debt—servicing capacity and creditworthiness.

—88—

Footnotes

1.

Equation (2) implicitly assumes that

is independent of C. each period,

which is correct under the assumptions made. In more general models, with a
variable labor supply or with work effort a function of C, we cannot simply

maximize TBt each period by setting C =

2.

Such a Ponzi scheme is called a "rational speculative bubble" in the

finance literature, where it is shown that with n >

forever.

r the

bubble can last

In a sense, the debt is an "unbacked asset" that maintains value

because each creditor believes that future creditors will make the necessary
loans to the debtor country.

Note that by writing C =

3.

— (1+r)D1, we are assuming that the borrower

and never opts to repudiate if credit rationing on

always repays

in fact

occurs.

By totally differentiating U =

4.

we have

and VDD <

(l+r)Ul/[Ul+VDD/(l+)1. Since

D/dD1
5.

v/(i+S),

0,

0 <

dD/dD1

<

(1+r).

Specifically,
+

dD1/dir =

where y =

(l+r)

—

dDfdD1

(l—u)(l+r)yU1/(1+)J

> 0

The proof is as follows. We start at an equilibrium with

6.

u1(c) =
by V0

_(1+r)VD(D)/(l+)

u(c0) +

and u1(c) >

.(l+r)VD(O)/(l+6).

{U(c)/(l÷) + v(o)/(i+)2}

+

Utility is given

(1-){U(c)/(l+)

+

The investment project has an income stream of —d11, 0, (l+O)2d1, over the
three periods, so that dV =
—

-U0d11

—

[1rVD(0)/(l+)2I(l+e)2dIl

Now, by conditions of optimality,

—89—

U0 =

(l+r)U1(c)f(i+)

+

(1+r)(1—)U1(C)/(i÷).

equation, we find dV/d11 =
—

(1+)[(1+r)U/(1+)

+

—[(i+r)U/(1+)

+

(1+6)2vD(DN)/(1+)21.

Substituting in the dV

(l+6)2vD(0)f(l+6)2]
+

Let y =

Then, by substituting in dV the relationships between U1 and VD, we get
dV/d11 =

kVD(O)/(l+)21[(1+r)2

— (1÷6)21 +

[(1+)VD(D)/(1+)21[(l+r)2

— (1÷0)21

—

For
1.

r =

0,

dV/dI, =

—ii(1+r)y/(i+5)

<

0.

For 0 >>

r

dy/dr1 > 0

Table 3 is calculated from the following model, using the notation of

Appendix:

QT =

t

N

T

CN =

+ pK

N

N

Q =Q0+pic
'P

Q=Q

Q

(Q—rD)

=CN

N

+Q

=
where p

c

KT = (1—y)D
.15, r

column of Table 3.

.10, C

= —2.0, and I is shown parametrically as the first

—90—

References

Arrow, K. and M. Kurz (1910), Public Investment, The Rate of Return, and Optimal
Fiscal Policy, Resources for the Future, Johns Hopkins Press, 1910.

Bhagwati, J. and T.N. Srinivasan (1976), "Optimal Trade Policy and Compensation

Under Endogenous Uncertainty: The Phenomenon of Market Disruption,"
Journal of International Economics 6: 317—36.
Blanchard, 0. (1983), "Debt and the Current Account Deficit in Brazil," in

P. Armella, etal. (eds.), Financial Policies and the World Capital
Market: The Problem of Latin American Countries, NBER Conference Report
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Blanchard, 0. and J. Sachs (1982), "Anticipations, Recessions, and Policy: An
Intertemporal Disequilibrium Model," Annales de L'Insee 47—48,
July-December.

Brecher, R.A. and C.F. Diaz—Alejandro (1977), "Tariffs, Foreign Capital and
Immiserying Growth," Journal of International Economics 7 (November):
317—322.

Bruno, M. and J. Sachs (1982), "Input Price Shocks and the Slowdown in Economic
Growth," Review of Economic Studies.

Bulow, J. and J.B. Shoven, (1978), "The Bankruptcy Decision," Bell Journal of
Economics.
Diaz—Alejandro, C. (l98)-), "Good—bye Financial Repression, Hello Financial

Crash," processed, Columbia University.

—91—

Dornbusch, R. (l98), "External Debt, Budget Deficits, and Disequilibrium
Exchange Rates," this volume.
Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981), "Debt with Potential Repudiation:
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies )-t8.

Jensen, M. and W. Meckling (1916), "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
Agency Costs, and Capital Structure," Journal of Financial Economics
3:305—60.

Kharas, H,J. (1981), "Constrained Optimal Foreign Borrowing by Less Developed
Countries," mimeo, Development Policy Staff, World Bank, August.
Lipton, D. and J. Sachs (1983), "Accumulation and Growth in a Two—Country
Model," Journal of International Economics.

McEachern, W.A. (1915), Managerial Control and Performance, Lexington Books.
Sachs, J. (1981), "The Current Account and Macroeconomic Adjustment in the
1910's," Brookings Papers on Economic

_________(1982a), "The Current Account in the Macroeconomic djustment Process,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics 8)-(2).

_________(1982b), "LDC Debt: Problems and Prospects," in P. Wachtel (ed.),
Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure (Lexington Books).

_________ (1983), "Energr and Growth under Flexible Exchange Rates," in
J. Bhandari and B. Putnam, The International Transmission of Economic
Disturbances, MIT

Press.

_________ (l981-), "Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing," forthcoming
in the Princeton Studies in International Finance 5)4.

and D. Cohen (1982), "LDC Borrowing with Default Risk," NBER

—92—

Working Paper No. 925.

Smith, Clifford and J. Warner (1979), "On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of
Bond Covenants," Journal of Financial Economics 1: 111—61.
Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1981), "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
Information: I," American Economic Review.

Wellons, P.A. (1911), Borrowing by Developing Countries in the Euro—Currency

Market, Paris: OECD Development Centre.

