NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RACIAL DISCRIMINATION AND COMPETITION
Ross Levine
Alexey Levkov
Yona Rubinstein
Working Paper 14273
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14273

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We thank seminar participants at Brown University, the Bank of Israel, the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, Harvard University, and the NBER Workshop on "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics."
We also thank Daron Acemoglu, Gary Becker, Roland Benabou, Steve Durlauf, Ken Chay, and Raquel
Fernandez for very useful discussions. We are grateful to Kerwin Charles and Jonathan Guryan for
sharing their data. We thank the Watson Institute for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ross Levine, Alexey Levkov, and Yona Rubinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Racial Discrimination and Competition
Ross Levine, Alexey Levkov, and Yona Rubinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 14273
August 2008, Revised July 2009
JEL No. D3,D43,G21,G28,J31,J7
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses the impact of competition on racial discrimination. The dismantling of inter- and
intrastate bank restrictions by U.S. states from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s reduced financial market
imperfections, lowered entry barriers facing nonfinancial firms, and boosted the rate of new firm formation.
We use bank deregulation to identify an exogenous intensification of competition in the nonfinancial
sector, and evaluate its impact on the racial wage gap, which is that component of the black-white
wage differential unexplained by Mincerian characteristics. We find that bank deregulation reduced
the racial wage gap by spurring the entry of non- financial firms. Consistent with taste-based theories,
competition reduced both the racial wage gap and racial segregation in the workplace, particularly
in states with a comparatively high degree of racial prejudice, where competition-enhancing bank
deregulation eliminated about one-quarter of the racial wage gap after five years.
Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu
Alexey Levkov
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Alexey_Levkov@brown.edu

Yona Rubinstein
Brown University
Department of Economics
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
yona_rubinstein@brown.edu

1

Introduction

More than four decades after the Civil Rights Act, large disparities in wage rates persist
between black and white Americans (Smith and Welch, 1989, Donohue and Heckman, 1991,
Altonji and Blank, 1999, and Neal, 2006). Yet, researchers have not fully determined the
degree to which blacks earn less than whites with the same observable skills because of
di¤erences in unobserved skills or because of racial wage discrimination, whereby blacks
are paid less than identically productive whites.
Becker (1957) argues that taste-based discrimination, the disutility that white employers
attach to hiring black workers, can produce racial wage discrimination and that intensi…ed product market competition can reduce this wage gap between identically productive
workers. With lower entry barriers, …rms with less of a taste for discrimination can initiate
pro…table operations by hiring equally productive black workers at lower wage rates than
their white counterparts, boosting the relative demand for black workers. Thus, like any
ine¢ ciency, competition erodes racial wage discrimination.
Rather than emphasizing racial biases and competition, Arrow (1972) and Phelps (1972)
stress that a gap in skills and imperfect information can explain racial wage di¤erentials.
If black workers are on average less productive than white workers due to characteristics
that are unobserved by employers, those employers will use the observable characteristic
– race – as a signal of productivity. In turn, employers will pay blacks a lower wage rate
than whites with identical observable skills.
In this paper, we evaluate the causal impact of intensi…ed competition on blacks’relative
wages and assess whether the mechanisms linking competition and the racial wage gap are
consistent with a taste-based explanation of the racial wage gap. In particular, Becker’s
(1957) theory suggests that competition will increase the relative demand for black workers
only in economies where employers have a taste for discrimination. We examine this.
Indeed, we provide the …rst evaluation of whether the impact of competition on blacks’
labor market opportunities varies positively with the economy’s taste for discrimination.
This provides information on whether competition diminishes the manifestation of racial
prejudices in labor markets.
Speci…cally, we use bank deregulation to identify an exogenous intensi…cation of competition among non…nancial …rms, and evaluate its impact on the racial wage gap in the
overall economy. From the mid-1970s to 1994, individual states of the United States relaxed restrictions on both the entry of banks from other states and the branching of banks
within states. The resultant intensi…cation of competition among banks reduced …nancial market imperfections and lowered entry barriers facing non…nancial …rms. Black and

1

Strahan (2002), Kerr and Nanda (2009), and our own estimates demonstrate that bank
deregulation substantively spurred the entry of new …rms. We assess whether this greater
competition among …rms boosted blacks’relative wages. That is, we exploit the cross-state,
cross-time variation in bank deregulation to identify exogenous changes in entry barriers
facing non…nancial …rms and then estimate whether the resultant intensi…cation of competition increases blacks’ relative wages. Critically, we do not focus on black’s relative
wages within the banking industry. Rather, we evaluate whether bank deregulation that
spurred competition in the entire economy reduced the racial wage gap in the state’s overall
economy.
Our estimation strategy requires that bank deregulation is exogenous to competition
and blacks’ labor market outcomes. Geographic restrictions on banking protected local
banks from competition for much of the 20th century (White, 1982). By the mid-1970s,
however, technological innovations reduced the economic advantages of these restrictions,
weakening the ability and desire of banks to …ght deregulation and triggering the dismantling of these statutes over the next two decades. Kroszner and Strahan (1999) show that
(1) the invention of automatic teller machines weakened the geographical bond between
customers and banks; (2) checkable money market mutual funds facilitated banking by
mail and telephone; and, (3) improvements in data processing, telecommunications, and
credit scoring techniques weakened the informational advantages of local bankers. These
national innovations interacted with preexisting state characteristics to produce considerable variation in the timing of bank deregulation across states. In states where probable
losers from deregulation, such as small banks, were politically powerful, deregulation occurred later, while in states where probable winners from deregulation, such as small …rms,
were relatively powerful, deregulation occurred sooner. The timing of deregulation was neither associated with competition in the non…nancial sector (Black and Strahan, 2002), nor,
as we demonstrate below, with the racial wage gap. Hence the history of bank deregulation
and its impact on entry barriers facing non…nancial …rms provides a natural laboratory for
evaluating the causal impact of competition on blacks’relative wages.
Our approach provides information on the mechanisms linking competition and relative wages by evaluating whether the impact of competition on the racial wage gap varies
by the degree of racial bias. According to Becker (1957), competition will boost blacks’
relative wages only when the marginal employer receives disutility from hiring black workers. Thus, we use interracial marriage rates prior to deregulation to proxy for cross-state
di¤erences in the taste for discrimination. Using the 1970 census, we compute the predicted rate of intermarriage based on individual and state characteristics. We interpret
the di¤erence between the predicted rate of intermarriage and the actual rate as positively

2

related to the taste for discrimination. Although imperfect, this racial bias index is (1)
measured prior to bank deregulation, (2) uncorrelated with the timing of bank deregulation, and (3) strongly associated with recent survey measures of racial prejudices employed
by Charles and Guryan (2008). We use the racial bias index to evaluate whether the impact of competition on blacks’relative wages varies positively with the economy’s taste for
discrimination, as suggested by the taste-based view of racial wage discrimination. Econometrically, di¤erentiating by year, state, and taste for discrimination yields a quasi-triple
di¤erence estimation framework that, as we explain below, allows us to relax standard
identi…cation assumptions.
Employed with this framework, we turn to the data. Using individual-level data from
the Current Population Survey for survey years 1977 to 2007, state-level data on new
incorporations per capita to proxy for competition in the non…nancial sector from Black
and Strahan (2002), data on married couples from the 1970s Census, and the dates of bank
deregulation from Kroszner and Strahan (1999), we evaluate the impact of deregulation
and competition on blacks’relative wages.
The …ndings suggest that intensi…ed competition substantially reduced racial wage discrimination by ameliorating the manifestation of racial prejudices in labor markets. We
…rst …nd that bank deregulation increased the rate of new incorporations across states with
di¤erent values of the racial bias index. Dynamically, the impact of deregulation on the
rate of new incorporations grows over time. Second, bank deregulation increased blacks’
relative wage rates, but only in "high racial bias" states. In states with above the median
level of the racial bias index, deregulation eliminated about one-third of the initial racial
wage gap after …ve years. Furthermore, the dynamic impact of deregulation on blacks’
relative wages mirrors that of deregulation on new incorporations, with blacks’ relative
wages rising for many years following bank deregulation. Third, blacks’relative wages are
positively associated with the rate of new incorporations in high racial bias states. Thus,
while bank deregulation boosted the rate of new incorporations in high and low racial bias,
there is a positive association between blacks’relative wages and both bank deregulation
and new incorporations only in high racial bias states.
Moreover, the two-stage least squares results indicate that an exogenous intensi…cation
of competition only boosted blacks’relative wages in states with a su¢ ciently high taste
for discrimination. Using inter- and intrastate bank deregulation as instrumental variables
to identify exogenous shocks to the rate of new incorporations, we …nd that increases in
the rate of new incorporations only reduced the racial wage gap in high racial bias states,
such that a ten percent increase in the rate of new incorporations reduced the black-white
wage di¤erential by 2.5 percent. Furthermore, exogenous increases in the rate of new

3

incorporations also increased the relative working hours of black workers in high racial
bias states, consist with the interpretation that intensi…ed competition boosted the relative
demand for black workers.
The …ndings do not simply imply that states with a high degree of racial bias converge
toward low racial bias states, nor that blacks’relative wages increase over time. Rather,
among high racial bias states, exogenous increases in competition reduce the wage gap while
accounting for state and year …xed e¤ects. The results, therefore, cannot be attributed to
convergence of blacks’relative wages in high racial bias states toward those in other states
nor to any common time e¤ects (business-cycles) among high racial bias states. Indeed, by
conditioning on state and year e¤ects, we control for all national in‡uences, such as federal
statutes, as well as state-speci…c factors. The results imply that competition boosts blacks’
relative wages by eroding the adverse e¤ects of racial prejudices on the relative demand for
black workers.
To provide additional information on how competition shapes the impact of racial prejudices on labor markets, we also examine segregation. Becker’s (1957) theory predicts that
when employers are heterogeneous in both quality and taste for discrimination, black workers will be hired by employers with the weakest racial prejudices, creating segregation in
the workforce. Moreover, the taste-based theory predicts that an intensi…cation of product
market competition will reduce segregation. A lowering of entry barriers that allows new
employers with less of a taste for discrimination to enter the market increases the employment opportunities of black workers, reducing segregation. Thus, if our …ndings on blacks’
relative wages re‡ect the causal impact of competition on how racial prejudices a¤ect labor markets, then we should also observe greater integration following an intensi…cation of
competition.
We examine this additional testable implication and …nd that an exogenous increase in
the rate of new incorporations reduced racial segregation across industries. To proxy for the
degree of segregation, we construct several measures of the degree to which each industry
is disproportionately composed of white workers or run by white managers. In high racial
bias states, we …nd that an increase in the rate of new incorporations sparked by bank
deregulation induced more blacks to work in industries that historically were composed
disproportionately of white workers or had a high proportion of white managers. These
…ndings are fully consistent with the view that intensi…ed competition reduced the e¤ects
of racial prejudices on blacks’relative wages and racial segregation.
This paper’s …ndings are robust to several potentially confounding in‡uences. First, the
intensi…cation of competition from bank deregulation could have increased blacks’relative
wages by disproportionately helping occupations and industries with a comparatively high

4

proportion of blacks, not by reducing the manifestation of racial prejudices on labor markets
(Black and Spitz-Oener, 2007). However, we …nd that blacks’wages rise relative to comparable white workers within the same occupation and industry. Second, bank deregulation
could trigger changes in the skill composition of the labor force through the selection of
workers into the labor force, interstate migration, and changes in self-employment (Butler
and Heckman, 1977; Mulligan and Rubinstein, 2008). We …nd no evidence that deregulation substantively a¤ected the relative skill composition of black workers. Third, bank
deregulation could have changed the prices of unobserved skills in which average black and
white workers are di¤erentially endowed. Following Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991), however, we …nd that bank deregulation improved black workers’ location throughout white
workers’ residual wage distribution, indicating that competition boosted blacks’ relative
wages in particular, not the relative wages of comparatively low income workers in general.
We are not the …rst to examine competition and discrimination. Becker (1957), Shepherd and Levin (1973), and Oster (1975) compare market concentration and relative wages
across industries, obtaining mixed results. Ashenfelter and Hannan (1986), however, stress
the importance of examining labor market integration, not relative wages, when comparing
industries or when examining an industry over time because relative wages are primarily
established in the overall economy, not in separate industries. Consistent with Becker’s
theory, they …nd a negative association between market concentration and the share of
female employees across several banking markets in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. In contrast to the Ashenfelter and Hannan (1986) approach, several studies trace the impact
of competition on relative wages within a single industry. Heywood and Peoples (1994)
and Peoples and Talley (2001) …nd that the deregulation of trucking increased the relative
wages of black workers. Black and Strahan (2001) …nd that bank deregulation increased
competition between banks, disproportionately reducing the rents paid to male workers
relative to female bank employees. Within manufacturing, Black and Brainerd (2004) …nd
that globalization intensi…ed competition and thereby reduced the gender wage gap.
Our major contribution is that we provide the …rst evaluation of whether the impact of
an exogenous intensi…cation of product market competition on blacks’relative wages and
racial integration varies positively with the economy’s taste for discrimination. That is, we
not only assess whether competition boosts the relative demand for black workers in general, we examine whether competition boosts blacks’relative wages and integration only in
those environments in which the taste-based theory suggests that competition will enhance
blacks’labor market opportunities. Toward this end, we use the rate of new incorporations
per capita as a measure of product market competition, rather than market concentration, because Becker (1957) identi…es the entry of new …rms as the mechanism through

5

which lower entry barriers changes the relative demand for black workers. Our results are
fully consistent with the central implication of the taste-based theory: An intensi…cation
of product market competition diminishes the manifestation of racial prejudices in labor
markets.
Our work complements Charles and Guryan’s (2008) study of the relation between
racial prejudices and blacks’ relative wages. Using state-level survey measures of racial
prejudices to gauge relative demand for black workers and the share of black workers in the
labor force, they provide the …rst empirical support for Becker’s (1957) hypothesis that a
stronger taste for discrimination by the marginal …rm reduces blacks’relative wage rates.
Rather than evaluating the relation between racial prejudices at the margin and relative
wages, we examine the impact of changes in competition on changes in relative wage rates,
while distinguishing states by the taste for discrimination.
This paper also relates to research on …nance and income inequality (Levine, 2005; Beck,
Levine, and Levkov, 2009; Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2009). We show that exogenous
improvements in the functioning of banks substantively enhanced the economic opportunities of an historically disadvantaged group by diminishing the impact of racial prejudices
on labor market opportunities.
Our …ndings do not reject, and might even complement, statistical discrimination explanations of racial wage di¤erentials. Di¤erences in productive skills might play an additional
role in explaining the racial wage gap. Indeed, Neal and Johnson (1996) explain a large
proportion of the racial wage gap using a measure of cognitive achievement. Heckman,
Stixrud, and Urzua (2006), however, warn that gaps in cognitive achievement scores could
re‡ect the historical rami…cations of racial prejudices, highlighting potential interactions
between statistical and taste-based theories. For example, competition that boosts blacks’
relative wages might enhance incentives for blacks to acquire more skills. This would increase the average skill level of blacks, potentially reducing statistical discrimination and
triggering self-reinforcing dynamics that reduce disparities in wages, education, and health
(Coate and Loury, 1993; Benabou, 1996; Card and Krueger, 1992; Durlauf, 1996, 2006;
Durlauf and Fafchamps, 2006; Jencks and Phillips, 1998; Altonji and Pierret, 2001; Fryer
and Levitt, 2004; Almond, Chay, and Greenstone, 2006).
In what follows, section 2 discusses the use of bank deregulation as an exogenous source
of variation in competition. Section 3 outlines the conceptual and statistical framework.
Section 4 describes the data and econometric design. Section 5 presents the core results
on relative wages, while Section 6 provide the results on racial integration. After providing
robustness tests in Section 7, Section 8 concludes.

6

2
2.1

Bank Deregulation and Competition
A Brief History of Bank Branch Regulation

Geographic restrictions on banks have their origins in the U.S. Constitution, which limited
states from taxing interstate commerce and issuing …at money. In turn, states raised
revenues by chartering banks and taxing their pro…ts. Since states received no charter
fees from banks incorporated in other states, state legislatures prohibited the entry of outof-state banks through interstate bank regulations. To maximize revenues from selling
charters, states also e¤ectively granted local monopolies to banks by restricting banks from
branching within state borders. These intrastate branching restrictions frequently limited
banks to operating in one city.
By protecting ine¢ cient banks from competition, geographic restrictions created a powerful constituency for maintaining these regulations even after the original …scal motivations
receded. Indeed, banks protected by these regulations successfully lobbied the government
to prohibit interstate banking and intrastate branching (Southworth, 1928; White, 1982;
Economides, Hubbard, and Palia, 1996).
In the last quarter of the 20th century, however, technological, legal, and …nancial innovations diminished the economic and political power of banks bene…ting from geographic
restrictions. In particular, a series of innovations lowered the costs of using distant banks.
This reduced the monopoly power of local banks and weakened their ability and desire to
lobby for geographic restrictions. For example, the invention of automatic teller machines
(ATMs), in conjunction with court rulings that ATMs are not bank branches, weakened the
geographical link between banks and their clientele. Furthermore, the creation of checkable money market mutual funds made banking by mail and telephone easier, thus further
weakening the power of local bank monopolies. Finally, the increasing sophistication of
credit scoring techniques, improvements in information processing, and the revolution in
telecommunications reduced the informational advantages of local bankers, especially with
regards to small and new …rms.
These national developments interacted with preexisting state characteristics to shape
the timing of bank deregulation across the states. As shown by Kroszner and Strahan
(1999), deregulation occurred later in states where potential losers from deregulation (small,
monopolistic banks) were …nancially stronger and had a lot of political power. On the
other hand, deregulation occurred earlier in states where potential winners of deregulation
(small …rms) were relatively numerous. Most states deregulated geographic restrictions on
banking between the mid-1970s and 1994, when the Riegle-Neal Act e¤ectively eliminated
these restrictions.

7

The forces driving bank deregulation were exogenous to competition in the non-…nancial
sector and the racial wage gap. The timing of deregulation was not shaped by new …rm
formation (Black and Strahan, 2002, Kerr and Nanda, 2009), nor by the strength of labor
unions (Black and Strahan, 2001), nor by the degree of earnings inequality (Beck, Levine,
and Levkov, 2009) in each state. Moreover, we show below that the racial wage gap does
not explain the timing of bank deregulation.
2.2

Bank Deregulation and Competition in the Non-Financial Sector

An extensive literature examines the rami…cations of bank deregulation. For example, Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) …nd that removing geographic restrictions improved banking
e¢ ciency by reducing interest rates on loans, raising them on deposits, lowering overhead
costs, and shrinking loan losses. Beyond banking, deregulation accelerated a state’s rate
of economic growth (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996; and Huang, 2008), lowered economic
volatility (Demyanyk, Ostergaard, and Sorensen, 2007), improved the self-employment opportunities of disadvantaged groups (Demyanyk, 2008), and reduced income inequality
(Beck, Levine, and Levkov, 2009).
More speci…cally for the purposes of this paper, inter- and intrastate bank deregulation
intensi…ed competition among …rms in the non-…nancial sector by reducing barriers to entry.
Black and Strahan (2002) …nd that deregulation helped entrepreneurs start new businesses,
with the rate of new incorporations per capita in a state increasing by six percentage
points following deregulation. Kerr and Nanda (2009) …nd that interstate deregulation
increased the number of new start-ups by six percentage points and expanded the number
of facilities of existing …rms by four percentage points across all sectors in the economy.
Furthermore, they …nd a dramatic increase in both the entry and exit of …rms, suggesting
that deregulation increased contestability throughout the economy.1 Below, we con…rm that
inter- and intrastate bank deregulation boosted the rate of new incorporations per capita
and we use this to identify an exogenous, positive shock to competition in our analysis of
racial discrimination.
1

Several interrelated factors explain the impact of deregulation on competition in the overall economy.
First, deregulation fueled competition among banks and reduced lending rates. This facilitated the expansion of existing …rms and the entry of new ones. Furthermore, the country’s more innovative banks were
developing better techniques for evaluating …rms. Sophisticated credit-scoring techniques in conjunction
with dramatic advances in information processing enhanced the ability of banks to evaluate and …nance
new and small businesses. By easing the acquisition of banks across and within state boundaries, deregulation helped spread these superior techniques for evaluating …rms (Hubbard and Palia, 1995). Deregulation
also permitted the formation of larger, more geographically diversi…ed banks. Diamond’s (1984) theory of
intermediation suggests that greater diversi…cation reduces the monitoring costs of lending to riskier, more
opaque …rms. Indeed, Berger et al. (1998) shows that small business lending increases after small banks
are acquired.

8

3

Conceptual and Statistical Framework

3.1

Conceptual Framework

Becker’s (1957) seminal analysis of racial discrimination and competition motivates our
empirical analysis. In Becker’s model, employers are heterogeneous in both quality and
‘taste for discrimination,’ which is de…ned as the degree to which they su¤er "disutility"
from employing minority workers.2 In equilibrium, minority workers must ‘compensate’
employers either by being more productive at a given wage or by accepting a lower wage
for identical productivity. In turn, market pressures cause blacks to be hired by the least
racially biased employers. Thus, the joint distribution of employer taste for discrimination
and employer quality combine with the proportion of black workers in the economy to
in‡uence the racial wage gap. For example, the racial wage di¤erential will be larger
when all employers have a greater taste for discrimination, holding other things constant.
Similarly, the racial wage di¤erential vanishes if employers receive no disutility from hiring
blacks. As a …nal example, an increase in the relative supply of black workers, holding
the distribution of existing …rms constant, will tend to widen the racial wage di¤erential
as …rms with a stronger taste for discrimination are induced to hire black workers through
lower relative wage rates.
De…ne racial discrimination as the percentage di¤erence in the wage rates of identical
black and white workers, so that, the log hourly wage rates of black workers WstB in economy
s during period t di¤er from those of identical white workers WstW by a racial discrimination
premium dst :
WstB

WstW

dst :

(1)

In anticipation of examining the states of the United States, we use the subscript s to
designate an economy. Racial discrimination is not de…ned as an economy’s attitude toward
minorities, though these tastes –these racial prejudices –in‡uence the wage gap between
identical black and white workers.
In this framework, an increase in competition –a reduction in entry barriers –can reduce
the black-white wage rate di¤erential. With lower entry barriers, new employers with less
of a taste for discrimination than incumbents can earn greater pro…ts than existing …rms by
hiring equally productive black workers at lower wage rates than their white counterparts.
Thus, the lowering of entry barriers boosts the relative demand for black workers, eroding
2

Bertrand and Mullainathan (2004) …nd that resumes with traditionally white names receive 50 percent
more calls for interviews than identical resumes with distinctively black names.

9

the manifestation of racial prejudices on relative wage rates.3 Competition does not change
any individual’s preferences toward hiring minority workers. Rather, competition makes
racial wage discrimination more costly by facilitating the entry of employers with less of a
taste for discrimination.
The model further suggests that the marginal impact of competition on blacks’relative
wage rates varies positively with the degree of racial prejudice in the economy. At the most
basic level, if employers have no taste for discrimination, then the racial wage gap equals
zero in the model. Under these conditions, competition does not a¤ect black’s relative wage
rates. Competition only increases the relative wage rates of black workers in the model
when employers have a taste for discrimination.4
In turning toward an empirical assessment of the relationship between competition and
racial discrimination, we use the entry of new …rms as a proxy measure of competition. One
key advantage of new …rm entry as a proxy for competition, rather than more traditional
measures based on market share, is that Becker’s (1957) theory focuses on the actual entry
of new …rms: The entry of new …rms with di¤erent tastes toward hiring minorities from
those of existing …rms reduces racial discrimination.
Furthermore, we (1) explicitly account for cross-state di¤erences in the taste for discrimination and (2) control for state and year …xed e¤ects to hold other factors constant
that theory suggests a¤ect the racial wage gap, such as cross-state di¤erences in the racial
composition of the workforce. Thus, we evaluate whether the impact of competition on the
racial wage gap varies positively with the degree of racial bias in the economy.
3.2

Statistical Framework

We now outline a statistical framework for assessing the impact of competition on the racial
wage gap. Below, we de…ne the construction of the actual data series and provide details
on the econometric methods.
B
Let Wist
equal the log hourly wage rate of black worker i in state s in time t. Further,
de…ne Rist as the relative wage rate of black worker i in state s in time t, which equals
B
the di¤erence between the log hourly wage rate of black worker i (Wist
) with observable
B
characteristics (Xist ) and the wage rate of a white worker with identical observable traits
W
B
W
B
st (Xist ). We call st (Xist ) the conditional wage rate of black worker i, where the condi3

Note, perfect competition does not necessarily eliminate the black-white wage di¤erential as argued
by Becker (1957). Depending on the joint distribution of …rm quality and taste for discrimination, an
equilibrium racial wage gap might still obtain with zero entry costs.
4
One can conceive of distributions of existing employer quality and racial prejudices inconjunction with
particular distributions of the quality, racial prejudices, and entry barriers of shadow …rms, such that an
increase competition will not boost blacks’relative wages. We evaluate this below.

10

tioning is done on black worker i receiving the same wage rate as the average white worker
B
with identical observed characteristics in state s in time t (Xist
).
For simplicity of illustration, yet without loss of generality, assume that states can be
divided into those with a high taste for discrimination and those where people do not receive
as much disutility from working and interacting with minorities. We allow the impact of
deregulation and competition on blacks’relative wages to vary by a state’s degree of taste
for discrimination. Let Ts be a binary variable which is equal to one if the taste for
discrimination in state s is high and zero if it is low. We de…ne the construction of this
racial bias index below.
Thus, we begin with a standard relative log hourly wage equation given by a linear-inthe-parameters speci…cation:
Rist

B
Wist

W
B
st (Xist )

=

0 Nst

+

1 Nst Ts

+

s

+

0t

+

1t

+ "ist ;

(2)

where Nst denotes the entry of new …rms, which serves as a proxy for competition, in state
s in time t, Ts is zero-one racial bias index, s is a vector of state …xed e¤ects, 0t and 1t
are vectors of time e¤ects in low and high racial bias states respectively, and "ist is an error
term composed of a person speci…c idiosyncratic shock and any unobserved state-year …xed
e¤ects. Note, this speci…cation allows time e¤ects to vary across high and low racial bias
states, so that 0t measures the time e¤ect in low racial bias states and 1t measures the
time e¤ect in high racial bias states. In terms of the parameter estimates on competition,
0 is the causal impact of competition on the relative wage rates of black workers in low
racial bias states, while 0 + 1 is the e¤ect of competition on the black-white wage gap in
high racial bias states.
Becker’s theory predicts that (1) competition boosts the relative wages of black workers
in states with a su¢ ciently high degree of racial bias, i.e., 0 + 1 > 0; and (2) the impact of
competition on blacks’relative wages is larger in states with a higher degree of racial bias,
i.e., 1 > 0. Since the marginal employer might have a nonzero taste for discrimination
even in low racial bias states, our speci…cation does not necessarily imply that 0 = 0, only
that 0 + 1 > 0 and 1 > 0.

4
4.1

Data and Econometric Design
Data

In this study we use micro-level and state aggregate data sources. For the micro-level
data on labor market characteristics, we use the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series

11

(IPUMS) from the U.S. Current Population Survey (CPS), March Supplements for the
survey years 1977 to 2007 and the Census of Population for 1970, Form 1 State, and Form
2 State one-percent samples. These are combined with aggregate state level data on bank
deregulation, taken from Kroszner and Strahan (1999), and new incorporations as a proxy
for competition in the non…nancial sector, which we obtained from Black and Strahan
(2002).
4.1.1 CPS Samples for the Years 1977 to 2007
The CPS March Annual Demographic Supplements provide information on earnings, along
with weeks and hours worked in the calendar year preceding the March survey so that
the 1991 survey provides information on earnings in 1990. We start in Survey year 1977
because that is when the CPS reports information on each person’s state of residence. To
enhance comparability and connect our analyses to the literature, we restrict our sample
to non-Hispanic white and black adult civilian males between the ages of 18 and 65 during
the working year, and exclude persons living in group quarters or with missing data on
relevant demographics. Our main wage sample further excludes the self-employed, persons
in the military, agricultural, or private household sectors, persons with inconsistent reports
on earnings, and individuals with allocated earnings.
We classify the adult population into six educational categories: (i) persons with 0–8
years of schooling completed; (ii) high school dropouts; (iii) high school graduates, 12 years
of schooling; (iv) some college; (v) college graduate; and (vi) advanced degree. Potential
work experience is constructed as the maximum between zero and age (in year of survey)
minus years of schooling completed minus seven.
Wage rates are de…ned as real annual earnings divided by the product of weekly working
hours and annual working weeks. We use the Consumer Price Index to de‡ate earnings to
2000 dollars and set hourly earnings to missing if any of these components is missing or
zero. Following Autor, Katz, and Kearney (2008), workers with top coded earnings have
their annual earnings set to 1.5 times the annual top-code amount. We trim outliers with
hourly wages below the 1st percentile and above the 97th percentile of the year-speci…c
distribution of hourly earnings of full-time, full-year workers. This trimming virtually
eliminates individuals with top-coded annual earnings. The results are robust to altering
the de…nition of outliers. Finally, in accord with previous research on bank deregulation,
we drop Delaware and South Dakota from our analyses due to large concentration of credit
card banks in these states. Appendix Table 2 provides more details on the construction of
our sample.

12

4.1.2 The 1970 Census
We use the 1970 Census to construct information on the rate of racial intermarriage in
each state. The Census samples are the largest microdata set containing detailed marriage
and demographics information. Our primary sample includes married whites and blacks
between that ages of 18 to 65, and excludes couples in which at least one person is living in
group quarters or has missing data on race, gender, state of residence, marital status and
educational attainment.
4.1.3 State level data on bank deregulation and new incorporations
We obtain the dates of interstate and intrastate bank deregulation from Kroszner and
Strahan (1999) and Amel (2008). Most states removed these geographic restrictions on
banking between the mid-1970s and 1994, when they were eliminated by federal legislation.
Appendix Table 1 provides the deregulation dates for each state.
To measure new …rm entry, we use the rate of new incorporations per capita from Black
and Strahan (2002), who obtain these data from Dun and Bradstreet. Speci…cally, we use
the log of new business incorporations per capita for each state over the period 1977-1994.
4.2

Generating Relative Wages and the Racial Bias Indexes

4.2.1 Relative wages
We …rst compute the estimated relative wage rate for each black worker i in the sample
^ ist ), which equals the worker’s actual wage rate minus the estimated wage rate that the
(R
average white worker with identical characteristics would earn.
We follow a two-step procedure for computing the log hourly wage rate that a white
worker with identical characteristics as his black counterpart would earn. We …rst estimate
the following Mincerian log hourly wage equation using the sample of white workers:
0

W
Wist
= Xist

W
t

+ eist ;

(3)

W
where Wist
is the log hourly wage of white worker i in state s during time t, Xist is
a vector of person-speci…c observable determinants of log hourly wages (e.g., quartic in
potential experience, and six education categories), Xist also includes state …xed e¤ects, eist
captures the component of wages idiosyncratic to white worker i. Equation (3) is estimated
separately for every year between 1976 and 2006. This yields time-varying returns, or
“prices” to observable characteristics, i.e., W
t . Further, the average value of unobservable
traits among white workers in state s during time t are incorporated into the estimation of

13

(3) by the inclusion of state …xed e¤ects in each of the 31 separate regressions. Below, we
analyze the potential biases induced by unobservable traits.
This …rst step has two noteworthy and crucial properties. First, given the changes in
the structure of wages in the United States since the mid 1970s (Katz and Autor, 1999),
to vary by year. This is crucial
we allow the Mincerian returns to observable skills W
t
for our analyses due to the well-documented skill gap between black and white workers.
Failure to account for time-varying returns to observables will lead to erroneous estimates
of the dynamic pattern of relative wages, potentially biasing our assessment of the impact
of competition on the black-white wage gap.
Second, by allowing state …xed e¤ects to vary by year, we control for all time-varying,
state-speci…c characteristics that might a¤ect the wage rates of white workers including the
e¤ect of bank deregulation. Speci…cally, we include a vector of state dummy variables in (3),
which is estimated separately for each year. Thus, we control for the state’s unemployment
rate, its gross state product, changes in the industrial composition of production, the racial
composition of each state, state-level productivity di¤erences, and regulatory reforms on
the wage rates of white workers. By controlling for these wage rate determinants in general,
we can more precisely focus on the impact of bank deregulation on blacks’relative wages
in particular.
In some extensions, we also control for time-varying occupation- and industry-speci…c
e¤ects. To do this, we add a vector of occupation and/or industry dummy variables to
(3), which is estimated separately for each year. We use the three digit occupation and
industry codes recorded in the CPS, which are based on the 1950 Census Bureau classi…cation system to provide a consistent set of industry and occupation codes throughout
the sample. This means including 408 additional dummy variables each year (144 industries and 262 occupations). While a worker’s occupation and industry could re‡ect racial
wage discrimination, we condition on occupation and industry in robustness tests to assess
whether blacks’ wages change relative to white workers with the same observable skills,
who are working in the same occupation and industry.
In the second step, we generate the estimated relative wage rate of each black worker i
B
in state s during time t as the worker’s actual wage rate (Wist
) minus the estimated wage
B0 W
rate that a white worker with the same characteristics would earn Xist ^t , using the
estimated parameters from (3):5
B
^ ist = Wist
R
5

B0

W

Xist ^t ;

(4)

To connect this to equation (2) of the statistical model, note that the estimated conditional wage rate
B0 W
B
^
of black worker i is ^ W
st (Xist ) = Xist t .

14

B0 W
where (Xist ^t ) is computed based on the following conditions: (1) each black worker’s
W
B
) are rewarded at the same estimated prices (^t )
observable Mincerian characteristics (Xist
as his white counterpart and (2) each black worker in state s during year t receives as part
of his wage rate the value of the unobservable traits of the average white worker in that
state and year.

4.2.2 Racial Bias Indexes
Becker’s (1957) theory implies that the impact of an intensi…cation of competition on the
relative demand, and hence the relative wage rates, of black workers depends positively on
the taste for discrimination, holding other factors constant. We do not directly observe the
taste for discrimination. Consequently, we compute and use several estimates of the degree
of racial bias in each state.
We develop two types of racial bias indices based on the accumulated stock of racial
intermarriage in 1970. The "simple" racial bias index equals the di¤erence between the
rate of intermarriage that would exist if married people were randomly matched and the
actual intermarriage rate. The random rate equals 2P (1 P ), where P is the proportion
of blacks among the married population. Larger values of the simple racial bias index
indicate that intermarriage occurs less in practice than if marriage pairings were random.
We interpret larger values as (partially) re‡ecting racial bias.
In the second type of racial bias index, we account for other factors that might induce
the actual rate of intermarriage to deviate from the random rate. Intermarriage depends on
the opportunities for interracial social contacts, so that the relative sizes of the black-white
populations might independently a¤ect intermarriage (Blau, 1977). Furthermore, since
the odds of interethnic unions increase with couples’educational attainment (Massey and
Denton, 1987; Qian, 1997; Rubinstein and Brenner, 2009), we also control for education
and age. Speci…cally, based on the 1970s census, we estimate the following equation for all
married couples (excluding couples in which either the husband or wife is neither white nor
black) in the United States:
Iis = bHis + cWis + dSs +

is ;

(5)

where Iis equals one if couple i in state s is racially mixed and zero otherwise, His and
Wis are vectors of age and education characteristics for the two spouses respectively, Ss are
state characteristics, is is the unexplained component of intermarriage, while b, c, and d
are coe¢ cients. Our benchmark speci…cation conditions on nine categories of education,
along with age entered as a quartic. For state characteristics, we include the random inter-

15

marriage rate de…ned above along with the percentage of blacks among married couples.
We experimented with numerous speci…cations, including and excluding the random intermarriage rate and the percentage of blacks, changing the speci…cation of education and
age controls, and conditioning on metropolitan and urban locations. These combinations
produce the same conclusions.
From equation (5), we compute the intermarriage racial bias index for each state. Let
s equal the average value of is across couples in state s. Recognizing that minf s g <
e
0,we compute the racial bias index as Tes =
s + maxf s g, so that Ts equals zero for
the state with the largest s . We interpret large values as signaling a stronger taste for
discrimination. Appendix Table 3 provides the value of the racial bias index, Tes ; for each
state and the District of Columbia. Furthermore, Ts = 1 if Tes medianfTes g, and Ts = 0
if Tes < medianfTes g.
The intermarriage racial bias index is positively correlated with survey-based measures
of racial prejudice. Table 1 (Panel A) shows that the intermarriage racial bias index is
positively related to three survey-based measures of racial prejudice used by Charles and
Guryan (2008) in their study of relative wages and racial prejudices: (1) the fraction of
whites supporting a law against interracial marriage, (2) the fraction of whites would not
vote for a black president, and (3) the fraction of whites supporting the right to segregate
neighborhoods by race. Thus, the racial bias index based on intermarriage in 1970 is closely
associated with subjective measures of racial attitudes measured over the period 1972 to
2004.
The intermarriage racial bias index is negatively correlated with the relative wage rates
of black workers. Panel B of Table 1 shows that the intermarriage racial bias index is
strongly, negatively associated with black’s relative wage rates in the years prior to both
inter- and intrastate bank deregulation, suggesting that the racial bias index captures crossstate di¤erences in the relative demand for black workers.
As emphasized by Becker (1957), the relative supply of blacks in the workforce should
also a¤ect the relative wage rate of black workers. We assess this prediction by including
the proportion of blacks in the workforce in 1970 in the relative wage rate regression. As
shown in Panel B of Table 1, states in which black workers compose ten percent or more of
the labor force tend to have low relative wage rates for black workers. The intermarriage
racial bias index, however, remains negatively and signi…cantly associated with the relative
wage rate of black workers.
We also use the Charles and Guryan (2008) survey-based estimates of the degree of
racial prejudice of the marginal …rm in each state to categorize high- and low-racial bias
states. As shown in Panel B of Table 1, states with above the median levels of this marginal

16

racial prejudice indicator have signi…cantly lower relative wages of black workers. Nonetheless, the racial bias index based on racial intermarriage remains negatively and signi…cantly
associated with blacks’relative wages even when controlling for the marginal racial prejudice indicator and when controlling for both the marginal racial prejudice indicator and
the proportion of blacks in the workforce.
For the purposes of this paper, there are advantages to using the intermarriage racial
bias index rather than survey-based measures of racial attitudes. The intermarriage racial
bias index is based on actual choices made prior to deregulation not survey responses
made during the period of deregulation. Moreover, our empirical strategy requires that
the measure of racial bias is invariant to bank deregulation and the resultant change in
competition. If we di¤erentiate states based on a measure of racial bias that itself re‡ects
the e¤ects of deregulation on the relative demand and supply of black workers, this will
confound our strategy of identifying the causal impact of product market competition on
the relative demand for black workers. The racial attitude surveys, however, are conducted
during the period of bank deregulation. Thus, the Charles and Guryan (2008) estimate of
the degree of racial prejudice of the marginal …rm, which is based on the racial attitude
surveys and the relative supply of black workers, includes the e¤ects of bank deregulation
on product market competition. Although this is not a problem for their study of the
connection between the taste for discrimination of the marginal …rm and relative wage
rates, these survey-based measures are inappropriate for our purposes.
Furthermore, when assessing the impact of competition on blacks’relative wages, Becker’s
(1957) framework advertises the advantages of our intermarriage racial bias index rather
than an estimate of the taste for discrimination of the marginal …rm, which incorporates
both the relative demand for and supply of black workers. Theory does not necessarily predict that an increase in competition will increase blacks’relative wages more in states with
initially low relative black wage rates because low relative wage rates re‡ect both demand
and supply. Rather, theory implies that an intensi…cation of competition will increase the
relative demand for black workers only in states with a su¢ cient taste for discrimination.
Holding the relative supply of black workers constant, therefore, theory predicts that an
intensi…cation of competition will increase blacks’ relative wages in states with a su¢ ciently high taste for discrimination. This is what we evaluate. We distinguish states by
their overall taste for discrimination, and assess whether competition boosts blacks’relative
wage rates while conditioning on other state and year characteristics, including the relative
supply of black workers.
In sum, we include state and year …xed e¤ects and evaluate whether an exogenous
increase in competition boosts the relative demand for black workers more in states with

17

larger values of the intermarriage racial bias index. Measuring racial bias with error will
bias the results against …nding a statistically signi…cant connection between racial bias,
competition, and the black-white wage gap. We do not require that the racial bias index is
a perfect measure of racial attitudes. We simply require that it provides some information
on racial prejudices across states.
4.3

Econometric Design

4.3.1 The impact of competition on blacks’ relative wages
To obtain a consistent estimate of the impact of competition, as measured by the rate of
incorporations, on relative wages, we need an instrumental variable that is correlated with
the rate of new incorporations but not independently correlated with blacks’relative wages.
It is important to use instrumental variables because blacks’relative wages could a¤ect the
actual entry of …rms. For example, …rms could enter to exploit the opportunity to hire less
expensive labor in states with a large racial wage gap. If this occurs, OLS will underestimate
the causal impact of competition on blacks’ relative wages. Thus, to assess the causal
impact of competition on racial wage discrimination while di¤erentiating economies by their
tastes for discrimination, our identifying strategy assumes that (i) banking deregulation is
exogenous to blacks’relative wages, (ii) new incorporations per capita is a fair proxy for
competition, (iii) the racial bias index re‡ects tastes for discrimination, and (iv) bank
deregulation does not a¤ect the racial wage gap beyond its impact on the rate of new
incorporations.
From equations (2) and (4), the following second stage regression captures the causal
relationship of interest,
^ ist =
R

0 Nst

+

1 Nst Ts

+

s

+

0t

+

1t

+

ist ;

(6)

where the predicted value of the log of new incorporations per capita (Nst ) is obtained from
the …rst stage regression using bank deregulation as an instrument:6
0

Nst = Dst

0

0

+ Dst 1 Ts +

s

+

0t

+

1t

+

st ;

(7)

where Dst is a vector indicating years since bank deregulation, Ts equals one in high racial
bias states and zero in low racial bias states, 0 and 1 are corresponding coe¢ cients, s
is a vector of state-speci…c e¤ects, 0t and 1t represent time e¤ects in low and high racial
6

The …rst stage regression is conducted at the individual level, so it is weighted by the proportion of
black workers in each state.

18

bias states respectively, ist is an error term composed of a person speci…c idiosyncratic
shock to relative wages and any unobserved state-year …xed e¤ects, and st is an error
term. The standard errors are clustered at the state-year level throughout the analyses. As
emphasized, we assess whether the impact of competition on the racial wage gap depends
on the degree to which states have a stronger or weaker taste for discrimination.
Our estimation strategy allows us to relax the standard exclusion restriction that bank
deregulation only a¤ects blacks’ relative wages through its a¤ect on the rate of new incorporations. We conduct a quasi triple di¤erence estimation by including state and year
…xed e¤ects and by separately analyzing states with above and below the median value of
the racial bias index. This yields an estimate of the di¤erential impact of an increase in
the rate of new incorporations on blacks’relative wages in high and low racial bias states,
i.e., we assess whether 1 > 0. To obtain a consistent estimate of this di¤erential impact
using 2SLS, we do not require the standard exclusion restriction to hold. Rather, we simply
require that any bias arising from bank deregulation a¤ecting blacks’relative wages beyond
its impact through the rate of new incorporations is the same in high and low racial bias
states, which we assess empirically below.7
4.3.2 Reduced form estimator
We also assess the reduced form impact of banking deregulation on black workers’relative
wages by estimating the following wage equation using OLS:
7

More formally with regard to the exclusion restriction, consider a modi…ed version of equation (6) that
allows bank deregulation to a¤ect blacks’relative wages beyond new …rm entry (Nst ):
^ ist =
R

0 Nst

+

1 Nst Ts

+

s

+

0t

+

1t

0

+ Dst +

ist

where re‡ects the direct impact of bank deregulation on blacks’relative wages. Using equation (7), it is
straightforward to show that:
p lim (

2SLS
0)

=

0

+

; p lim (

0

+

2SLS
1)

=

0

+

1

+

0

0

+

1

and
p lim

2SLS
1

= p lim (

0

+

2SLS
1)

p lim (

2SLS
0)

=

1

+
0

+

=
1

0

1
1

0( 0

+

1)

Under the standard exclusion restriction, bank deregulation has no direct impact on blacks’ relative
wages, = 0, so that 2SLS provides consistent estimates for 0 and 1 .
However, even if bank deregulation in‡uences blacks’relative wages directly, 2SLS provides a consistent
estimate of 1 as long as the impact of bank deregulation on the entry of new …rms is the same in high and
low racial bias states, i.e., if 1 = 0:
Moreover, if both 1 > 0 and > 0. 2SLS will underestimate the di¤erential impact of competition
on blacks’ relative wages in high racial bias states, so that p lim 2SLS
< 1 . We evaluate both of these
1
conditions below.

19

^ ist = D0
R
st

0

0

+ Dst

1 Ts

+

s

+

0t

+

1t

+

ist ;

(8)

where 0 and 1 are coe¢ cients, s is a vector of state …xed e¤ects, 0t and 1t are vectors
of time e¤ects in low and high racial states respectively, and ist is an error term. For simplicity, we use s; 0t ; and 1t as generic representations of state and year …xed e¤ects, while
recognizing that the actual values will di¤er across equations. In extensions of equation (8),
we assess the dynamic e¤ects of deregulation on black workers’relative wages by allowing
the relationship between relative wages and deregulation to vary by each year before and
after bank deregulation.
Although OLS produces unbiased estimates of the impact of bank deregulation on the
racial wag gap under standard identifying assumptions, including the assumption that
deregulation is uncorrelated with ist , OLS does not necessarily identify a channel running
from competition to blacks’relative wages. Identifying this channel motivates our use of
the two-stage least squares (2SLS).
Examining both the 2SLS and reduced form speci…cations provides a more comprehensive assessment of the determinants of racial wage discrimination than using only one
method. If the rate of new incorporations is a sound proxy for competition and bank
deregulation is a valid instrument, then the 2SLS estimator provides information on the
causal impact of competition on blacks’relative wage rates, putting aside for now the complexities associated with accurately measuring the relative wage rates of equivalent black
and white workers. Yet, the reduced form analysis is independently valuable. It provides
information on whether bank deregulation disproportionately bene…ted an historically disadvantaged group in the economy, expanding our understanding of the impact of …nancial
sector policies on the economy.

5
5.1

Results
Preliminaries

Our empirical analysis rests on the assumption that the cross-state timing of bank deregulation was not a¤ected by the racial wage gap. Figure 1 shows that neither the level of the
estimated wage gap before deregulation (Panel A) nor its rate of change prior to deregulation (Panel C) explains cross-state di¤erences in the timing of interstate bank deregulation.
Panels B and D of Figure 1 con…rm these …ndings for the case of intrastate deregulation.
The size of the "bubbles" in the …gures represent the size of the black workforce in each
state, which corresponds to the weighting in the relative wage regressions below.

20

Our strategy also requires that bank deregulation increases the rate of new incorporations in the overall economy. In Table 2, we show that both interstate bank deregulation
and intrastate branch deregulation exert a strong, positive impact on the log of new incorporations per capita over time. In columns (1) (3), we use simple dummy variables that
equal zero before a state deregulates and one afterwards. Interstate deregulation enters
signi…cantly and positively, but intrastate does not, which is consistent with the …ndings
in Black and Strahan (2002).
The results in Table 2 emphasize that the positive impact of deregulation on the rate
of new incorporations grows over time. In columns (4) (6), we include the number of
years since deregulation and its quadratic. Interstate and Intrastate equal the number of
years since interstate and intrastate bank deregulation respectively, and equal zero before
deregulation. Both linear terms enter positively and signi…cantly, while the quadratic terms
are negative, but the coe¢ cients are an order of magnitude smaller.8 Economically, the
coe¢ cients in columns (4) and (5) indicate that …ve years after either inter- or intrastate
deregulation the rate of new incorporations is about 10 percent greater than before deregulation. Furthermore, simultaneously deregulating inter- and intrastate restrictions boosts
the rate of new incorporations by 18 percent after …ve years as shown in column (6).
Figure 2 more fully illustrates the positive, dynamic impact of both interstate and
intrastate deregulation on the rate of new incorporations. In Figure 2, we trace out the yearby-year relationship between both interstate and intrastate deregulation and the logarithm
of new incorporations. We do this for two samples of states, those with above the median
level of the racial bias index and those with below median levels. Speci…cally,we report
estimated coe¢ cients from the following regression:
Nst =

+

1 Inter 9

+ ::: +

18 Inter+9

+

1 Intra 9

+ ::: +

18 Intra+9

+

s

+

t

+ "st ; (9)

where Inter j equals one for the j th year before interstate deregulation, and Inter+k equals
one for the k th year after interstate deregulation, while Intra j equals one for the j th year
before intrastate deregulation, and Intra+k equals one for the k th year after intrastate
deregulation. These dummy variables equal zero in other years. We present results starting
9 years before each form of bank deregulation and trace out the year-by-year dynamics of
the relationship between deregulation and the wage gap until 9 years after each type of
bank deregulation. The year of deregulation is omitted and the regressions include state
( s ) and year ( t ) …xed e¤ects. After detrending the series, Figure 2 illustrates the level
and trend of the logarithm of new incorporations following each type of bank deregulation
8

The impact of each form of deregulation on competition grows over time, reaching a maximum about
a decade after interstate deregulation, and over two decades after intrastate deregulation.

21

relative to the level and trend before deregulation.9
There are three critical observations from Figure 2. First, interstate and intrastate
bank deregulation boost the rate of new incorporations. This is crucial since we use bank
deregulation to identify an exogenous intensi…cation of competition.
Second, the impact of bank deregulation on the rate of new incorporations is not immediate. The e¤ect of bank deregulation on the rate of new incorporations is still growing
after …ve years. If bank deregulation a¤ects blacks’relative wages by increasing the rate of
new incorporations, therefore, we should also …nd that the dynamic impact of deregulation
on black’s relative wages materializes over time.
Third, the positive impact of inter- and intrastate bank deregulation on the rate of new
incorporations occurs in both states with above the median level of the racial bias index
and in states with below the median level of the racial bias index. The the marginal impact
of intrastate deregulation on the rate of new incorporations in low racial bias states is less
pronounced than in high racial bias states.10 Though the impact of bank deregulation on
new incorporations does not have to be identical in high and low racial bias states, our
empirical strategy requires that deregulation boosts the rate of new incorporations in both
high and low racial bias states because we propose to evaluate whether the marginal impact
of an exogenous increase in competition is greater in high racial bias states.
5.2

Bank Deregulation and Blacks’Relative Wages

5.2.1 Reduced Form Analyses of Bank Deregulation
We next assess the reduced form impact of Interstate and Intrastate on the relative wage
^ ist . For each form of deregulation, we present three speci…cations.
rates of black workers R
First, blacks’ relative wages are regressed on bank deregulation using the full sample.
Second, we add an interaction term of deregulation and the racial bias dummy for each
state, which equals one if the value of the racial bias index is greater than or equal to the
sample median and zero otherwise. As suggested by theory, the impact of competitionenhancing bank deregulation on blacks’relative wages should be greater in more racially
biased states. Third, rather than include an interaction term, we split the sample by the
median value of the racial bias index, which allows the coe¢ cients on state and year …xed
9

Speci…cally, we compute the trend in the coe¢ cients on the dummy variables on bank deregulation prior
to deregulation. We then detrend the entire series of estimated coe¢ cients based on the pre-deregulation
trend. The resulting …gure illustrates the level and trend of the logarithm of new incorporations after bank
deregulation relative to the patterns before deregulation.
10
As developed in footnote (7), when bank deregulation has a larger e¤ect on the rate of new incorporations in high racial bias states, the 2SLS estimator will tend to underestimate the di¤erential impact of
the rate of new incorporations on blacks’relative wages in high versus low racial bias states.

22

e¤ects to di¤er across the two subsamples. Throughout the analyses, we include state and
year …xed e¤ects.
Table 3 shows that bank deregulation has a large, signi…cant impact on the relative
wage rates of black workers in states with su¢ ciently high values of the racial bias index.
In the regressions including the interaction of deregulation with the racial bias dummy,
the impact of deregulation on blacks’relative wages is increasing in the state’s racial bias
index. The results hold for both inter- and intrastate bank deregulation. When splitting
the sample between high and low racial bias states, the results indicate that a drop in entry
barriers triggers a bigger increase in the relative demand for black workers in more racially
biased economies.
Furthermore, by splitting the sample between high and low racial bias states, we employ
a quasi-triple di¤erence speci…cation. In particular, there might be concerns that even
though bank deregulation di¤ers in its timing across states, there might be a confounding
factor that reduces racial discrimination and is coincident with the state-speci…c timing
of bank deregulation. By showing that bank deregulation only increases blacks’ relative
wages in high racial bias states as predicted by theory, this reduces the possibility that an
unobserved state-year e¤ect is driving the results, and it is fully consistent with the view
that intensi…ed competition reduces the manifestation of racial prejudices in labor market
outcomes.
The estimated reduction in the racial wage gap from bank deregulation is economically meaningful. Consider column (4) of Table 3, which provides the regression results for
states with above the median value of the racial bias index. Among these states, deregulation boosts the wage rates of black workers by 6 percentage points more than their white
counterparts after …ve years (6 = 0:012 5 100). Since the average racial wage gap in
these high-bias states was 20 percent in 1976, the results suggest that interstate deregulation eliminates almost 30 percent of the initial racial wage gap. The results are virtually
identical when using Intrastate, as shown in column (8).
5.2.2 Dynamic Analysis of the E¤ect of Bank Deregulation
We next illustrate the dynamic relation between bank deregulation and the relative wages of
blacks. In Figure 3, we trace out the year-by-year relationship between deregulation and the
wage gap by including a series of dummy variables in equation (8) for inter- and intrastate
deregulation respectively. Speci…cally, D j equals one for the j th year before deregulation,
and D+k equals one for the k th year after deregulation. These dummy variables equal zero
in other years. The year of deregulation is omitted and the regressions include state and
year …xed e¤ects.

23

In examining the dynamic impact of deregulation on the racial wage gap, we use two
samples of states. In Panel A of Figure 3, the subsample includes states with above the
median values of the racial bias index. Panel B reports the dynamic relation between the
relative wage rates of black workers and bank deregulation for the subsample of states with
below the median values. The dashed line reports the estimated coe¢ cients on the interstate
deregulation dummy variables, while the solid line provides the estimated coe¢ cients on
the intrastate deregulation dummy variables.
Three crucial messages emerge from Figure 3. First, the impact of both interstate and
intrastate bank deregulation on blacks’relative wages is much greater in states where the
racial bias index is above the median than in states with lower values of the racial bias
index. For example, the impact of interstate bank deregulation on blacks’relative wages
rises over time in states with high values of the racial bias index, while interstate bank
deregulation has virtually no e¤ect on relative wage rates in states with low values of the
racial bias index. Second, there is no evidence that trends or innovations in the wage gap
precede either interstate or intrastate bank deregulation. Rather, blacks’ relative wages
rise after bank deregulation for an extensive period in states with high values of the racial
bias index. Third, the impact of deregulation on black’s relative wages grows over time.
This is consistent with the dynamics of the relationship between deregulation and the rate
of new incorporation documented in Figure 2 and Table 2.
While demonstrating the powerful impact of bank deregulation on the racial wage gap,
these results do not provide direct evidence on the underlying causal mechanisms. We now
examine the relationship between the rate of new incorporations and blacks’relative wages
to assess whether, and under which conditions, an exogenous increase in the rate of new
incorporations reduces the black-white wage gap.
5.3

Competition and Blacks’Relative Wages

5.3.1 Reduced Form Analyses of Competition
In examining the relationship between competition and the racial wage gap, we begin with
reduced form OLS regressions. In Table 4, the dependent variable is blacks’relative wages
^ ist . The key regressor is the log of new incorporations per capita, which we use as a
R
proxy for competition. The estimation is conducted on the full sample, and we also split
the sample into states with below and above the median level of the racial bias index.
In Panel A, we use the benchmark measure of blacks’relative wages, which is computed
while conditioning on the standard Mincerian characteristics, education and potential work
experience. In Panel B, we use an alternative measure of blacks’relative wages that also

24

conditions on occupation, as discussed above.
There is a strong, positive association between the rate of new incorporations and the
relative wages of black workers in states with above the median values of the racial bias
index (column 3). The OLS estimates indicate that ten percent increase in the rate of new
incorporations is associated with a 1.4 percent increase in blacks’ relative wages in high
racial bias states. In contrast, there is no relationship between the wage gap and our proxy
for competition in states with low values of the racial bias index (column 2). These results
hold both when using the benchmark, Mincerian measure of blacks’relative wages (Panel
A) and also when conditioning on occupation (Panel B).
5.3.2 2SLS Analyses of Competition
The …nal six columns of Panel A and Panel B of Table 4 report 2SLS estimates, where
two di¤erent sets of instrumental variables are used to identify changes in the rate of new
incorporations. First, the "linear" instruments simply include Interstate and Intrastate.
Second, the "Non-Parametric" instruments included dummy variables for each year before
and after both interstate and intrastate deregulation. These instruments are drawn from the
analyses reported above in Table 2 and Figure 3. Furthermore, in reported robustness tests,
we …nd that using Interstate and Intrastate plus their quadratic terms as instruments
produces similar results.
As shown, the instrumental variables pass the validity tests. They signi…cantly explain
new incorporations as shown by the F-test of the excluded instruments. Furthermore, the
instruments pass the test of the over-identifying restrictions (OIR test), meaning that the
hypothesis that the instruments only a¤ect blacks’relative wages through their e¤ect on
new incorporations is not rejected.11
The exogenous increase in the rate of new incorporations dramatically boosted the wage
rates of black workers relative to their white counterparts in states with above the median
values of the racial bias index. As reported in columns (6) and (9) of both Panels A and
B, an acceleration of the rate of new incorporations increased blacks’relative wages in high
racial bias states. In contrast, the results in columns (5) and (8) indicate that a faster
rate of new incorporations did not increase blacks’relative wages in states with below the
median values of the racial bias index.
11

In unreported robustness tests, we also show that the results are not driven by states in which deregulation did not induce an increase in competition, which would run counter to theory and our identi…cation
strategy. Thus, we run the …rst-stage regression while omitting each state one-at-a-time. We then …nd
which states are "‡attening" the estimated relationship between competition and deregulation in the …rst
stage. When we eliminate these states, the results strengthen. This robustness test suggests that the e¤ects
of deregulation on racial discrimination are driven by states in which the "treatment" is a¤ecting product
market competition, not by some spurious channel.

25

The economic impact the rate of new incorporations on blacks’relative wages is large in
states with above the median level of the racial bias index. With either set of instrumental
variables, the estimates indicate that a ten percent acceleration in the rate of new incorporations increases blacks’relative wages by about 2.5 percent in high racial bias states.12
Combining these results with those in Figure 2, the results suggest that bank deregulation
boosted the rate of new incorporations by over 20% after …ve years in high racial bias
states, which in turn increased blacks’relative wages by about …ve percent in these same
states. These estimates indicate that by increasing competition, bank deregulation boosted
blacks’relative wages by one-quarter of the initial racial wage gap in these states, which
equaled, on average, 20 percent in the years before bank deregulation.
5.3.3 Competition and Blacks’Relative Wages: Sensitivity Analyses
The results are robust to using either the Charles and Guryan (2008) measure of racial
prejudices (CG) or the intermarriage racial bias index (LLR) to categorize states as high- or
low-racial bias states. Table 5 presents the OLS and 2SLS analyses of the relation between
the racial wage gap and the rate of new incorporations. We use the linear instrument set and
compute blacks’relative wages conditional on standard Mincerian traits and occupation.
We use a common sample of states that is slightly smaller than in Table 4 because the CG
measure is unavailable for Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Nebraska, Nevada, and New Mexico.
The strong positive impact of the rate of new incorporations on blacks’relative wages
is robust to using the CG racial prejudice indicator to classify states. In states with above
the median values of the two racial bias indicators, the log of new incorporations per capita
is positively associated with blacks’relative wages.
Figure 4 shows that the results are robust to considering the full range of possible
combinations of (1) estimation strategy (OLS and 2SLS), (2) method for computing blacks’
relative wages (either conditioning on standard Mincerian controls (R) or also conditioning
on occupation (Ro)), (3) method for categorizing states by taste for discrimination (LLR
or CG), and (4) using linear or non-parametric instrumental variables (Linear or N on
param:). Figure 4 plots each point estimate along with its 95% con…dence interval. As
shown, the results are robust. In terms of the instrumental variable results, there is only
one speci…cation in which the rate of new incorporation does not enter positively and
signi…cantly at the …ve percent level, and instead enters with a p-value of (0:10). This
exception involves using the CG indicator to de…ne racial attitudes, and we have already
12

The 2SLS parameter estimate is larger than the OLS estimate. This is consistent with the reverse
causality argument made above. Speci…cally, if …rms are attracted to states where blacks’relative wages
are particularly low, OLS will underestimate the impact of a lowering of entry barriers on blacks’relative
wages.

26

discussed the advantages, in the context of our particular study, of using the intermarriage
racial bias measure (LLR).

6
6.1

The E¤ect of Competition on Segregation
Racial Prejudices, Competition, and Segregation

Besides making predictions regarding relative wages, Becker’s (1957) taste-based theory
of discrimination also predicts that when employers are heterogeneous in both productive
quality and the "disutility" they receive from employing black workers, there will be racial
segregation as black workers are hired by the least racially biased employers. Indeed, if …rms
are similar except for the racial prejudices of employers, segregation will reduce racial wage
di¤erentials as workers sort according to the racial preferences of employers. This led Welch
(1975) to emphasize the segregation prediction of the taste-based theory of discrimination.
While racial wage di¤erentials are a fundamental measure of labor market discrimination
and the focus of our examination, segregation o¤ers an additional margin along which to
assess whether the relations between competition and the racial characteristics of labor
markets are consistent with the taste-based theory.
More speci…cally, the taste-based theory suggests that an intensi…cation of competition
will reduce segregation. Lowering entry barriers allows new employers with less of a taste for
discrimination than existing employers to enter. This increases the number of employers
willing to hire black workers at prevailing wage rates. By expanding the employment
opportunities of blacks, competition will reduce segregation. If our earlier results on blacks’
relative wages re‡ect the causal impact of intensi…ed competition on how racial prejudices
a¤ect labor markets, then we should also observe a reduction in segregation following an
intensi…cation of competition.
6.2

The E¤ect of Competition on Segregation: Results

In light of this testable implication, we turn back to the data and evaluate the impact of
an intensi…cation of competition on the racial allocation of workers while di¤erentiating
states by the degree of racial prejudice. To analyze the same time period and workers used
in our examination of blacks’relative wages, we study the racial composition of workers at
the industry level, using data on the 144, 3-digit industry categories in the CPS. If there
are cross-industry di¤erences in the racial prejudices of employers, then the taste-based
theory predicts that competition will expand the cross-industry labor market opportunities
available to black workers and induce blacks to move to industries that were previously

27

dominated by whites. While one may question whether the racial prejudices of employers
di¤er by industry, Becker (1957) provides an economic rational for examining segregation at
the industry level: competition may di¤er by industry. If there are cross-industry di¤erences
in entry barriers, and hence competition, employers with stronger racial prejudices will have
comparatively greater success in less competitive industries holding other factors constant.
Thus, while the keystone of our analysis is blacks’relative wages, racial integration across
industries provides additional evidence on the mechanisms linking competition and racial
discrimination in labor markets.
Consequently, we construct and use several measures of the extent to which an industry
is particularly "white." First, we calculate the share of white workers by industry. Second, since the racial composition of workers in an industry might simply re‡ect the human
capital needs of the industry in conjunction with the di¤erential racial composition of human capital skills, we also estimate the degree to which the proportion of white workers
in an industry is greater than the proportion explained by the underlying characteristics
of workers. To do this, we regress (for each year) the proportion of white workers in each
of the 144 industries on the characteristics of the white workers in that industry, including
education, a quartic in potential experience, as well as occupation and state …xed e¤ects,
i.e., the same set of regressors that we employ to generate wage residuals. We collect the
average residuals in each industry. These provide crude and residual ("unexplained") measures of the "whiteness" of each industry. Third, motivated by Ashenfelter and Hannan
(1986), we calculate the proportion of white managers in each industry and use this proportion as a measure of the degree to which an industry is dominated by whites. Fourth, we
also construct the unexplained proportion of white managers, using the same conditioning
regressors.
We next estimate the impact of competition on the racial composition of the industry
in which each black worker is employed. We use the same speci…cation employed in our
relative wage regressions, except the dependent variable is one of the measures of the
"whiteness" of the industry in which each black works. Thus, we regress industry whiteness
on the log of new incorporations per capita, controlling for state and year …xed e¤ects.
We do this using OLS and 2SLS. We divide states by the degree of racial bias, using
both the LLR and CG measures of racial bias to categorize states. Thus, we evaluate
whether an exogenous increase in competition induces black workers to move to "white"
industries, while di¤erentiating states by racial bias. In the analyses, we obtain the same
results whether we use the crude or residual measures of the degree to which an industry
is composed of white workers or managers. For simplicity, we present the results for the
unexplained proportion of white workers and the crude measure of the fraction of white

28

managers.
Consistent with the taste-based theory, Table 6 indicates that an acceleration of the
rate of new incorporations in high racial bias states induced blacks to work in "whiter"
industries. These results hold when examining (1) the unexplained proportion of white
workers and (2) the proportion of white managers. The results hold when using OLS or
2SLS, and whether we divide states by the LLR or the CG indicator of racial prejudices.
The sizes of the estimated coe¢ cients suggest that the impact of new incorporations on
the reallocation of black workers across industries is economically small, but not inconsequential. For instance, consider the sample of high racial bias states based on the racial
bias index (LLR) and the results using the proportion of white managers. The estimated
coe¢ cient indicates that a one standard deviation increase in the log of new incorporations
per capita (0.4) boosts the proportion of white managers in which the average black worker
is employed by 0.0032 (0.4*0.08), which is almost one-tenth of the cross-industry standard
deviation of white managers (0.04). In sum, the …ndings are consistent with the view that
intensi…ed competition reduced racial segregation in the workforce.
6.3

Competition and Blacks’Relative Wages Within Industries

Given this …nding on the movement of black workers to historically white industries, we
were concerned that the earlier results on blacks’ relative wages could re‡ect a shift of
black workers to better paying industries, rather than an increase in blacks’relative wages
within industries. To assess whether the shift of black workers to white industries accounts
for the increase in blacks’ relative wages, we evaluate the impact of an increase in the
rate of new incorporations on blacks’ relative wages, where we not only compute blacks’
relative wages by conditioning on education, potential experience, and occupation, but
also by conditioning on industry. As noted above, we recognize the problems with this
conditioning since an individual’s industry could be endogenously explained by the rate of
new incorporations. Nonetheless, as a robustness check, we compare the wages of black
workers with the same observable traits as their white counterparts who are working in the
same industry and the same occupation to see whether the relation between the rate of
new incorporations and blacks’relative wages is accounted for by the movement of black
workers to higher paying industries.
The results in Table 7 suggest that the intensi…cation of competition boosted blacks’
wages relative to comparable white workers within the same industry and occupation.
Increased racial integration does not fully account for the increase in blacks’relative wages
following the boost in the rate of new incorporations. Both results –the increase in blacks’
relative wages and the increase in racial integration in the workplace –are consistent with

29

the taste-based view of racial discrimination.

7

Robustness Checks

In this section, we address concerns about several factors that could confound our ability
to draw accurate inferences about the impact of competition on racial wage discrimination.
Some of these factors work against the reported …ndings, leading us to underestimate the
bene…cial e¤ects of bank deregulation and the rate of new incorporations on blacks’relative
wages. In these cases, we simply discuss our robustness tests without presenting tables.
Other factors either play a central role in Becker’s (1957) theory or potentially lead us to
overestimate the impact of competition on racial discrimination. In these cases, we present
correspondingly more information.
7.1

Relative Hours Worked

We were concerned that blacks’relative wages could also rise if deregulation induced the
labor supply curve of black males to shift leftward. If this occurs, the working hours of
blacks could actually fall after deregulation relative to those of whites.
Table 8 reports the e¤ects of bank deregulation and the log of new incorporations
per capita on the relative working hours of blacks in high racial bias states using two
approaches. We examine high racial bias states because this is where the rate of new
incorporations increased blacks’relative wages. In the …rst approach, we trace the impact
of bank deregulation, through the rate of new incorporations, to blacks’relative wages. We
then examine the impact of these projected relative wages on blacks’relative annual hours
worked. If an outward shift in the demand curve is causing the increase in blacks’relative
wages, then we expect to …nd a positive coe¢ cient on blacks’relative wages in the relative
working hours regression.
In the second approach, we examine the impact of the log of new incorporations per
capita on the relative working hours of blacks without tracing the e¤ect through relative
wages. Speci…cally, we reproduce the 2SLS analyses in Table 4 except that the dependent
variable is the di¤erence between the actual number of hours worked of each black worker
and the projected annual hours worked of a white worker with identical traits. The di¤erence between the actual and projected hours worked re‡ects the racial gap in hours. We
use bank deregulation to identify an exogenous increase in new incorporations and assess
the impact on this gap in working hours.
To compute relative working hours, we …rst estimate a labor supply equation every
year on a sample of white males, while conditioning on state …xed e¤ects and the same

30

Mincerian characteristics used in the wage equation. Then, we use the resulting coe¢ cient
estimates to calculate the predicted number of hours worked of a white worker with each
black worker’s characteristics. Finally, we compute the relative working hours of each black
worker as the di¤erence between his actual and predicted working hours.
Since there is a meaningful kink in the labor supply curve between working and not
working, we use both OLS and Tobit speci…cations and also examine the subsample of
blacks with positive working hours. We use a standard bootstrapping procedure to correct
the standard errors since the regressors are estimated.
We …nd that bank deregulation that increased the rate of new incorporations and
boosted blacks’ relative wages also increased the relative working hours of blacks. The
evidence suggests that bank deregulation increased the relative demand for black workers. As shown, the impact is particularly pronounced among workers. This suggests that
while deregulation increased the relative demand for black workers, bank deregulation did
not signi…cantly attract new black workers into the workforce. Most important given the
focus of this paper, the Table 8 results clearly demonstrate that bank deregulation and
competition did not shift black’s labor supply curve to the left.
7.2

Selection, Migration, and Self-Employment

We were concerned that changes in the skill composition of black males in the economy could
a¤ect our evaluation of blacks’ relative wages. Consequently, we calculate the projected
wage rates for all working age (non-institutionalized) blacks in each state, whether they are
working or not. We do this using the estimated returns to observable traits from equation
(3) and using the actual traits of each black male. In this way, we compute the value of
observable traits of all black males. Then, we evaluate the impact of bank deregulation on
the composition of skills in the workforce.
Table 9 provides regression results of the projected wage rates of all relevant black
males on a dummy variable if the person works, Interstate, and the interaction between
Interstate and the dummy variable for working or not, as well as state and year …xed
e¤ects. There are similar regressions for Intrastate. The summation of the coe¢ cients
on Interstate and the interaction term provide information on whether the average value
of the traits of workers changes after deregulation. The coe¢ cient on Interstate provides
information on the change in the average value of the traits of individuals who are not
working following deregulation.
Deregulation did not have a signi…cant e¤ect on the average value of the traits of
black workers. There is no evidence that bank deregulation substantively a¤ected the skill
composition of black workers. To the extent that observable traits are correlated with un-

31

observable characteristics, these results further imply that the composition of unobservable
traits did not change much following bank deregulation.
Deregulation could also a¤ect migration across states. To assess this, we estimate the
e¤ect of deregulation on the fraction of black males within states. We …nd that the share
of black males within states increased slightly after deregulation. This is consistent with a
situation in which deregulation boosted the rate of new incorporations, reduced the racial
wage gap, and attracted blacks from other states. Yet, as shown in Table 9, the net
compositional changes of blacks in the economy due to deregulation did not have much of
an e¤ect on the skill composition of working blacks. There is no indication that migration
leads us to overstate the bene…cial e¤ects of deregulation.
Similarly, the boost in blacks’relative wages could attract black males with comparatively low unobserved skills into the labor force, leading us to underestimate the degree to
which the rate of new incorporations reduces racial wage di¤erentials. A quantile regression
at the median helps in assessing the importance of this potential bias by putting less weight
on entrants of black workers with low unobserved skills.
We …nd no evidence that selection based on unobservables is causing us to underestimate
the true e¤ect of the rate of new incorporations. While the log of new incorporations per
capita increases the relative demand for black workers, the number of new black males
pulled into the labor force is relatively small, such that the median regression yields virtually
identical results to the OLS coe¢ cient estimates.
7.3

Swimming Upstream

Biases could arise from changes in the "prices" of unobserved skills. Although national
trends in returns to unobserved skills will not a¤ect our results because we control for
year …xed e¤ects, the intensi…cation of competition when a state deregulates could increase
returns to unobservable traits. If the average white worker has more of these unobserved
traits than the average black worker, the average wage rate of whites will rise relative to
that of blacks. This e¤ect will cause the estimated value of blacks’relative wages to fall,
even though racial discrimination is not rising.
Under these conditions, we will underestimate the true, positive e¤ect of deregulation
on the relative wages of blacks. This is sometimes called “swimming upstream” (Juhn
Murphy and Pierce, 1991; Blau and Kahn, 1997; Blau and Kahn, 2000; and Mulligan
and Rubinstein, 2008). To assess the importance of swimming upstream, we follow the
literature and use quantile regressions. The goal is to compare black and white workers
that are more similar in unobserved skills than when using OLS, which compares averages
from both groups.

32

In unreported regressions, we con…rm the existence of swimming upstream, suggesting
that we are underestimating the bene…cial e¤ects of bank deregulation on blacks’relative
wages when using OLS. The median regressions produce similar coe¢ cient estimates to
those from OLS. Moreover, in moving from lower quantiles to higher quantiles, we …nd
that deregulation reduced a larger proportion of the racial wage gap. Under the assumption
that the average white has more unobserved skills than the average black, these …ndings
are consistent with the view that the racial wage gap closed more among white and black
workers with comparable unobserved skills.
7.4

Racial Discrimination or the Poor

Since bank deregulation exerts a disproportionately positive impact on the poor and blacks
are on average comparatively poor (Beck, Levine, and Levkov, 2009), the current paper’s
analyses could re‡ect this income distributional e¤ect, rather than the impact of bank
deregulation and competition on blacks in particular.
Three observations, however, suggest that this is not the case. First, bank deregulation
and the rate of new incorporations boosted blacks’ relative wages in states with a high
degree of racial bias. This is di¢ cult to reconcile with the view that our results simply
re‡ect a tightening of the distribution of income. Second, the results hold when computing
relative wages conditional on occupation and industry. Thus, our …ndings indicate that even
within low-paying (and high-paying) occupations and industries, blacks’relative wages rose
with competition.
Third, and most directly, we perform a rank analysis and compare the change in blacks’
relative wages with those of comparable whites across the full distribution of relative wage
rates. If deregulation is simply helping the poor, we should not see that blacks converge
toward whites at each point in the wage distribution.
The results show that bank deregulation, and the accompanying boost in the log of new
incorporations per capita, disproportionately helped black workers across the full distribution of wages. Figure 5 shows the rank plot for the high racial bias states, and for the
sample of states with below the median level of the racial bias index. The solid and dashed
lines represent the location of blacks within the conditional log hourly wage distribution of
whites before and after deregulation respectively. The median black among the high racial
bias states, for example, corresponds to the 28th percentile white worker prior to deregulation and the 32nd percentile white work after deregulation. The median black, therefore,
gained four ranks in the white wage distribution as a result of deregulation, but only in
high racial bias states. Consistent with the earlier results, there is little change in relative
wage rates in the low racial bias states. These results suggest that deregulation exerted a

33

particularly pronounced e¤ect on black workers.

8

Conclusions

In this paper, we examine whether an increase in product market competition reduced
the manifestation of racial prejudices in labor markets. As Becker (1957) argued, tastebased discrimination by employers can (1) produce an equilibrium gap between the wages
of identical black and white workers and (2) produce racial segregation in the workforce.
He further stressed that greater competition could erode the racial wage gap by reducing
the impact of racial prejudices on the relative demand for black workers and reduce racial
segregation by increasing the number of employers willing to hire black workers. A central
implication of the taste-based discrimination theory is that greater competition will reduce
the black-white wage di¤erential and increase racial segregation only in economies where
employers have a su¢ ciently strong "taste for discrimination."
Our results indicate that an exogenous intensi…cation of competition substantively
boosted blacks’relative wages and reduced racial segregation in states with a su¢ ciently
high degree of racial bias. In reduced form speci…cations, bank deregulation that lowered
entry barriers facing non…nancial …rms reduced the racial wage gap. In 2SLS, we use bank
deregulation to identify an exogenous intensi…cation of competition. We …nd that the resultant increase in competition eliminated more than one-…fth of the preexisting black-white
wage di¤erential in high racial bias states over a …ve year period. Furthermore and critically, we …nd that intensi…ed competition reduced racial segregation, especially in high
racial bias states. These …ndings suggest that competition reduced the impact of racial
prejudices on blacks’relative wages and enhanced the opportunities of black workers.
Looking forward, much work remains. The paper emphasizes the powerful role of competition in expanding the economic opportunities of minorities. By reducing racial wage
di¤erentials, competition could also increase the incentives for blacks to acquire skills.
Thus, future research might merge and extend taste-based and statistical-based explanations of racial discrimination. This paper also advertises the need for additional research
on …nance and economic opportunity. In this paper, we show that improvements in the
functioning of banks substantively enhanced the economic opportunities of a disadvantaged
group. These improvements materialize not because banks make more loans to black entrepreneurs, but because improvements in banking disproportionately enhanced the labor
market opportunities of blacks.

34

References
Almond, Douglas Vincent, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone. 2006. "Civil Rights,
the War on Poverty, and Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality in the Rural South
and Mississippi." MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 07-04.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Charles R. Pierret. 2001. "Employer Learning And Statistical
Discrimination." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (February): 313-50.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. "Race and Gender in the Labor Market.
In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3., edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. St.
Louis, MO: Elsevier: 3143–259.
Amel, Dean F. 2008. "State Laws A¤ecting the Geographic Expansion of Commercial
Banks." Unpublished manuscript. Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1972. "Some Mathematical Models of Race Discrimination in the Labor
Market." In Racial Discrimination in Economic Life, edited by A. H. Pascal. Lexington,
MA: D.C. Heath Press, 187-204.
Ashenfelter, Orley C., and Timothy Hannan. 1986. "Sex Discrimination and Product Market Competition: The Case of the Banking Industry." Quarterly Journal of Economics 101
(February): 149-74.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. "Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Re-Assessing the Revisionists." Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (May):
300-25.
Beck, Thorsten, Ross Levine, and Alexey Levkov. 2009. “Big Bad Banks? The Winners
and Losers from Bank Deregulation in the United States.”Brown University mimeo.
Becker, Gary S. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Benabou, Roland. 1996. “Equity and E¢ ciency in Human Capital Investment: The Local
Connection.”Review of Economic Studies 63(2) (April): 237-64.
Berger, Alan, Anthony Saunders,Joseph Scalise, and Gregory Udell. 1998. "The E¤ects of
Bank Mergers and Acquisitions on Small Business Lending." Journal of Financial Economics 50 (November): 187-229.

35

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2004. "Are Emily and Greg More Employable than Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination."
American Economic Review 94 (September): 991-1013.
Black, Sandra E., and Philip E. Strahan. 2001. “The Division of Spoils: Rent-Sharing
and Discrimination in a Regulated Industry.”American Economic Review 91 (September):
814-31.
Black, Sandra E., and Philip E. Strahan. 2002. “Entrepreneurship and Bank Credit Availability.”Journal of Finance 57 (December): 2807-32.
Black, Sandra E., and Elizabeth Brainerd. 2004. "Importing Equality? The E¤ects of
Globalization on Gender Discrimination." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 57 (July):
540-59.
Black, Sandra E., and Alexandra Spitz-Oener. 2007. "Explaining Women’s Success: Technological Change and the Skill Content of Women’s Work." Working Paper no. 13116,
NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 1997. “Swimming Upstream: Trends in the
Gender Wage Di¤erential in the 1980s.”Journal of Labor Economics 15 (January): 1-42.
Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2000. “Gender Di¤erences in Pay.”Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 14: 75–99.
Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity. New York: Free Press.
Bound, John, and Richard B. Freedman. 1992. "What When Wrong? The Erosion of
Relative Earnings and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 107 (February): 201-32.
Butler, Richard, and James J. Heckman. 1997. “The Government’s Impact on the Labor
Market Status of Black Americans: A Critical Review,” In Equal Rights and Industrial
Relations, edited by Leonard J. Hausman, Orley Ashenfelter, Bayard Rustin, Richard F.
Schubert, and Donald Slaiman, Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research Association:
235-81.
Card, David, and Alan Krueger. 1992. "School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings:
A Direct Assessment." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February): 151-200.
Charles, Kerwin K., and Jonathan Guryan. 2008. "Prejudice and the Economics of Discrimination." Journal of Political Economy 116 (October): 773-809.

36

Coate, Stephen, and Glenn C. Loury. 1993. "Will A¢ rmative-Action Policies Eliminate
Negative Stereotypes?" American Economic Review 83 (December): 1220-40.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine. 2009. “Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence.”Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, Palo Alto, CA, forthcoming.
Demyanyk, Yuliya, Charlotte, Ostergaard Charlotte, and Bent Sorensen. 2007. “U.S. Banking Deregulation, Small Businesses, and Interstate Insurance of Personal Income.”Journal
of Finance 62 (December): 2763-801.
Demyanyk, Yuliya. 2008. “U.S. Banking Deregulation and Self-Employment: A Di¤erential
Impact on Those in Need.” Journal of Economics and Business 60 (January-February):
165-78.
Diamond, Douglas. 1984. "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring." The Review of Economic Studies 51 (July): 393-414.
Donohue, John, and James J. Heckman. 1991. "Continuous versus Episodic Change: The
Impact of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks." Journal of Economic
Literature 29 (December): 1603-43.
Durlauf, Steven N. 1996. “A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality.”Journal of Economic
Growth 1 (March): 75-93.
Durlauf, Steven N. 2006. “Racial Pro…ling as a Public Policy Question: E¢ ciency, Equity,
and Ambiguity.”American Economic Review 92 (May): 132-6.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Marcel Fafchamps. 2006. “Social Capital,” In Handbook of Economic Growth, Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, eds., Amsterdam: North Holland,
1639-99.
Economides, Nicholas, Glenn R. Hubbard, and Darius Palia. 1996. "The Political Economy
of Branching Restrictions and Deposit Insurance: A Model of Monopolistic Competition
among Small and Large Banks." Journal of Law and Economics 39 (October): pp. 667-704.
Fryer, Roland G. Jr., and Steven D. Levitt. 2004. "Understanding the Black-White Test
Score Gap in the First Two Years of School." The Review of Economics and Statistics 86
(May): 447–64.
Goldberg, Matthew S. 1982. "Discrimination, Nepotism, and the Long-Run Wage Di¤erential." Quarterly Journal of Economics 97 (May): 307-19.

37

Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. "The E¤ects of Cognitive and
Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior." Journal of Labor
Economics 24 (July): 411-82.
Heywood, John S., and James H. Peoples. 1994. "Deregulation and the Prevalence of Black
Truck Drivers." Journal of Law and Economics 37 (April): 135-55.
Huang, Rocco R. 2008. “Evaluating the Real E¤ect of Bank Branching Deregulation: Comparing Contiguous Counties Across US State Borders.”Journal of Financial Economics 87
(March): 678-705.
Hubbard, Glenn R., and Darius Palia. 1995. “Executive Pay and Performance: Evidence
from the U.S. Banking Industry.”Journal of Financial Economics 39 (September): 105-30.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Phillip E. Strahan. 1996. "The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from
Bank Branch Deregulation." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (August ): 639-70.
Jayaratne, Jith, and Phillip E. Strahan. 1998. “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and
Dynamic E¢ ciency: Evidence from Commercial Banking.”Journal of Law and Economics
41 (April): 239-73.
Jencks, Christopher, and Meredith Phillips. 1998. The Black-White Test Score Gap. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1991. "Accounting for the Slowdown
in Black-White Wage Convergence." In Workers and Their Wages: Changing patterns in
the United States, edited by Marvin Kosters, Washington, DC: American Enterprise Press:
107-43.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce. 1993. "Wage Inequality and the Rise
in Returns to Skill." Journal of Political Economy 101 (June): 410-42.
Katz, Lawrence F., and David H. Autor. 1999. "Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality." In Handbook of Labor Economics, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, Amsterdam: North-Holland Elsevier Publishers.
Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda. 2009. "Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations,
Financing Constraints, and Entrepreneurship." Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

38

Kroszner, Randall, and Phillip E. Strahan. 1999. “What Drives Deregulation? Economics
and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114 (November): 1437-67.
Lang, Kevin, Michael Manove, and William Dickens. 2005. "Racial Discrimination in Markets with Announced Wages." American Economic Review 95: 1327-40.
Levine, Ross. 2005. "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence." In Handbook of Economic Growth, edited by Philippe Aghion and Steven Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland
Elsevier Publishers.
Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy A. Denton. 1987. "Trends in the Residential Segregation of
Blacks, Hispanics and Asians: 1970-1980." American Sociological Review 52 (December):
802-25.
Mulligan, Casey B., and Yona Rubinstein. 2008. "Selection, Investment, and Women’s
Relative Wages Over Time." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (August): 1061-110.
Neal, Derek A. 2006. "Why Has Black-White Skill Convergence Stopped?" In Handbook
of the Economics of Education, edited by Erik Hanushek and Finis Welch, Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
Neal, Derek A., and William R. Johnson. 1996. "The Role of Premarket Factors in BlackWhite Wage Di¤erences." Journal of Political Economy 104 (October): 869-95.
Oster, Sharon M. 1975. "Industry Di¤erences in the Level of Discrimination Against
Women." Quarterly Journal of Economics 89 (May): 215-29.
Peoples, James H., and Wayne K. Talley. 2001. "Black-White Earnings Di¤erential: Privatization versus Deregulation." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 91
(May): 164-8.
Phelps, Edmund S. 1972. "The Statistical Theory of Racism and Sexism." American Economic Review 62 (September): 659-61.
Qian, Zhenchao. 1997. "Breaking the Racial Barriers: Variations in Interracial Marriage
Between 1980 and 1990," Demography 34 (May): 263-76.
Rubinstein Yona, and Dror Brenner. 2009. "Pride and Prejudice: Evidence from the
’Promised Land’". Brown University mimeo.

39

Shepherd, William G., and Sharon G. Levin, Sharon G. 1973. "Managerial Discrimination
in Large Firms." The Review of Economics and Statistics 55 (November): 412-22.
Southworth, Shirley D. 1928. Branch Banking in the United States. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Smith, James P., and Finis R. Welch. 1989. "Black Economic Progress After Myrdal."
Journal of Economic Literature 27 (June): 519-64.
Welch, Finis R. 1975. "Human Capital Theory: Education, Discrimination, and Life Cycles." American Economic Review 65 (May): 63-73.
White, Eugene N. 1982. "The Political Economy of Banking Regulation, 1864-1933." Journal of Economic History 42 (March): 33-40.

40

Table 1
THE RACIAL BIAS INDEX, SURVEY MEASURES OF RACIAL PREJUDICE, AND RELATIVE WAGES

Panel A: Correlation Coefficients Between the Different
Measures of Taste for Discrimination
Racial bias index
Observations

Panel B: Taste for Discrimination and
Relative Wages of Blacks
Racial bias index > median

(1)

Fraction
whites who
would not vote
for black
president
(2)

Fraction whites
who support
right to
segregate
neighborhoods
(3)

0.36
{0.02}
43

0.35
{0.02}
43

0.31
{0.04}
43

Fraction whites
who support law
against interracial
marriage

Dependent Variable: Relative Wages of Blacks
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-.058***
(.015)

-.072***
(.014)
-.042***
(.015)

-.065***
(.012)
-.002
(.017)
-.082***
(.013)

10,076

10,076

10,076

-.079***
(.013)

Marginal racial prejudice > median
Share of blacks in 1970 ≥ 10%
Observations

10,076

NOTE – Panel A reports correlation coefficients between (1) The racial bias index, which is based on interracial marriages in 1970,
and (2) three recent survey-based indicators of racial prejudice from Charles and Guryan (2008). Panel B reports estimated
coefficients from four regressions, where the dependent variable is blacks’ relative wage rates. Relative wages are conditional on
five indicators of years of completed education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+) and a quartic in potential experience. Estimates are
weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current Population Survey. In column (1), the regressor is an indicator which
equals one if the racial bias index above the median and zero otherwise. In column (2) the regressor is an indicator which equals one
if the marginal racial prejudice above the median and zero otherwise. The marginal racial prejudice index is the pth percentile of the
distribution of an aggregate index of racial prejudice, where p is the percentile of workforce that is black. The marginal racial
prejudice index is taken from Charles and Guryan (2008). Column (3) includes simultaneously the regressors from columns (1) and
(2). In column (4) we also control for an indicator which equals one if the proportion of blacks in the workforce in 1970 is above
10%. The regressions include black workers prior to interstate and intrastate bank deregulation, so that the reported number of
observations equals 10,076. All regressions include year fixed effects. We do not include state fixed effects because the regressors are
fixed for each state and do not change over time. Standard errors are clustered at the state-year level and appear in parentheses; pvalues are in brackets. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

41

Table 2
BANK DEREGULATION AND LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS PER CAPITA
(1)
Interstate dummy

(2)

.084***
(.031)

Intrastate dummy

(3)

(4)

.040
(.041)

(6)

.021***
(.008)
-.0004*
(.0002)

.029**
(.014)
-.002
(.001)
.019**
(.008)
-.0004*
(.0002)

882

882

(.031)
.038
(.041)

Interstate

.032**
(.015)
-.002
(.001)

Interstate squared
Intrastate
Intrastate squared

Observations

(5)

.082**

882

882

882

882

NOTE – The table shows the impact of various measures of bank deregulation on log new incorporations
per capita. Robust standard errors are adjusted for state-level clustering and appear in parentheses.
Intrastate dummy equals one in the years after a state permits branching via mergers and acquisitions
and zero otherwise. Interstate dummy equals one in the years after a state permits interstate banking and
zero otherwise. Interstate is equal to years since interstate deregulation and is equal to zero before
interstate deregulation. Intrastate is equal to years since intrastate deregulation and is equal to zero before
intrastate deregulation. New incorporations are from Dun and Bradstreet. Dates of intrastate and
interstate bank deregulations are from Kroszner and Strahan (1999) and Amel (2008). The sample is for
the years 1977-1994 and excludes Delaware and South Dakota. All regressions include state and year
fixed effects. There are no other covariates. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%,
respectively.

42

Table 3
BANK DEREGULATION AND RELATIVE WAGE RATES
Interstate Deregulation

Intrastate Deregulation

Racial Bias Index:
All
States
Years since deregulation

Impact after five years
as a share of sample's initial wage gap
Observations

Above
Median

All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

.001
(.003)

.004
(.003)
.003***
(.001)

.003
(.003)

.012*
(.007)

.005***
(.001)

.005***
(.001)
.004***
(.001)

.004***
(.002)

.011***
(.002)

(Years since deregulation) x
(Racial bias index > median)
Impact after five years

Below
Median

Racial Bias Index:

.006

.037**

.013

.061*

.023***

.044***

.022***

.057***

(.015)

(.016)

(.016)

(.034)

(.006)

(.007)

(.007)

(.012)

3%

21%

9%

29%

13%

25%

15%

27%

73,801

73,801

48,367

25,434

73,801

73,801

48,367

25,434

NOTE - The dependent variable is the relative wage rates of blacks. Relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of completed education (0-8,
9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+) and a quartic in potential experience. Estimates are weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current Population Survey.
Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in parentheses. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The reported number
of observations is for blacks only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2. In columns (1)-(4), “years since deregulation” stands for
years since interstate deregulation; in columns (5)-(8), “years since deregulation” stands for years since intrastate deregulation. In columns (2) and (6),
years since deregulation is interacted with an indicator which equals one if the racial bias index is above the median and zero otherwise. In columns (1),
(2), (5), and (6) we include the entire sample. In columns (3) and (7) we include only states with racial bias index below the median. In columns (4) and (8)
we include only states with racial bias index above the median. The racial bias index is based on rate of interracial marriages using the 1970 Census of
Population. Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. The average initial racial wage gap is 17% for all states, 15% for states with a racial
bias index below the median, and 21% for states with a racial bias index above the median. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
respectively.

43

Table 4
THE IMPACT OF LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS PER CAPITA ON RELATIVE WAGE RATES: OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES
OLS

2SLS: Linear

Racial Bias Index:

2SLS: Non-Parametric

Racial Bias Index:

Racial Bias Index:

All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

.267***
(.071)
26.8
.134
13,122

.019
(.048)
3.0
.608
37,876

-.122**
(.054)
2.3
.518
24,754

.235***
(.062)
113.5
.086
13,122

Panel B: Relative Wage Rates are Conditional on Education, Potential Experience, and Occupation
Log new incorporation per capita
.016
-.029
.122***
.023
-.026
.214***
(.020)
(.023)
(.037)
(.064)
(.071)
(.068)
F-test of excluded instruments
21.8
8.2
26.8
OIR test (p-value)
.046
.358
.123
Observations
37,876
24,754
13,122
37,876
24,754
13,122

.020
(.046)
3.0
.845
37,876

-.079
(.053)
2.3
.683
24,754

.198***
(.058)
113.5
.082
13,122

Panel A: Relative Wage Rates are Conditional on Education and Potential Experience
Log new incorporation per capita
.018
-.038
.137***
.042
-.080
(.022)
(.023)
(.038)
(.064)
(.071)
F-test of excluded instruments
21.8
8.2
OIR test (p-value)
.003
.174
Observations
37,876
24,754
13,122
37,876
24,754

NOTE - The dependent variable is the relative wage rates of blacks. In panel A, relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of completed
education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+) and a quartic in potential experience. In panel B, relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of
completed education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+), a quartic in potential experience, and occupation fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by sampling
weights provided by the Current Population Survey. Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in parentheses. All regressions
include state and year fixed effects. The reported number of observations is for blacks only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2.
The sample is limited to the years 1977-1994 due to availability of log new incorporations per capita data. In columns (1), (4), and (7) we include the
entire sample. In columns (2), (5), and (8) we include only states with racial bias index below the median. In columns (3), (6), and (9) we include only
states with racial bias index above the median. The racial bias index is based on rate of interracial marriages using the 1970 Census of Population.
Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. Columns (1)-(3) report Ordinary Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new
incorporations per capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. Columns (4)-(9) report Two Stage Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new
incorporations per capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. In columns (4)-(6), log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by years since
interstate deregulation and years since intrastate deregulation. In columns (7)-(9), log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by dummy
variables for each year before and after interstate deregulation and dummy variables for each year before and after intrastate deregulation. The F-test of
excluded instruments reports the F-statistic from the first-stage. The OIR test reports the p-value of a J-statistic that test over-identifying restrictions. *,
**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

44

Table 5
THE IMPACT OF LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS ON THE RELATIVE WAGES OF BLACKS: OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES
LEVINE-LEVKOV-RUBINSTEIN AND CHARLES-GURYAN MEASURES OF RACIAL PREJUDICE
OLS

Log new incorporation per capita

2SLS

Racial Bias
Below Median
LLR
CG
(1)
(2)

Racial Bias
Above Median
LLR
CG
(3)
(4)

Racial Bias
Below Median
LLR
CG
(5)
(6)

Racial Bias
Above Median
LLR
CG
(7)
(8)

-.029

-.029

(.023)

(.030)

.124***
(.037)

-.024
(.071)

-.051
(.057)

.224***
(.068)

.165**
(.076)

8.1
.375

32.8
.264

26.8
.259

16.2
.571

24,272

8,093

12,942

29,121

.039
(.028)

F-test of excluded instruments
OIR test (p-value)
Observations

24,272

8,093

12,942

29,121

NOTE - The dependent variable is the relative wage rates of blacks. Relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of
completed education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+), a quartic in potential experience, and occupation fixed effects. Estimates are
weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current Population Survey. Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering
and appear in parentheses. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The reported number of observations is for blacks
only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2. The sample is limited to the years 1977-1994 due to availability of
log new incorporations per capita data. “LLR” stands for the racial bias index and is based on rate of interracial marriages using the
1970 Census of Population. Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. “CG” stands for the marginal racial prejudice
which is obtained from Charles and Guryan (2008). In columns (1) and (5) we include only states with racial bias index below the
median. In columns (3) and (7) we include only states with racial bias index above the median. In columns (2) and (6) we include
only states with marginal racial prejudice below the median. In columns (4) and (8) we include only states with marginal racial
prejudice above the median. Columns (1)-(4) report Ordinary Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new incorporations per
capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. Columns (5)-(8) report Two Stage Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new
incorporations per capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. Log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by dummy
variables for each year before and after interstate deregulation and dummy variables for each year before and after intrastate
deregulation. The F-test of excluded instruments reports the F-statistic from the first-stage. The OIR test reports the p-value of a Jstatistic that test over-identifying restrictions. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

45

Table 6
THE IMPACT OF LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS PER CAPITA ON EMPLOYMENT OF BLACKS IN “WHITE” INDUSTRIES: OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES

Panel A: Racial Bias Index
Log new incorporation per capita
Observations
Panel B: Marginal Racial Prejudice
Log new incorporation per capita
Observations

Dependent variable:

Dependent variable:

working in a white industry

working for a white manager

OLS

2SLS

OLS

2SLS

Racial Prejudice:
Below
Above
Median
Median
(1)
(2)

Racial Prejudice:
Below
Above
Median
Median
(3)
(4)

Racial Prejudice:
Below
Above
Median
Median
(5)
(6)

Racial Prejudice:
Below
Above
Median
Median
(7)
(8)

.001
(.001)
24,754

.004**
(.002)
13,122

-.001
(.003)
24,754

.012***
(.004)
13,122

.002
(.002)
24,687

.007***
(.002)
13,064

-.000
(.004)
24,687

.008*
(.004)
13,064

.000
(.002)

.004**
(.001)

-.001
(.002)

.007**
(.003)

.000
(.003)

.009***
(.002)

.000
(.003)

.015***
(.004)

8,093

29,121

8,093

29,121

8,064

29,034

8,064

29,034

NOTE – The dependent variable in columns (1)-(4) is proportion of “excess” whites in an industry, where the proportion of “excess” whites is the proportion of
whites that is unexplained by years of completed education (0-8, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+), a quartic in potential experience, and occupation fixed effects. The
dependent variable in columns (5)-(8) is proportion of white managers in an industry. Estimates are weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current
Population Survey. Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in parentheses. All regressions include state and year fixed effects. The
reported number of observations is for blacks only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2. The sample is limited to the years 1977-1994 due to
availability of log new incorporations per capita data. In columns (1), (3), (5), and (7) we include only states with racial prejudice below the median. In columns (2),
(4), (6), and (8) we include only states with racial prejudice above the median. In panel A, racial prejudice is the racial bias index which is based on rate of
interracial marriages using the 1970 Census of Population. Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. In panel B, racial prejudice is the marginal
racial prejudice which is obtained from Charles and Guryan (2008). Columns (1), (2), (5), and (6) report Ordinary Least Squares estimates, while columns (3), (4),
(7), and (8) report Two Stage Least Squares. Log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by dummy variables for each year before and after interstate
deregulation and dummy variables for each year before and after intrastate deregulation. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

46

Table 7
THE IMPACT OF LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS PER CAPITA ON RELATIVE WAGE RATES: OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES
RELATIVE WAGES ARE CONDITIONAL ON EDUCATION, EXPERIENCE, OCCUPATION, AND INDUSTRY
OLS

2SLS: Linear

Racial Bias Index:
All
States
Log new incorporation per capita

Below
Median

Above
Median

All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

Racial Bias Index:
All
States

Below
Median

Above
Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

.018
(.020)

-.024
(.022)

.123***
(.035)

-.012
(.061)
21.8
.316

.010
(.070)
8.2
.813

.190***
(.067)
26.8
.051

.005
(.042)
3.0
.814

-.043
(.048)
2.3
.638

.172***
(.056)
113.5
.122

37,876

24,754

13,122

37,876

24,754

13,122

37,876

24,754

13,122

F-test of excluded instruments
OIR test (p-value)
Observations

2SLS: Non-Parametric

Racial Bias Index:

NOTE - The dependent variable is the relative wage rates of blacks. Relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of completed education (08, 9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+), a quartic in potential experience, occupation fixed effects, and industry fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by sampling
weights provided by the Current Population Survey. Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in parentheses. All regressions
include state and year fixed effects. The reported number of observations is for blacks only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2.
The sample is limited to the years 1977-1994 due to availability of log new incorporations per capita data. In columns (1), (4), and (7) we include the
entire sample. In columns (2), (5), and (8) we include only states with racial bias index below the median. In columns (3), (6), and (9) we include only
states with racial bias index above the median. The racial bias index is based on rate of interracial marriages using the 1970 Census of Population.
Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. Columns (1)-(3) report Ordinary Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new
incorporations per capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. Columns (4)-(9) report Two Stage Least Squares estimates of the impact of log new
incorporations per capita on the relative wage rates of blacks. In columns (4)-(6), log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by years since
interstate deregulation and years since intrastate deregulation. In columns (7)-(9), log new incorporations per capita are instrumented by dummy
variables for each year before and after interstate deregulation and dummy variables for each year before and after intrastate deregulation. The F-test of
excluded instruments reports the F-statistic from the first-stage. The OIR test reports the p-value of a J-statistic that test over-identifying restrictions. *,
**, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% respectively.

47

Table 8
RELATIVE LOG HOURLY WAGES AND ANNUAL WORKING HOURS IN HIGH RACIAL BIAS STATES
Annual Hours
All
OLS
(1)
Projected relative log hourly wage

All
Tobit
(2)

Hours>0
OLS
(3)

Log(Annual Hours)
All
2SLS
(4)

All
OLS
(5)

377*

376*

424*

.658**

(223)

(223)

(223)

(0.285)

Log new incorporations per capita

59
(105)

All
2SLS
(6)

.271***
(.106)

Instruments:
Years since deregulation

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Years since deregulation squared

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

21.5
.19
20,556

21.5
.19
20,556

21.5
.19
16,951

21.7
.39
20,556

21.5
.19
16,951

21.3
.49
16,951

F-test of excluded instruments
OIR test (p-value)
Observations

NOTE - The dependent variable is either hours worked or the log of hours worked. Thus, some specifications include all
working-age black males, while others include only working black males. Estimates are weighted by sampling weights
provided by the Current Population Survey. Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in
parentheses. In regressions (1) – (3) and (4), the standard errors are bootstrapped. All regressions include state and year
fixed effects. The analysis excludes states with below the median values of the racial bias index. Data on new
incorporations per capita are available for the period 1977-1994. “Years since deregulation” includes both years since
interstate deregulation and years since intrastate deregulation. The F-test of excluded instruments reports the F-statistic
from the first-stage. The OIR test reports the p-value of a J-statistic that test over-identifying restrictions. *, **, and ***
indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

48

Table 9
BANK DEREGULATION AND SELECTION ON OBSERVABLE CHARACTERISTICS
All
States
1 if person reports wages
Interstate
Interstate x (1 if person reports wages)

Racial Bias Index
Below Median

Racial Bias Index
Above Median

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

.066***
(.003)
-.004***
(.001)
.002***
(.000)

.075***
(.003)

.064***
(.003)
-.005***
(.001)
.002***
(.000)

.070***
(.004)

.069***
(.005)
-.001
(.003)
.002***
(.000)

.082***
(.005)

Intrastate

-.001
(.000)
.001***
(.000)

Intrastate x (1 if person reports wages)

-.001
(.001)
.001***
(.000)

-.000
(.001)
.000
(.000)

Impact of deregulation on observable skills of black workers

-.002

.0001

-.003*

.0003

.001

-.0002

H0: (Years since deregulation) x (1 if person reports wages) = 0

(.001)

(.0005)

(.001)

(.0006)

(.002)

(.0008)

116,593

116,593

77,301

77,301

39,292

39,292

Observations

NOTE - The dependent variable is the predicted relative wages of blacks. Relative wages are conditional on five indicators of years of completed education (0-8,
9-11, 12, 13-15, and 16+) and a quartic in potential experience. Estimates are weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current Population Survey.
Standard errors are adjusted for state-year clustering and appear in parentheses. All regressions control for state and year fixed effects. The reported number of
observations is for blacks only. Details about sample construction are in Appendix Table 2. The sample is limited to the years 1977-1994 due to availability of log
new incorporations per capita data. In columns (1) and (2) we include the entire sample. In columns (3) and (4) we include only states with racial bias index
below the median. In columns (5) and (6) we include only states with racial bias index above the median. The racial bias index is based on rate of interracial
marriages using the 1970 Census of Population. Appendix Table 3 lists the racial bias index for each state. *, **, and *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% respectively.

49

Appendix Table 1
DATES OF INTRASTATE AND INTERSTATE DEREGULATIONS, BY STATES

State

State code

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
District of Columbia
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi

AL
AK
AZ
AR
CA
CO
CT
DC
FL
GA
HI
ID
IL
IN
IA
KS
KY
LA
ME
MD
MA
MI
MN
MS

Missouri

MO

Type of deregulation:
IntraInterstate
state
1981
1987
1960
1982
1960
1986
1994
1989
1960
1987
1991
1988
1980
1983
1960
1985
1988
1985
1983
1985
1986
1997
1960
1985
1988
1986
1989
1986
1999
1991
1987
1992
1990
1984
1988
1987
1975
1978
1960
1985
1984
1983
1987
1986
1993
1986
1986
1988
1990

State
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

1986

NOTE - Dates of intrastate and interstate deregulations are taken from Kroszner and Strahan (1999).

50

State code
MT
NE
NV
NH
NJ
NM
NY
NC
ND
OH
OK
OR
PA
RI
SC
TN
TX
UT
VT
VA
WA
WV
WI
WY

Type of deregulation:
IntraInterstate
state
1990
1993
1985
1990
1960
1985
1987
1987
1977
1986
1991
1989
1976
1982
1960
1985
1987
1991
1979
1985
1988
1987
1985
1986
1982
1986
1960
1984
1960
1986
1985
1985
1988
1987
1981
1984
1970
1988
1978
1985
1985
1987
1987
1988
1990
1987
1988
1987

Appendix Table 2
SUMMARY STATISTICS: NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS
Restriction / Selection Rule

Observations

All observations in sample years 1977 to 2007

5,085,135

Civilian adults, not in group quarters, with positive sampling weight and

3,805,475

non-missing demographics such as: age, gender, state and region of residence,
marital status, and education
Excluding:
Observations in Delaware and South Dakota
Women
Younger than 18 or older than 65

3,712,856
1,749,618
1,392,503

More than 50 years of potential experience
Hispanics or other race groups but Whites or Blacks

1,337,897
1,149,855

Main sample:
Whites
Blacks

1,033,262
116,593

Wage sample:
All

756,996

Whites

683,195

Blacks

73,801

NOTE - March Current Population Survey data were obtained from <http://cps.ipums.org/cps/>. We start in Survey
year 1977 because that is when the CPS reports information on each person's exact state of residence. The 2007 Survey is
the latest Survey available. We exclude Delaware and South Dakota due to large concentration of credit card banks in
these two states. The ‘wage sample’ differs from the ‘main sample’ in that we drop self-employed and agricultural
workers, workers in private household sector, those with wages below the 1st and above the 97th percentile of yearspecific wage distribution of full-time, full-year workers (i.e., those who work at least 50 weeks per year and at least 35
hours per week). Finally, we include in the ‘wage sample’ only wage and salary workers.

51

Appendix Table 3
RACIAL BIAS INDEX BY STATES, 1970
States with racial bias index < median
State

States with racial bias index > median

Racial Bias Index

State

Racial Bias Index

Alaska
Hawaii
Washington
New York
Nevada
California
District of Columbia
Delaware
South Carolina
New Jersey
Pennsylvania

0.00
0.07
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.24
0.24
0.25
0.25

Arkansas
Virginia
South Dakota
Colorado
North Carolina
Texas
Nebraska
Minnesota
Mississippi
Oregon
Louisiana

0.30
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.32
0.32
0.32
0.32
0.33
0.33
0.33

Michigan
Kentucky
Illinois
Maryland
Connecticut
Rhode island
New Mexico
Kansas
Massachusetts
Ohio
Missouri
Arizona
Florida

0.26
0.26
0.26
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.27
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.28
0.29
0.29

Georgia
Oklahoma
Indiana
Alabama
Wisconsin
Vermont
Utah
Idaho
Tennessee
Iowa
Montana
North Dakota
West Virginia
Maine
Wyoming

0.34
0.35
0.35
0.35
0.36
0.36
0.37
0.37
0.39
0.39
0.40
0.43
0.45
0.45
0.46

New Hampshire

0.46

NOTE - The racial bias index is based on inter-racial marriage data obtained from the 1970 Census of Population. The sample
includes married whites and blacks between that ages of 18 to 65, and excludes couples in which at least one person is living
in group quarters or has missing data on race, gender, state of residence, marital status, or educational attainment. The racial
bias index is based on the difference between the estimated rate of inter-racial marriage in 1970, where the estimation is
based on each state’s racial composition along with each individual’s education and age characteristics, and the actual rate of
inter-racial marriage. Larger values of the racial bias index signify that the actual rate of inter-racial marriage is
correspondingly smaller than the estimated rate.

52

Figure 1
TRENDS AND INNOVATIONS IN THE RELATIVE WAGE RATES OF BLACKS PRIOR TO BANK DEREGULATION
B.
Year of intrastate deregulation

Year of interstate deregulation

A.
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
-.5

-.4

0
-.2
-.1
-.3
Relative wage rates of blacks
prior to interstate deregulation

2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
-.5

.1

Year of intrastate deregulation

Year of interstate deregulation

1995
1990
1985
1980
0
.05
-.05
Change in relative wage rates of blacks
prior to interstate deregulation

.1

D.

C.
2000

-.1

-.4
-.3
-.2
-.1
0
Relative wage rates of blacks
prior to intrastate deregulation

2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
-.1

.1

0
.05
-.05
Change in relative wage rates of blacks
prior to intrastate deregulation

.1

NOTE – Figures A and B plot the year of bank deregulation against the average black-white wage
differential prior to deregulation. In Figure A we consider years prior to interstate deregulation. In Figure
B we consider years prior to intrastate deregulation. Figures C and D plot the year of bank deregulation
against the change in the black-white wage differential prior to deregulation. In Figure C we consider
years prior to interstate deregulation. In Figure D we consider years prior to intrastate deregulation. All
statistics are weighted by the number of black workers.

53

Figure 2
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON ENTRY OF FIRMS
A. Racial Bias Index > Median
Percentage change in new corporations per capita

.6

.4

.2

0

-.2
-10

-5

0
Years before/after deregulation

Intrastate Deregulation

5

10

Interstate Deregulation

Percentage change in new corporations per capita

B. Racial Bias Index < Median
.3

.2

.1

0

-.1
-10

-5

0
Years before/after deregulation

Intrastate Deregulation

5

10

Interstate Deregulation

SOURCES – Data on new corporations per capita are taken from Black and Strahan (2002). Dates of intrastate and interstate
deregulations are taken from Kroszner and Strahan (1999).
NOTE – The figures plot the impact of interstate and intrastate bank deregulations on log new corporations per capita. The upper
figure is for states with racial bias index above the median. The lower figure is for state with racial bias index below the median. We
consider an 18 years window spanning from 9 years before deregulations until 9 years after deregulations. The solid lines represent
the impact of intrastate deregulation on log new per capita. The dashed lines represent the impact of interstate deregulation on log
new corporations per capita. Specifically, we report estimated coefficients from the following regression:
Yst = α + β1Intra-9 + γ1Inter-9 + β2Intra-8 + γ2Inter-8 + … + β18Intra+9 + γ18Inter+9 + δs + δt + εst
Yst is log new corporations per capita in state s and year t. Intra-j equals one for states in the jth year before intrastate deregulation
and equals zero otherwise. Intra+k equals one for states in the kth year after intrastate deregulation and equals zero otherwise.
Similarly, Inter-j equals one in states in the jth year before interstate deregulation and equals zero otherwise. Inter+k equals one in
states in the kth year after interstate deregulation and equals zero otherwise. δs and δt are state and year fixed effects, respectively.
We exclude the year of intrastate and interstate deregulation, thus estimating the dynamic effect of deregulation on log new
corporations per capita relative to the corresponding year of deregulation. We de-trend the coefficients by prior trends and
normalize their average prior to deregulation to be zero. The estimates are weighted by the number of black workers.

54

Figure 3
THE IMPACT OF DEREGULATION ON THE RELATIVE WAGE RATES OF BLACKS

Percentage change in the relative wage rates of blacks

A. Racial Bias Index > Median
.3

.2

.1

0

-.1
-10

-5

5
0
Years before/after deregulation

Intrastate Deregulation

10

15

Interstate Deregulation

Percentage change in the relative wage rates of blacks

B. Racial Bias Index < Median
.3

.2

.1

0

-.1
-10

-5

0
5
Years before/after deregulation

Intrastate Deregulation

10

15

Interstate Deregulation

NOTE – The figures plot the impact of interstate and intrastate bank deregulations on the relative wage rates of blacks. The upper
figure is for states with racial bias index above the median. The lower figure is for state with racial bias index below the median. We
consider a 25 year window, spanning from 10 years before deregulation until 15 years after deregulation. The solid lines represent
the impact of intrastate deregulation on the relative wage rates of blacks. The dashed lines represent the impact of interstate
deregulation on the relative wage rates of blacks. Specifically, we report estimated coefficients from the following regression:

RˆistB = α + β1Dst−10 + β 2 Dst−9 + ... + β 25 Dst+15 + δ s + δ t + vist
The D’s equal zero, except as follows: D-j equals one for states in the jth year before deregulation, while D+j equals one for states in
the jth year after deregulation. We exclude the year of deregulation, thus estimating the dynamic effect of deregulation on the
relative wage rates of blacks relative to the year of deregulation. We de-trend the coefficients by prior trends and normalize their
average prior to deregulation to be zero. The estimates are weighted by the number of black workers.

55

Percentage point change in relative wages of blacks

Figure 4
THE IMPACT OF LOG NEW INCORPORATIONS PER CAPITA ON THE RELATIVE WAGE RATES OF BLACKS
DIFFERENT OLS AND 2SLS SPECIFICATIONS
(DASHED LINES REPRESENT 95% CONFIDENCE INTERVALS)
.45

.35

.25

.15

.05

OLS

-.05

(1

L
)O

S,

L
R,

LR

(2)

S
OL

o,
,R

LL

R

O
(3)

LS

2SLS

G
G
G
G
G
LR
LR
LR
LR
CG
,C
,C
,C
,C
,C
,L
,L
,L
,L
o,
,R
,R
Ro
Ro
,R
r, R
Ro
Ro
,R
r, R
m,
ar,
ea
ram
m,
am
ar,
LS
ea
a
e
n
r
i
r
a
a
e
n
i
n
O
r
a
i
L
a
p
L
a
L
-p
Lin
(4)
on
LS
n- p
on
LS
n- p
LS
LS
2S
No
2S
No
SN
2S
SN
2S
(7)
LS
SL
(5)
LS
SL
(8)
S
2
(6)
S
2
2
)
)
)2
(9)
(11
(12
(10

Specification

NOTE – The circles represent the estimated impact of log new incorporations per capita on the relative wages of blacks. The dashed
lines represent the corresponding 95% confidence intervals, adjusted for state and year clustering. The estimated coefficients and the
confidence intervals are from twelve different specifications. The notation in the specifications is as follows: OLS – Ordinary Least
Squares; 2SLS Linear – Two-Stage Least Squares with Interstate and Intrastate entering linearly; 2SLS Non-param – Two-Stage
Least Squares with Interstate and Intrastate entering non-parametrically; R – relative wages of blacks, where the relative wages are
conditional on years of completed education and quartic in potential experience; Ro - relative wages of blacks, where the relative
wages are conditional on years of completed education, a quartic in potential experience, and occupation fixed effects; LLR – states
with racial bias index above the median; CG – states with marginal racial prejudice (From Charles and Guryan, 2008) above the
median. The different specifications are: (1) OLS, with relative wages conditional on education and experience, in states below the
median racial bias index, (2) OLS, with relative wages conditional on education, experience, and occupation, in states below the
median racial bias index, (3) OLS, with relative wages conditional on education and experience, in states below the median marginal
racial prejudice, (4) OLS, with relative wages conditional on education, experience, and occupation, in states below the median
marginal racial prejudice, (5) 2SLS with linear instruments, relative wages conditional on education and experience, in states below
the median racial bias index, (6) 2SLS with linear instruments, relative wages conditional on education, experience, and occupation,
in states below the median racial bias index, (7) 2SLS with linear instruments, relative wages conditional on education and
experience, in states below the median marginal racial prejudice, (8) 2SLS with linear instruments, relative wages conditional on
education, experience, and occupation, in states below the median marginal racial prejudice, (9) 2SLS with non-parametric
instruments, relative wages conditional on education and experience, in states below the median racial bias index, (10) 2SLS with
non-parametric instruments, relative wages conditional on education, experience, and occupation, in states below the median racial
bias index, (11) 2SLS with non-parametric instruments, relative wages conditional on education and experience, in states below the
median marginal racial prejudice, (12) 2SLS with non-parametric instruments, relative wages conditional on education, experience,
and occupation, in states below the median marginal racial prejudice. Measures of marginal racial prejudice are obtained from
Charles and Guryan (2008). All estimates are weighted by sampling weights provided by the Current Population Survey.

56

Percentile of white wage distribution

Before and after interstate dereg.
States with racial bias > median
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Before and after intrastate dereg.
States with racial bias > median
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
Percentile of black wage distribution

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
Percentile of black wage distribution

Before and after interstate dereg.
States with racial bias < median

Before and after intrastate dereg.
States with racial bias < median

Percentile of white wage distribution

Percentile of white wage distribution

Percentile of white wage distribution

Figure 5
THE LOCATION OF BLACKS IN THE WHITE WAGE DISTRIBUTION BEFORE AND AFTER DEREGULATION

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
Percentile of black wage distribution

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100
Percentile of black wage distribution

NOTE – The figures provide rank analyses and compare the change in black workers’
relative wages with those of comparable whites across the full distribution of wage
rates, before and after bank deregulation. The results in the plots were obtained using
the following procedure: First, we calculate residuals for black and white workers from
equation (7). We keep 100 black workers, each corresponding to a different percentile
of black workers’ relative log hourly wage distribution. Next, we calculate their
position in the white workers’ log hourly wage distribution. We repeat this procedure
before (solid line) and after (dashed line) inter- and intrastate deregulations. The upper
figures refer to states with racial bias index above the median. The lower figures refer
to states with racial bias index below the median. We use sampling weights in all
estimations.

57

