NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT MARKET SYNERGIES AND COMPETITION IN MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS:
A TEXT-BASED ANALYSIS
Gerard Hoberg
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 14289
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14289
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

This paper was previously circulated as "Product Market Synergies and Competition in Mergers and
Acquisitions." Hoberg can be reached at ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu and Phillips can be reached at
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu. We thank Michael Faulkender, Kathleen Hanley, Nagpurnanand Prabhala,
David Robinson and seminar participants at Duke University, Ohio State University, the Securities
Exchange Commission, and the University of Maryland for helpful comments. All errors are the authors
alone. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Product Market Synergies and Competition in Mergers and Acquisitions: A Text-Based Analysis
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 14289
August 2008, Revised February 2012
JEL No. G3,G34
ABSTRACT
We examine how product differentiation influences mergers and acquisitions and the ability of firms
to exploit product market synergies. Using novel text-based analysis of firm 10K product descriptions,
we find three key results. (1) Firms are more likely to enter restructuring transactions when the language
describing their assets is similar to all other firms, consistent with their assets being more redeployable.
(2) Targets earn lower announcement returns when similar alternative target firms exist. (3) Acquiring
firms in competitive product markets experience increased profitability, higher sales growth, and increased
changes in their product descriptions when they buy target firms that are similar to them and different
from rival firms. Our findings are consistent with similar merging firms exploiting synergies to create
new products and increase their product differentiation relative to ex-ante rivals.
Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4423 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Citigroup Center
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
Gordon.Phillips@marshall.usc.edu

It has long been viewed that product market synergies and competition are key
drivers of mergers.1 One important dimension of synergies is the ability of merging
firms to create new products and differentiate themselves from rivals when merging
firms have complementary assets. This dimension of synergies is frequently cited as
being important for mergers but has not been documented as being an important
factor for mergers.2 We examine whether product market measures of similarity and
competition affect firms’ propensity to merge and whether firms use mergers and
acquisitions to increase profits and introduce new products given asset complementarities.3
In competitive markets, mergers are a quick way to potentially increase product
offerings if synergies arise from asset complementarities. Thus, firms may have incentives to merge with firms that have different skills or technologies that increase
the ability to introduce new products. Another important concern to acquirers is to
introduce new products that differentiate them from existing rival firms. There is
thus a potential tension between merging with a firm whose products are very similar, and a firm whose skills or technologies are different enough from rivals to help
differentiate the acquirer.
We explore this “similar but different” tension in examining the likelihood of
mergers and ex post merger outcomes. Our paper provides direct evidence on asset
complementarities and synergies as a source of gains from merging. We provide
evidence on how similar firms are with respect to their existing products and also
measure new product creation and the extent that product differentiation from rival
firms increases post merger.
1

See Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) and Betton, Eckbo, and Thorburn (2007) for two
surveys on different motives for mergers.
2
Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) model asset complementarity and synergies as a motive for
mergers and provide evidence that merging firms have similar market-to-book valuations. However,
given they do not have product data or descriptions, they are unable to provide direct evidence
that firms with asset complementarities combine to exploit potential synergies. Healy, Palepu, and
Ruback (1992) and Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford (2001) have documented increased industryadjusted cash flows following mergers. However, the literature has not been able to identify if asset
complementarities allowing firms to introduce new products are responsible for gains in cash flows.
3
Chamberlain (1933) and Hotelling (1929) famously show that the notion of product differentiation is fundamental to theories of industrial organization, with product differentiation increasing the
profitability of firms. The Hotelling model allows for a concept of distance and makes a distinction
between “close” rivals versus “distant” rivals, a concept that we exploit. In Chamberlain, product
differentiation exists but all rivals are equally close. See also the survey by Eaton and Lipsey (1989).

We employ a novel empirical design using text-based analysis of firm product descriptions obtained from web-crawling algorithms that read and process 49,408 10-K
filings from the SEC Edgar website. From firm product descriptions we calculate
measures of product similarity and product market competition. Our product based
measures capture the degree to which products are different from rivals - while independently measuring the similarity between the acquirer and target. Our framework
also permits analysis of product descriptions in time series, and we can thus analyze
likely synergies in the form of new product introductions.
We test how competition and product similarity affect the likelihood of mergers
and acquisitions, the size of stock-market gains, and which transactions are most successful in the long-run. Our similarity measures allow us to directly address the dual
role of competition and relatedness in merger decisions and outcomes, and permit us
to test whether new product synergies are closely tied to the positive real outcomes
we report. Our hypotheses relating ex post outcomes of mergers to product market competition and product similarity cannot be tested using similarity measures
based on traditional SIC codes, given that they are too granular and do not capture
similarity both within and across industries.
We report three major findings. First, we find that the distribution of rivals around
a given firm strongly predicts the likelihood that it will merge. Second, transactions
in competitive product markets with similar acquirer and target firms experience
increased stock returns and real longer-term gains including higher profitability and
increased changes in their product descriptions. Third, these findings are especially
strong when the target is less similar to the acquirer’s closest rivals. These results
are robust to the inclusion of measures of horizontal and vertical relatedness using
SIC codes and the product input-output matrix. We now summarize each of these
findings in more detail.
Regarding transaction likelihood, we find that firms having products that are more
broadly similar to all other firms in the economy are more likely to restructure, and
firms having more very close rivals are less likely to restructure. We interpret the first
effect as an “asset deployability effect”, as firms with more broadly similar products
likely have assets that can be more easily deployed in other product markets, and
2

hence face a larger opportunity set of possible transactions. We interpret the second
effect as a “competitive effect”, as firms with very near rivals must compete for any
available restructuring opportunities. These effects are significant, economically and
statistically, and for large and small firms alike.
We also find that mergers and acquisition transactions experience higher market reactions and positive long-term real outcomes (higher profitability and evidence
of new product introductions) when acquirers reside in ex-ante competitive product
markets, and when the transaction increases the acquirer’s product market differentiation relative to its close rivals. These findings are both statistically and economically
significant. Our results suggest that product market competition can be influenced
by merging. In particular, firms residing in ex-ante competitive industries can use
restructuring to reduce competition. We also find that gains from this strategy are
larger when the target and the acquirer are more pairwise similar, consistent with
mergers involving firms with related products experiencing significant gains. Gains
are also larger when there is evidence of barriers to entry, suggesting that rivals will
not be able to replicate the new products.
We differ from the existing literature in three major ways. First, the literature
has not focused on how product differentiation and competition affect the probability
of restructuring and subsequent ex-post performance and product development. Second, we present an innovative new methodology based on text analysis that allows
us to separately measure an acquirer’s similarity to its rivals, the location of the target relative to the acquirer’s rivals, and the target and acquirer pairwise similarity.
Existing studies have relied on SIC code based variables to measure product market competitiveness and firm similarity. Most recently, Fan and Goyal (2006) show
that mergers that are vertically related using the input-output matrix have positive
announcement wealth effects in the stock market. While partially informative, SIC
code based measures cannot measure the degree to which firms are similar within
and across industries. Our continuous measure of similarity is important economically and statistically even after controlling for both horizontal and vertical measures
of relatedness using SIC codes. We document that the product similarity of merger
pairs is highly diverse both within and across industries. Our measure also captures
3

how close merging firms are to existing rival firms. Our results show that our measure of similarity and competition significantly helps explain ex post changes in cash
flows, sales, and new product introduction. Lastly, we also measure barriers to entry
by examining the frequency of the word root “patent”.
Our research contributes to existing strands of literature using text analysis in
finance. Hanley and Hoberg (2008) examine prospectus disclosures on the SEC Edgar
website and construct section size measures and document similarity measures to
address theories of IPO pricing. Outside of corporate finance, other studies that use
text based analysis to study the role of the media in stock price formation include
Tetlock (2008), Macskassy, Saar-Tsechansky, and Tetlock (2004), Li (2006a), and
Boukus and Rosenberg (2006).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. A discussion of merger strategies and the incentives to merge is in section I. The data, methodology and summary
statistics are presented in section II. Section III introduces our new empirical measures of product market similarity, and Section IV examines key predictions regarding
their relationship to firm profitability. Determinants of the likelihood of restructuring transactions are presented in section V. A discussion of ex-post outcomes upon
announcement and in the long term is in section VI. Section VII concludes.

I

Incentives to Merge and Post-Merger Performance

This section first discusses existing literature on mergers and, second, develops our
hypotheses of how potential changes to product differentiation and competition may
affect a firm’s decision to merge and its post-merger performance.

A

Relation to Previous Literature on Mergers

Our paper focuses on how high ex ante product market competition creates incentives
to merge, and how mergers may create profits through synergies and subsequent
product differentiation. The central idea is that firms may wish to merge with partners
with complementary assets who expand their range of products through new product
4

introductions (enabling them to differentiate their products from rival firms) - while
also picking partners that are related enough so that they can skillfully manage the
new assets.
This rationale for mergers is distinct from the existing motives in the finance literature.4 Rhodes-Kropf and Robinson (2008) also consider synergies through asset
complementarities as a motive for mergers - but do not consider how competition impacts this motive, nor do they empirically measure ex post new product introduction.
We also use text based methods to directly measure asset complementarity of merger
partners rather than inferring it using market-to-book ratios. Overall, the existing
literature does not consider how product market competition affects the incentives to
choose targets that can increase product market differentiation from close rivals as
in Hotelling (1929). Perhaps more importantly, using new techniques, our paper can
measure potential synergies through asset complementarities and how similar merging firms are from rivals and also document ex post changes in product differentiation
post merger.
In addition to increases in product differentiation, key to understanding ex post
performance after mergers are measures of relatedness of the target and acquirer.
As emphasized by many authors, related acquisitions have the potential to perform
better as the acquirer is likely to have existing skill in operating the target firm’s
assets. Kaplan and Weisbach (1992) show that related mergers are less likely to be
divested subsequently by the acquirer - although they do not find any difference in
the performance of diversifying versus non-diversifying mergers. Maksimovic, Phillips,
and Prabhala (2008) find that acquirers with more skill in particular industries are
more likely to maintain and increase the productivity of the assets they acquire and
keep in related industries. Fan and Goyal (2006) show that mergers that are vertically
related using the input-output matrix have positive announcement wealth effects in
the stock market. While partially informative, SIC code based measures cannot
4

Existing reasons for mergers include technological industry shocks and excess industry capacity
(Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny (1988), Jensen (1993), Mitchell and Mulherin (1996), Andrade and
Stafford (2004), Harford (2005)), reduction of agency problems (Jensen (1993)), agency and empire
building (Hart and Moore (1995)), demand shocks and efficiency (Maksimovic and Phillips (2001),
Jovanovic and Rousseau (2002), Yang (2008)) and the industry life cycle (Maksimovic and Phillips
(2008)).

5

measure the degree to which firms are similar within and across industries. Our
study shows that many merging firms are highly related using text-based measures
even though they have different two-digit SIC codes that are not related. Most
importantly, discrete measures of relatedness cannot capture how related rivals are
to the merging firms both within and across industries.
Research in industrial organization has also studied mergers in industries with
existing differentiated products. Baker and Bresnahan (1985) theoretically model how
mergers can increase pricing power by enabling post-merger firms to increase prices.
The prescribed policy is to merge with firms whose products are close substitutes
to yours, when other non-merging firms only produce distant substitutes. Pricing
power is enhanced by merging because post-merger firms face an increased steepness
in their residual (inverse) demand curves. Empirical studies in this literature have
focused on estimating own and cross-price elasticities of demand, as well as the effect
on post-merger prices in specific markets including the ready-to-eat cereal market
(Nevo (2000)).
Our study has a different focus. Instead of taking the extent of product differentiation as given, we examine how producers in competitive markets with similar
products may be able to use mergers to increase their differentiation relative to rival
firms by using synergies to enhance and develop new products. The flexibility of our
text based measures, especially our ability to measure product similarity across arbitrary groups of firms and in time series, allows us to test for evidence of new product
introductions.

B

Product Differentiation and Changing Competition

A simple example illustrates how managers can reduce competition via mergers when
they reside in ex-ante competitive product markets, and illustrates why a refined notion of product differentiation and competition is important. First consider a manager
producing product X in a competitive industry with 100 homogeneous firms. Here,
mergers offer little help in reducing competition because an oligopoly of 99 is little
different than an oligopoly of 100 firms. However, consider the situation if the 100

6

firms are somewhat differentiated, with some firms having complementary assets. We
assume that firms with complementary assets can merge and the two firms can jointly
produce a new product Z at a lower expected cost (equivalently a higher probability
of success).5 Gains from a merger are possible if product Z is somewhat different
from existing products such that the new combined firm faces less competition and
enjoys higher profit margins. Hence, firms can use mergers to substantially alter the
degree of competition they face when they reside in differentiated product markets.
Only an empirical design capable of measuring the degree of product similarity both
within and across industries can test these theories.

C

Hypotheses

We now develop specific hypotheses based on the aforementioned theories of merger
pair similarity and industrial organization. Our first two hypotheses concern the
probability that a given firm will become part of an acquisition. Our last three
hypotheses formulate predictions regarding ex post outcomes.
Hypothesis H1: Asset Redeployability: Firms with assets that are similar
to large numbers of firms are more likely to enter into restructuring transactions.
Hypothesis H2: Competition for Targets: Firms with high local product
market competition are less likely to be targets and enter restructuring transactions
given the existence of multiple substitute target firms. This competition not only
reduces the likelihood that any given firm will merge, but will also reduce the premium
realized by a target when it does merge.
Key to testing H1 and H2 is the degree of similarity. The effects of H2 are likely
to be more severe when firms are very similar. For example, identical firms would
have to compete in order to merge with a third firm offering new synergies requiring
their technology. In contrast, the effects of H1 are more likely to hold when firms
are moderately similar, as such firms are less viable substitutes. Also, some degree of
heterogeneity is likely required in order for new product synergies to be possible.
5
It is also necessary that contracting costs and ex post holdup prevent a contract from being
signed between the firms.

7

Our remaining hypotheses focus on long term outcomes.
Hypothesis H3: Differentiation from Rivals: Acquirers in competitive
product markets experience positive outcomes when they buy target firms that help
them to increase product differentiation relative to their nearest ex-ante rivals.
Hypothesis 3 follows from two ideas. First, basic industrial organization (as in
Hotelling (1929)) suggests that firms that differentiate themselves and generate local
product monopolies should be more profitable. Second, profits from this strategy
can be leveraged through new product introductions, especially when synergies allow
products in markets with lower competition from rivals.
Hypothesis H4: Synergies through Asset Complementarities: Acquirers
buying targets similar to themselves are likely to have asset complementarities and
experience future higher profitability and product differentiation.
The reasons why acquirer and target pairwise similarity should result in positive
outcomes as in Hypothesis 4, are numerous as discussed earlier in section I. Our
primary rationale is that products developed using technology from similar targets
with complementary (similar) assets are more likely to succeed as in Rhodes-Kropf
and Robinson (2008).
The merger strategies underlying Hypotheses 3 and 4 might be especially relevant
in competitive product markets because the gains from product differentiation are
likely to be at a maximum when competition is reduced (Hypothesis 3), and highly
similar targets are more likely to exist (Hypothesis 4). Although they might seem
at odds, these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive. Key to maximizing gains is
finding a target that is both somewhat distant from the acquirer’s closest rivals, yet
not too distant from the acquirer itself - ”similar to self and different than rivals”.
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
We illustrate these hypotheses using two examples: the Symantec and Veritas (SV)
merger, and the Disney and Pixar (DP) merger. We base our discussion on actual
similarity data (described fully in Section II). Figure 1 displays the SV merger, and
the ten nearest rival firms surrounding both Symantec and Veritas. Firms with a label
8

“S” are among Symantec’s closest rivals and firms with a “V” are among Veritas’s
closest rivals. Both firms offer products that are indeed related to each other (Veritas
is Symantec’s 18th closest firm and Symantec is Veritas’s 37th closest), but also quite
different. Symantec focuses on anti-virus software and Veritas focuses on internet
security and authentication. The figure shows that Symantec faced a fair amount
of competition from its rivals including Cyberguard, McAfee, and Watchguard, for
example.
The SV merger is consistent with Symantec choosing Veritas because it is similar enough to permit successful managerial integration and new product synergies
(Hypothesis 4), perhaps in the form of new security products defending joint PC and
internet applications. This merger also might help Symantec to differentiate itself
from its rivals and introduce new products that will face little in the way of initial competition (Hypothesis 3), which in turn will improve profit margins. Hence,
Symantec might use the merger to change the degree of product market competition
it faces, a strategy that might be especially effective if Veritas owns key patents or
trade secrets preventing rivals from launching similar products (Hypothesis 5, see
below). Importantly, this notion of similar but different is underscored by comparing
the chosen target to a hypothetical merger between Symantec and one of its other
near rivals such as McAfee. Because the products offered by the firms in this hypothetical pair are closer to being perfect substitutes, both in terms of technology and
end consumer usage, gains from Hypotheses 3 and 5 are likely not possible, explaining
why Veritas might be a more appropriate target.
[Insert Figure 2 Here]
The DP merger in Figure 2 shows by example that the same logic applies to larger
firms with many products. Disney is Pixar’s sixth closest rival, and Pixar is Disney’s
ninth closest rival. Only one other firm, Newscorp, is a member of both firms’ nearest ten rivals. Pixar’s nearest two rivals are Dreamworks and IMAX, consistent with
Pixar’s focus on computer generated motion pictures. Disney is ranked ninth on
Pixar’s list likely because it offers many products including television programming
and amusements that are related to, but not exactly substitutes for motion pictures.
9

Disney’s nearest two rivals are Newscorp and and CBS, and Six Flags is its fourth
closest rival, suggesting that Disney has a significant television and print media presence, as well as an amusement park presence. Pixar’s appeal to Disney might be due
to both its asset similarity, but also its moderately different product offerings, as this
merger might permit seamless integration and new product introductions that can
enhance pricing power in niche markets.
If Disney were to merge with its closest rival, it would choose to merge with
NewsCorp, or perhaps with one of the other top ranked firms. This transaction
would score highly on pairwise product similarity (Hypothesis 4), but it might not
be different enough from existing rivals to enable the introduction of new products in
less competitive product markets (Hypothesis 3). In contrast, Pixar has the benefit
of still being pairwise similar to Disney (its ninth closest firm), but it also has the
virtue of being distant from Disney’s other close rivals. This point is underscored by
the fact that only one firm other than Disney and Pixar themselves are in both firms’
nearest ten. Hence, Pixar scores highly on both dimensions and is both similar to the
acquirer (Hypothesis 4) and distant from Disney’s other closest rivals (Hypothesis 3).
This right mix of ”similar to self but different than rivals” should increase product
differentiation and profitability for Disney.
It is also relevant to consider the reaction of Disney’s rivals to mergers fitting
this profile. The hypothesized gains might be transient, for example, if the target’s
assets and product lines are not protected by high replication costs or patents. Rival
firms could develop similar products and erase any pricing power generated by the
transaction. Our next hypothesis is based on this intuition.
Hypothesis H5: Barriers to Entry: Gains from restructuring will be even
larger if barriers to entry such as patents exist, as rivals would be less able to replicate
the acquirer’s strategy.

10

II
A

Data and Methodology
Data Description

The key innovation of our study is that we use firms’ 10-K text product descriptions
to compute continuous measures of product similarity for every pair of firms in our
sample (a pairwise similarity matrix). We construct these text-based measures of
product similarity (described later in this section) using firm product descriptions
that we obtain directly from 10-K filings on the SEC Edgar website during the period
electronic 10K records are available. We merge these product similarity measures to
the COMPUSTAT/CRSP database using the tax identification number (also known
as the employee identification number), and we then link this firm-level database to
the SDC Platinum database of mergers and acquisition of asset transactions. In order
to be in our firm-level database, for both firms involved in mergers and acquisitions
and all other firms, a firm must exist in both the CRSP and COMPUSTAT databases
in the given year of analysis. 52,013 firm years pass this initial screen.
We electronically gather 10-Ks by searching the Edgar database for filings that appear as “10-K”, “10-K405”, “10KSB”, “10KSB40”. Prior to 1997, the Edgar database
is somewhat sparse as electronic filing was not required until 1997. Of the 52,013 firm
years that are present in both CRSP and COMPUSTAT, we are are able to match
and read 49,408 filings (95%) associated with fiscal years ending in 1997 to 2005. Note
we do not include 10-K filings from investment trusts, tracking stocks, and inactive
firms.6 These 49,408 filings match with the COMPUSTAT database based on their
tax ID number, and most match directly without any intervention. However, a small
number of firms (roughly 1% to 2% of our sample) experienced changes in their tax
ID number during our sample period, and we hand correct links for these firms.7
6

Although we consider fiscal year endings through 2005, we extract documents filed through
December 2006, as most of the filings in 2006 are associated with fiscal years ending in 2005. Hence,
our main database ends in 2005, as we consider the fiscal year end to be the unit of observation, as
is the case in the standard COMPUSTAT database. Regarding the start date of our main database,
we use observations associated with 1996 fiscal year endings only for the purposes of computing
lagged variables, and hence our main database begins in 1997. To ensure maximum coverage, we
search for filings beginning in January 1996 as some firms with fiscal years ending in the earlier part
of 1996 file their 10-K in calendar year 1996.
7
The COMPUSTAT tax ID number is only available as a header variable and this variable thus
reflects the firm’s most recent tax ID number. Because some firms maintain the same COMPUSTAT

11

We extract the product description section from each linked 10-K. This section
appears as Item 1 or Item 1A in most 10-Ks. We utilize a combination of PERL
web crawling scripts, APL programming, and human intervention (when documents
are non-standard) to extract and summarize this section. The web crawling algorithm scans the Edgar website and collects the entire text of each 10-K annual report, and APL text reading algorithms then extract its product description and tax
number. This latter process is extensively supported by human intervention when
non-standard document formats are encountered. This method is highly reliable and
we encountered only a very small number of firms (roughly 100) that we were not
able to process because they did not contain a valid product description or because
the product description had fewer then 1000 characters. These firms are excluded
from our analysis.
Our database of 49,408 filings in our sample years of 1997 to 2005, and 6485
additional observations for fiscal years ending in 1996 (these latter observations are
used solely for computing the values of lagged variables) represents 95.0% of the
eligible CRSP and COMPUSTAT database. We can also report that our database is
well balanced over time, as we capture 95.6% of the eligible data in 1997, and 94.3% in
2005, and this annual percentage varies only slightly in the range of 93.6% in 2000 to
95.9% in 2003. Because we do not observe any time trends in our data coverage, and
because database selection can be determined using ex-ante information (ie, the 10-K
itself), we do not believe these requirements induce any bias. Our final sample size
is 47,394 rather than 49,408 because we additionally require that key COMPUSTAT
data items, (sales, assets and operating cash flow), are populated before observations
can be included in our analysis.
gvkey and CRSP permno even as their Tax ID number changes, these hand corrections ensure that
our database has uniform coverage over all of our sample years. These hand corrections are mainly
based on comparing the firm names at the time of filing to those listed in the CRSP historical names
database. Although fuzzy matching is used to suggest possible corrections, all final corrections are
hand verified.

12

B

Product Similarity

For each firm i and j, we measure product similarity using a method based on each
firm’s empirical distribution of words used in its product description. This method
results in a real number in the interval (0,1) to capture the similarity of words used for
each pair of firms. Details are discussed in Appendix 1. The main idea is that firms
having more common word usage are scored as having a higher degree of product
similarity. The method uses a normalization to avoid over-scoring larger documents,
and a simple adjustment to exclude very common words. Based on these pairwise
similarities, we compute the following measures local and broad similarity. We also
compute a measure of barriers to entry based on usage of the word root “patent”.
Product Similarity (All Firms - 10): For a given firm i, this variable is the average
pairwise similarity between firm i and all other firms j in the sample - excluding
i’s 10 closest rivals.
Product Similarity (10 Nearest): For a given firm i, this variable is the average
pairwise similarity between firm i and its ten closest rivals j. The closest rivals
are the ten firms having the highest similarity relative to i.
% Neighbor Patent Words: For each firm, we first compute the percentage of all of
the words in its product description having the word root “patent”. Because
our focus is on whether a product market is protected by barriers to entry
(hypothesis H5), we then compute this variable’s average over each firm’s ten
nearest rivals.
Last Year 10 Nearest Fraction Restructured: For firm i, this variable is equal to the
fraction of its ten closest rivals that were either a target or an acquirer in the
previous year according to the SDC Platinum database.
Target + Acquirer Product Similarity: For a given merger pair (target and acquirer),
this is the product similarity of the two firms.
Gain in Product Differentiation: This variable is the target’s average distance from
the acquirer’s 10 nearest rivals minus the acquirer’s average distance from its 10
nearest rivals. Pairwise distance is one minus pairwise similarity. This variable
measures the degree to which an acquirer gains product differentiation from its
rivals by purchasing the given target.
Product similarities are most intuitive when firms have only one segment. Importantly, our computer-based algorithms are not able to separate the text associated
with each segment of conglomerate firms.8 However, we believe that similarities measured relative to conglomerates are still informative regarding the competition faced
8

Multiple segments appear in product descriptions, but automated text reading algorithms cannot
separate the text attributable to each due to the high degree of heterogeneity in how segment
descriptions are organized.

13

by the firm in all of its segments. To the extent that multiple segments might add
noise to our measures, we do not see this as a problem as it would only bias our
results away from finding significant results. However, to ensure our inferences do
not change, we also rerun all of our tests using the subsample of single segment firms.
Although not reported to conserve space, our results change little in this subsample.9

C

Other Control Variables

Past studies seeking to measure product differentiation have been forced to rely on
industry definitions based on SIC codes. We thus control for the following standard
measures of industry competition and merger similarity based on SIC codes.
Sales HHI (SIC-3): We use the two step method described in Hoberg and Phillips
(2008) to compute sales-based Herfindahl ratios for each three-digit SIC code.
This method uses data based on both public and private firms to compute
the best estimate of industry concentration given the limited data available on
private firm sales.
Last Year SIC-3 % Restructured: For a given firm i, we compute the percentage of
firms in its three-digit SIC code that were involved in restructuring transactions
in the previous year according to the SDC Platinum database.
Same SIC-3 Industry Dummy: For a given merger pair, this is variable is one if the
two firms are in the same three-digit SIC code.
Vertical Similarity Dummy: For a given merger pair, this is variable is one if the
two firms are at least 5% vertically related. We use the methodology described
in Fan and Goyal (2006) to construct this variable. In particular, based on four
digit SIC codes of both the target and the acquirer, we use the Use Table of
Benchmark Input-Output Accounts of the US Economy to compute the fraction
of the inputs that are from the other firm’s SIC industry. If this percentage
exceeds 5% for either firm, then the dummy is set to one. For robustness
we also replace this dummy variable with the percentage shipped from merger
partner’s industry i to merging partner’s industry j.
Although Herfindahl indices based on SIC codes are informative in many applications, we present evidence that SIC codes provide only a weak measure of competition.
This is primarily due to their granularity. We include both SIC code based measures
and text-based measures of similarity throughout our analysis, and we document the
benefits of each. We also include controls for the following variables at the transaction
level.
9

In some isolated cases, significance levels decline from the 1% level to the 5% or 10% level due
to reduced power.

14

Target Relative Size: The pre-announcement market value of the target divided by
the sum of the pre-announcement market values of the target and the acquirer.
Merger Dummy: A dummy variable equal to one if the given transaction is a merger
and zero if it is an acquisition of assets. We only examine these two transaction
types.
Merger x Relative Size: The cross product of the above two variables.
Log Total Size: The natural logarithm of the sum of the pre-announcement market
values of the target and the acquirer.

III

Mergers and Product Market Similarity

We begin by exploring how mergers relate to our product market similarity measure.
To show their uniqueness relative to SIC codes, Table I lists all restructuring pairs
in 2005 that are very similar (the top percentile of similarity from all firm pairings)
despite the fact that they reside in different two-digit SIC codes. The list suggests
that the high degrees of similarity are, in fact, due to real product similarities. For
example, petroleum and pipeline firms are related. Newspapers and radio are also
related, and can be viewed as substitute sources of advertising despite their being in
different two-digit SIC codes.
To further illustrate how the algorithm rated these firms, Table II displays the
full list of words that were common for the first ten of these related transactions.
Appendix 2 presents the word lists for the remaining transactions in Table I. Table II
further illustrates the limitations of using SIC codes as an all or nothing classification
of merger pair similarity. The word lists suggest that the similarity calculations are
indeed driven by product market content, consistent with our interpretation of the
similarity measures as representing product market similarity. Key to this result is
our focus on non-common words, as our similarity calculations are based only on
words that appear in no more than 5% of all 10-Ks in the given year. This eliminates
templates, legal jargon and other non-product related content. The list of similar
words for each pair is also substantial, indicating that our basis for defining similarity
is informative.
Table III displays summary statistics for our key variables based on our firm
and transaction level databases. 15.1% of the firms in our firm-level database were
15

targets either of a merger or an acquisition of assets, and 28.2% were acquirers.
These numbers are somewhat larger than some existing studies because (1) our sample
includes more recent years in which transactions were more common, (2) these figures
include both mergers and partial acquisitions, and (3) transactions are included if the
counterparty is public or private. We next report the fraction of targets and acquirers
by transaction type, and find that mergers (4.3% targets and 10.4% acquirers) are
less common than asset acquisitions (10.8% targets and 17.7% acquirers). However,
both transaction types are sufficiently common to permit statistical analysis.
All product similarities are bounded in the range (0,1). The average product similarity between randomly chosen firms (excluding ten closest rivals) is .017 (or 1.7%).
The average similarity between a firm and its ten closest neighbors is considerably
higher at 15.9%. The average sales based HHI for firms in our sample is .048. The
average percentage of rival firm 10-K words having the word root “patent” is 0.147%.
In Panel B, we report summary statistics for the transaction level database. Importantly, we measure ex-post changes in profitability, sales growth, and expenses
of the acquiring firm starting from the year after the transaction becomes effective
(ie, year t+1).10 For example, a three year change in profitability is equal to profitability in year t+4 minus that in year t+1. The average acquirer experienced an
announcement return very close to zero (0.4%), and the average target experienced
an announcement return of 9.5%. The average merger pair is 9.3% similar, and the
average target is 8.8% less similar to the acquirer’s rivals than the acquirer itself
is (ie, an average 8.8% potential gain in acquirer product differentiation). Panel C
shows that the average acquiring firm experiences very little change in profitability,
and 15.9% to 27.0% sales growth over the one to three year horizon following the
transaction.
Table IV displays Pearson correlation coefficients between our measures of product
differentiation and other key variables. Product similarity relative to all firms (excluding nearest ten) is 60.1% and 52.0% correlated with similarity measured relative
10

Although this is conservative and reduces the power of our tests (some performance gains might
accrue immediately), this avoids potential bias due to the challenges associated with computing
the ex-ante performance given that two firms exist prior to the transaction, and because most
transactions are partial acquisitions.

16

to the one hundred and ten nearest neighbors, respectively.11 We also find that the
sales HHI variable is roughly -10% correlated with the product similarity variables.
This suggests that firms in concentrated industries have somewhat lower product similarities, which is consistent with higher product similarity and lower HHI both being
associated with product market competition. However, this correlation is modest and
both measures contain much distinct information. Overall, we conclude that most
correlations are small and that multi-collinearity is not likely to be an issue in our
analysis. We confirm this later using formal tests for multicollinearity.

A

The Similarity Measure

Figure 3 displays the distributional properties of our pair-wise similarity measure.
The uppermost graph displays the distribution of similarities for all randomly chosen
firm pairs (ie., we do not condition on restructuring). The vertical axis is the frequency and the horizontal axis is the pairwise similarity expressed as a percentage.
Randomly chosen firms generally have similarity percentages ranging from zero to
four, but a relatively fat tail also stretches beyond scores of ten percent. The second graph displays similarities for firms entering into restructuring transactions. Our
broad conclusion is that restructuring pairs are highly similar relative to randomly
selected firms, and that merger pair similarities are quite diverse with considerable
mass attached to values ranging from zero all the way to thirty.
[Insert Figure 3 Here]
Existing studies measure merger pair similarity by asking if the target and acquirer reside within the same SIC code or in vertically related industries. The third
and fourth graphs confirm that product similarities are very high for merger pairs in
the same two and three-digit SIC codes. However, the high diversity of similarities
illustrates that the granular nature of SIC codes fails to capture much product heterogeneity. Also striking, however, is the relatively high level of merger pair similarity
observed for merger pairs residing in different two-digit SIC codes in the bottom most
11

Although we focus on the ten nearest neighbors in most of our analysis, our results change little
if we instead focus on the 100 nearest neighbors.

17

graph. Firms in this sample are in different two-digit SIC codes, and hence any study
assessing merger pair similarity on the basis of SIC groupings would label these pairs
as being dissimilar. We find that the overwhelming majority of firms in this group
have relatively high levels of similarity compared to the randomly chose firms in the
top most graph. Even if we exclude firms that are in vertically related industries we
still find striking evidence that merging firms in unrelated industries are in many cases
very similar. We conclude that product similarity adds information not contained in
SIC codes and allows us to measure the degree of similarity within industries and also
across dissimilar industries.

IV

Product Similarity, Product Market Competition and Profitability

Before beginning our examination of mergers and acquisitions, we test whether our
similarity variables constructed from the 10-K product descriptions explain the profitability of firms in cross section. We examine the relation between our similarity
variables and profitability to provide verification that our similarity measures are
valid measures of product characteristics for all firms. The theoretical link is that our
similarities are based on an empirical multi dimensional Hotelling grid that underlies
the product space of all firms (the grid has as many dimensions as there are words
in firm 10-K product descriptions, and a firm’s location is determined by its word
usage).
Theories of industrial organization predict that firms residing in locations where
fewer close rivals exist - thus firms with more product differentiation - should enjoy
higher profit margins in equilibrium. Hence, if our empirical measure of product
market competition is valid, there should be a negative relationship between a firm’s
similarity relative to its ten nearest rivals, and its profitability.
Table V displays the results of OLS regressions in which one observation is one
firm in one year. The dependent variable is profitability defined as operating income
scaled by sales (Panel A) and scaled by assets (Panel B). We present results in groups
of three: all firms, large firms (above median book assets) and small firms. In all spec18

ifications, we include three digit SIC industry fixed effects and we report t−statistics
that are adjusted to account for clustering at the year and three digit SIC industry
level.
[Insert Table V Here]
Table V strongly confirms that our product similarity variable is negatively related
to profitability. This finding is significant both statistically (at better than the 1%
level) and economically. Where economic impact is defined as a regression coefficient
multiplied by the given variable’s standard deviation, and based on the standard
deviations from Table III and the coefficients from Table V, rows one and three imply
that the economic impact of product differentiation on profitability is 2.6 percentage
points. When profitability is scaled by assets rather than sales (Panel B), this number
is still large at 1.7 percentage points. These numbers are roughly ten percent of the
total standard deviations of the dependent variables (operating income scaled by sales
and assets have standard deviations of 35.4 and 23.7 percentage points, respectively).
We conclude that our 10-K based measures of product market competition are indeed
consistent with key predictions of industrial organizational theories, lending further
support to our assumption that the ten nearest similarity variable is a valid proxy for
local product market competition and product differentiation.

V

Merger and Asset Acquisition Likelihood

In this section, we test our first two hypotheses and examine the likelihood of restructuring transactions and its link to measures of product market competition and
similarity. Table VI displays the results of logistic regressions in which one observation is one firm in one year. All reported figures are marginal effects, and t-statistics
are reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to
one if the given firm is a target of a restructuring transaction in a given year (Panel
A) and a dummy equal to one if the given firm is an acquirer (Panel B). In all specifications, we report t−statistics that are adjusted to account for clustering at the year
and industry level.

19

Consistent with Hypothesis 1, the table shows that a firm is more likely to be
an acquirer or a target (especially an acquirer) if its overall product similarity to all
firms is high. This result is highly significant for acquirers at the 1% level regardless
of specification. However, it is somewhat weaker for targets, as the product similarity
relative to all firms is significant only when the similarity relative to ten nearest
neighbors is included in the model. Although this result is weaker, tests we conduct
indicate that the observed significance in the joint model is robust as a conditional
result and not due to multicollinearity.12 We interpret these results in terms of asset
deployment. A firm whose product is broadly similar likely owns assets that can be
deployed in many different product markets. These firms, especially acquirers, engage
in more restructuring transactions. We refer to this as the “Redeployment effect”.
Second, consistent with Hypothesis 2, firms in highly competitive local product
markets are less likely to restructure both as targets and acquirers. The product
similarity relative to a firm’s ten nearest rivals significantly negatively predicts transaction likelihood at the 1% level for both targets and acquirers. This finding does
not depend on the specification. We interpret this as a “competitive effect”, as firms
having very similar rivals must compete for restructuring opportunities. Later in this
section, we confirm that both the redeployment effect and the competitive effect are
economically significant.
Table VI also shows that firms using the word “patent” in their product descriptions are more likely to restructure, both as targets and as acquirers. A likely
explanation is that patents serve as barriers to entry, and hence a firm that needs a
technology protected by patents has few options to acquire it outside of merging with
the patent holder. For example, patents might effectively preclude entry via organic
investment.
The table also shows that the SIC-based sales HHI variable is negatively related
to restructuring for acquirers, and weakly positively linked to restructuring for tar12
The two variables are only 51% correlated and the highest variance inflation factor (VIF) is 1.5,
which is considerably below the critical value of 2.5, and far below the value of 10 deemed necessary
to declare the presence of multicollinearity. The results are also not driven by functional form as
they change little in an OLS linear probability model. We also randomly divide the sample into two
and find similar results on the resulting subsets of data.

20

gets. A likely explanation for the strong negative link for acquirers is that firms
might anticipate federal regulations that block acquiring firms in concentrated industries. It is also possible that HHIs load on the redeployment effect more than the
competitive effect. We conclude that concentration measures and product similarity
measures should indeed be jointly considered in studies of product market competition as they contain much distinct information. The table also shows that recent
restructuring activity predicts future restructuring for both SIC-based and product
similarity based measures, confirming that SIC codes and product similarities contain
distinct information.
Although we do not report the results to conserve space, we separately reproduce
the tests in Table VI for small and large firms. Our goal is to examine robustness, and
to determine which group of firms is most responsible for our findings. In each year,
we divide firms into a big firm sample and small firm sample based on whether their
assets are above or below the median. We then reproduce the logistic regressions in
Table VI for both groups. Both the redeployment effect and the competitive effect
are especially robust for large firms, and results for acquirers are also robust for small
firms. The results suggest that the likelihood that small firms will be targets is less
related to similarity variables. The link between patents and restructuring is also
stronger for larger firms. The importance and strongest robustness of our findings for
large firms leads us to conclude that our results are important, as the restructuring
decisions of these firms have a greater impact on the overall utilization of assets.
In Table VII, we reproduce the tests in Table VI for mergers and acquisition
of assets transactions. The competitive effect is stronger for acquisition of asset
transactions in Panel B than for mergers in Panel A. One reason is that acquisition
of assets are more common, as noted earlier. Furthermore, it is possible that asset
deployment and competition for assets might be easier to measure when the matter
of control and managerial job loss are less an issue. Although the competitive effect
retains its negative sign for acquirers in mergers, it becomes positive for targets of
mergers. This feature might reflect consolidating industries, where complete mergers
to reduce high competition might be the best strategy to restore profitability. It is
also possible that the matter of target control drives this finding. The redeployment
21

effect remains highly positive and robust for both mergers and acquisition of assets
transactions.

A

Economic Magnitudes

In this section, we summarize the economic magnitude of our findings regarding transaction likelihood. We examine the effect of changing one of our three key variables
(product similarity 10 nearest, product similarity all firms excluding the ten nearest
firms, and the % neighbor patent words) on the probability of a given transaction. In
later sections, we also examine economic magnitudes related to announcement returns
and real outcomes. Because some of our models are logistic models, and others OLS
based, we adopt a general framework based on predicted values. We first compute a
model’s predicted value when all of the independent variables are set to their mean
value. We then set one of our three variables to its expected 10%ile value, and recompute the predicted value holding all other variables fixed. We repeat this procedure
for the 90%ile. We are thus able to report how a given dependent variable changes
when a key independent variable moves from its 10%ile value, to its mean value, and
to its 90%ile value. Key benefits of this approach include its generality and its ability
to show not only impact, but also the magnitude of the dependent variable itself.
Table VIII confirms that our findings regarding economic magnitudes for transaction incidence are economically relevant. The effect of changing similarity (10 nearest)
from the 10%ile to the 90%ile changes acquirer incidence from 19.4% to 10.8%. The
economic magnitude of our “competitive effect” is thus quite substantial, and it is
especially large for big firms in row 4. This effect is somewhat smaller, but still large,
for target incidence at 16.6% to 13.5%. The overall similarity variable, the “redeployment effect”, is also large and moves from 12.5% to 17.7% for acquirer incidence. The
redeployment effect is considerably smaller for target incidence. The patent variable
also has a rather substantial economic impact as it changes acquirer incidence from
12.7% to 17.5%. Interestingly, this variable has just as much impact on both target
and acquirer incidence. Its importance is consistent with acquisitions being a necessity when firms need to acquire patent protected technology as organic investment is
less feasible. Acquisitions should be more common when they are the only option.
22

VI

Ex-post Outcomes

We now examine ex post outcomes, including combined announcement returns and
longer-term changes in cash flows, sales and product descriptions. Our tests relate ex
post outcomes to the similarity between the acquirer and target and also the similarity
between the target and the acquirer’s existing rival firms.

A

Announcement Returns

This section tests Hypotheses H3, H4, and H5 by examining the returns of the combined acquirer and target firms preceding and surrounding transaction announcements. Importantly, these hypotheses predict that total value creation will be larger
when mergers are more likely to permit new product synergies in markets facing little
competition. Although these hypotheses thus have strong predictions regarding the
combined firm’s returns, they are silent on how the gains would be split between the
target and the acquirer. Hence, we focus our analysis on the combined firm.
Table IX reports OLS regressions with the acquirer and target’s combined abnormal announcement return as the dependent variable. We consider one to eleven day
event windows ending on the announcement date (from day t=-10 to day t=0), and
we adjust standard errors to reflect possible clustering at the industry and year level.
The combined firm’s raw return is the total market capitalization of both firms (in
dollars) at the end of the event window minus the original market capitalization (in
dollars), all divided by the original market capitalization. Hence, this is a simple
value weighted return for the combined firm. The abnormal return is equal to this
raw return less the return of the CRSP value weighted market index over the same
event window. Because the many of our transactions are partial acquisitions, these
returns are noisy measures of the transactions’s true return, and their economic magnitude can vastly understate the true impact of the transaction when the transaction
is smaller. Given we wish to also control for partial anticipation of the deals, we
examine event windows starting at ten days before announcement.13 Note that our
13

To measure deal anticipation further, we also considered a variable summarizing the fraction
of a firm’s ten nearest rivals that were involved in restructuring in the past year. Consistent with
anticipation, this variable negatively predicts announcement returns, but only at the 10% level in

23

sample of transactions for this test is somewhat smaller than our main transaction
sample because we must further require that the target firm is both publicly traded
and that it has available CRSP stock returns on the event date.
[Insert Table IX Here]
We find strong support for the conclusion that more value is created around the
announcement date when the acquirer is in a relatively competitive product market,
and it is buying target assets in a product market that is less competitive. Rows 1, 3,
5, and 7 support this conclusion at the five percent level or better in all but one event
window (the acquirer result is not significant for the t=-1 to t=0 event window in row
3). This rather strong evidence supports the notion that the market rewards acquirers
that buy assets permitting new product synergies in less competitive markets.
In rows 2, 4, 6, and 8, we replace the basic product market competition variable
with two other variables to more directly test H3 and H4. Namely, we include the
gain in product differentiation relative to the acquirer’s rivals and the merger pair
similarity. The results broadly support H3 for all horizons, as the gain in product
differentiation is positive and significant at the 5% level or the 1% level in all rows.
We also see some support for H4 over longer event windows, as the pairwise similarity
variable is positive and significant at the 5% level in row 8 for the t=-10 to t=0 event
window. These results suggest that significant gains accrue consistent with H3 and
H4 despite the low degree of power in these tests, and also that these gains appear
both on the event day, and in the form of leakage prior to the event day. Although the
% neighbor patents variable is positive in every row, it is not statistically significant.
Hence, we find only very weak support for H5 in this test.
Lastly, we also find that announcement returns are larger when the transaction
is a merger involving a target firm that is large relative to the acquirer, and smaller
when the firms are larger unconditionally. The larger returns when bigger targets are
involved in mergers likely reflects the leveraged gains that should be observed in the
combined firm’s returns when transactions involve a larger fraction of the combined
some specifications, or less in others. We omit this variable as it does not alter any inferences and
to conserve space.

24

firm (mergers, unlike asset acquisitions, involve all of the target’s assets).

B

Real Performance

Although we observe evidence of financial value creation consistent with our hypotheses in Section A, it is important to examine the additional predictions of H3, H4, and
H5. In particular, this value increase should be accompanied by real post-transaction
gains in both sales and profitability. Also, we should observe evidence consistent with
new product synergies. This section presents the real long-term outcomes of acquiring
firms as a function of their ex-ante competitive environment.14
An important challenge faced by researchers studying ex-post restructuring performance is that two separate firms exist ex ante, and one or two firms might exist
ex post depending upon the transaction type. The matter of measuring ex-ante profitability or sales is especially confounding for partial asset purchases. We avoid this
issue entirely by only considering the acquirer’s post-effective change in performance
measured relative to the first set of numbers available after the transaction’s effective
date. Our hypotheses thus assume that profitability and sales growth accrue over
time, as should be the case when new product development drives gains given issues
related to the time to build. We examine changes from year t+1 to year t+2 or t+4
(one and three year horizons). For this reason, the sample of transactions used in
this section is somewhat smaller than our sample in section A because we must further require that the acquirer has valid COMPUSTAT data at least two years after
a given transaction closes. By examining post-effective changes only, we bias our
analysis toward not finding results due to lost power, but we avoid biases associated
with attempts to measure year t=-1 performance, and complications due to changes
in accounting methods following the transaction. As documented by Maksimovic,
Phillips, and Prabhala (2008), many mergers also involve selling off divisions at the
time of transaction and hence t-1 assets may no longer be owned by either firm by year
3. Our results thus likely understate the true relationship between our key variables.
14

Although not displayed, we also find that the same variables used to predict changes in ex post
profitability and sales growth also positively predict long-term abnormal stock returns, although
these findings are only significant at the 10% level. These tests confirm that our long-term findings
are not unique to accounting data.

25

We consider three measures of ex post performance: the change in operating
income divided by sales, change in operating income divided by assets, and sales
growth. All measures are SIC-3 industry adjusted. The first is COMPUSTAT item
13 divided by item 12. The second is COMPUSTAT item 13 divided by item 6.
To mitigate the effect of outliers, we truncate both profitability variables to lie in
the interval (-1,1). Changes are computed from year t+1 to year t+4. To reduce
survivorship issues, we assign any missing values for a given horizon the value of the
last known horizon (for example, if three year sales growth is missing, we populate
the given observation with two year sales growth, or one year sales growth).15
Table X reports the results of OLS regressions where the ex post change in performance (horizons noted in column two) is the dependent variable. In each panel,
we first present two rows including acquirer product similarity (one- and three-year
windows, respectively). In the third and fourth regressions of each panel (regressions
(3) and (4) in Panel A, regressions (7) and (8) in Panel B, and regressions (11) and
(12) in Panel C) we replace this variable with two other variables to more directly
test H3 and H4. Namely, we include the gain in product differentiation relative to
the acquirer’s rivals and the merger pair similarity.
We find evidence that acquirers residing in highly competitive product markets
experience positive improvements in profitability and sales growth. The gains in profitability in Panel A accrue over three years, and gains in sales in Panel C accrue more
quickly. These results are significant at the 1% level or better for sales growth, and
the three year profitability result is significant at the 5% level. These results are also
economically significant, as we report later in this section. Acquirers in competitive
product markets thus appear able to influence the degree of competition they face by
restructuring and developing new products, which is consistent with the growth in
sales. The potential for these new products to generate product differentiation can
explain why increased profitability accompanies the higher sales. The weaker results
in Panel B for profitability normalized by sales rather than assets is likely due to the
high sales growth documented in Panel C that coincides with the profitability growth
noted in Panel A, as sales is in the denominator of the profitability variable in Panel
15

Our results are robust to simply discarding these observations rather than using the last value.

26

B. The strong results for sales growth are especially consistent with the development
of new products.
Rows (3) and (4) in Panel A, and rows (11) and (12) of Panel C, show strong support for Hypothesis 3. In particular, the gain in product differentiation coefficient is
positive and significant. Hypothesis 4 is also supported by the positive and significant
target+acquirer similarity coefficient. As before, we do not see significant coefficients
in rows (7) and (8) in Panel B for these variables because Panels A and C suggest
that predictions regarding operating income scaled by sales are ambiguous.
We view the especially strong support for sales growth to be consistent with new
product development being a key feature of merger strategies. This result helps
to separate our hypotheses from the pure pricing power hypothesis advocated by
Baker and Bresnahan (1985). Our more direct evidence supporting new product
development presented later in this section further illustrates this distinction. The
increased profitability noted in Panel A supports both hypotheses. In the case of new
product development, managers should favor developing new products in markets
where rivals do not yet exist, which will generate increased pricing power.
We do not find support for Hypothesis 5 on this table (the % target neighbor’s
patent words is generally insignificant, and even negative in some specifications).
However, some of the weakness in testing H5 might be related to industry adjusting
the dependent variables that we use in this analysis. In particular, if patents matter
at the industry level, the theoretical predictions of H5 would still obtain, however
they would not be visible in our regression design.

C

Product Descriptions

In this section, we consider the prediction of Hypotheses 4 and 5 that new product
development will accompany positive real outcomes. New product development is
most likely when the target firm is more similar to the acquirer itself due to complementary assets (H4), and when barriers to entry protect the target’s uniqueness
(H5).
To test these predictions, we consider the time series of the product descriptions,
27

and examine how their size varies over time. We proxy for new product development
by examining whether firms experience growth in the size of their product descriptions
in the years following the merger’s effective date. This first description fully integrates
the initial state of the post merger firm. We define “product description growth” as
the logarithmic growth in the number of words used in the product market description
from year t+1 to either year t+2 or t+4. We then explore whether the same set of
variables used to predict ex-post real performance also predict product description
growth. In our analysis, we use an OLS specification in which all standard errors
are adjusted for clustering at the year and SIC-3 industry level. Note the sample
of transactions used in this section is smaller than our sample in section B because
we were able to obtain COMPUSTAT data going out to a longer horizon than our
available 10-K data, which is needed to construct the dependent variable in this
section.
Table XI presents the results of these tests. We find support for hypotheses H4
to H5. Rows (1) to (3) show that product descriptions increase dramatically when
acquiring firms reside in ex-ante competitive industries (a key prediction of both
hypotheses). This result is significant at the 1% level. Rows (4) to (6) show that this
result can be explained by two key factors. Product development is most aggressive
when (1) the acquirer and target are more similar, and (2) barriers to entry protect
the target’s technologies. Evidence supporting H4 is particularly strong, as pairwise
similarity is significant at better than the 1% level. For the three year horizon, the
% neighbor patent words variable is positive and significant at the 1% level.
The Table also shows that vertical mergers, as described in Fan and Goyal (2006)
also experience ex-post growth in the size of product descriptions, consistent with
these mergers also permitting the introduction of new products. These results support
the broader conclusions of Fan and Goyal (2006), who show that vertical mergers are
indeed value creating.
The table also shows that pairwise similarity measured using SIC codes is too
granular to produce similar inferences. Hence, understanding the relationship between
pairwise similarity and product differentiation relies on the researcher’s ability to
measure the degree of product similarity, and also to measure similarities relative to
28

different groups of firms. The table also documents that product descriptions also
have a tendency to mean revert over time, a feature that is likely due to writing style
and a long term preference for brevity. We control for this feature of the data in
addition to the other key variables discussed above.
An alternative explanation for our findings is that repeat acquisitions explain why
product descriptions expand. We test this hypothesis and compute dummy variables
indicating whether a given firm completes a future acquisition during the same horizon
over which these calculations are performed. We do not find a statistically significant link between the incidence of repeat acquisitions and our key product market
competition and pairwise similarity variables. We also reproduce these tests using
the subsample of firms that do not experience any future acquisitions and our results
remain robust. We conclude that repeat acquisitions do not explain our findings.

D

Economic Magnitudes for Ex Post Outcomes

In this section, we summarize the economic magnitude of two key variables (product
similarity 10 nearest, and the % neighbor patent words) on announcement returns
and real outcomes. We use the same generalized method used to examine transaction
incidence in section V.
Table XII displays the results of these calculations. The economic magnitudes in
Panel A regarding announcement returns are modest relative to our incidence results,
at least in nominal terms. The competitive effect we document for the combined firm
increases event day announcement returns by 0.3%, and longer horizon (11-day) event
returns by 0.8%. This spread is modest in nominal terms, but is not trivial given
that the mean combined event day firm announcement return is just 0.5% (standard
deviation of 4.2%), and the eleven day announcement return averages 0.6% (standard
deviation of 7.9%). Hence, over the longer window, the 0.8% is 10% the total standard
deviation, and this variable moves the announcement return by more than the mean
itself. The relatively small nominal size of these returns is consistent with the bulk
of our database being partial acquisitions, and with target firms being smaller than
acquiring firms in general. These features make it very hard to measure the impact

29

of a transaction when all we observe is an aggregated return that includes changes
in the value of the non-acquired assets. The patent variable has a smaller magnitude
consistent with its low statistical significance in Table IX. Because transactions can
be anticipated months or even years in advance, we believe that additional gains
likely accrue to the combined firm outside of the traditional event windows that we
examine.
The results in Panel B show that the economic magnitude of our findings regarding
real outcomes are large, especially regarding sales growth. The acquirer’s product
similarity (10 nearest) increases the change in profitability from -0.9% to -0.2% (1
year) and from -2.3% to -0.9% (3 years). Noting that this variable is a change (hence
its mean is near zero) that has a standard deviation of roughly 10% (See Table III), we
conclude that this predicted spread is economically relevant, especially for the three
year horizon where the predicted spread is nearly 20% of the standard deviation of
the dependent variable. Put differently, profitability does not change very much year
to year, and a 1.4% shift in profitability can be quite substantial. The table also
shows that acquirer product similarity generates a sales growth spread from 11.9%
to 19.9% (one year) and 20.0% to 33.9% (three years). These spreads are substantial
and economically significant both in nominal and relative terms.
Panel C reports the economic impact of our variables on the ex post growth in
the size of the product description. The spread for the acquirer product similarity
variable is from -2.4% to 9.1% (results similar for one and three year horizons). This
spread is economically large. We conclude that our findings regarding incidence,
real performance, and product description growth are economically large. Our most
economically significant findings relate to transaction incidence, sales growth, and
product description growth. Our findings regarding announcement returns are modest
in nominal terms, but are larger when compared to the dependent variable’s narrow
distribution.

30

E

Robustness

In this section, we examine key predictions of some alternative theories and summarize
additional robustness tests.
One main alternative for higher cash flows ex post is that firms cut expenses
post-merger. This could arise if the combined firm experiences economies of scale or
if acquirers deliberately purchase less efficient targets in order to improve efficiency.
We use methods similar to those of Table X and measure changes in the cost of
goods sold (scaled by sales), selling and administrative expenses (scaled by sales),
and capital expenditures (scaled by assets) starting from year t+1 to year t+2 or
t+4 (one year or three year performance). We find that our key variables are weakly
negatively related to changes in these expense ratios, but none of the coefficients are
statistically significant. We conclude that cost savings and economies of scale likely
cannot explain our previous results. Despite this finding, it is important to note that
expense-based merger strategies are not mutually exclusive to our product market
based strategies, and the best mergers might generate gains along both dimensions.
Second, we also examine whether our results are driven by measures of vertically
related mergers, as in Fan and Goyal (2006). Although we find independent support
for the conclusion that vertical mergers have positive attributes, we also find that
our similarity measures correlate very little with vertical similarity measured using
the input-output tables (correlation less than 10%). We also control for vertical
similarity in our analysis and find that our results are unchanged regardless of whether
we include or exclude controls for vertical similarity. Our measures thus capture
additional information that is economically and statistically significant in explaining
ex post changes in merger profitability and new product introduction.
Third, we test whether our results are driven by the technology boom of the late
1990s. We perform several tests to exclude this possibility. Throughout our study,
we control for time and industry effects. We also run an unreported robustness test
where we exclude all technology firms from our sample (technology firms defined as in
Loughran and Ritter (2004)). Our results are almost unchanged, and in some cases,
become stronger in this test. Our results are thus not driven by technology firms.
31

Fourth, our results might be driven by multiple segment firms, and in particular, our broad measure of product similarity might be measuring firm diversification
rather than asset redeployability. We test this hypothesis by rerunning our tests after
excluding all multiple segment firms, where multiple segment firms are identified using the COMPUSTAT segment tapes. Our results change little in this test, and the
relevant broad product similarity variable’s coefficient declines by only 5% to 10% in
various tests. Although diversification might play a small role, our results are not
driven by firm diversification.
Fifth, our product similarity variables might be driven by corporate culture, and
our results thus driven by similar cultures being more conductive to innovation and the
introduction of new products. We do not believe our results support this hypothesis
for two reasons. First, the word lists that drive our similarity measure (see Table
II) fit a product market interpretation, and not a corporate culture interpretation.
Second, although corporate culture predicts that outcomes might be related to target
and acquirer pairwise similarity, it is silent on whether the target’s distance from the
acquirer’s nearest rivals (gain in differentiation) will matter to ex post outcomes thus
corporate culture likely cannot explain our results.
Sixth, we examine whether our results are driven by repeat-acquiring firms by
rerunning our tests after excluding firms that were involved in an acquisition in the
past year. Our results change little in these tests. We conclude that our findings are
most consistent with product market competition and similarity influencing merger
incidence and ex post changes in profitability and product offerings.

32

VII

Conclusions

Using novel text-based measures of product similarity between firms, we analyze how
similarity and competition impacts the incentives to merge and whether mergers
with potential product market synergies through asset complementarities add value.
Our 10-K based text measures of product market competition, differentiation, and
new product development have advantages over simple SIC code based measures as
they can capture similarity both within and across product markets, and changes in
product descriptions over time.
We find that firms with higher economy-wide product market similarity are more
likely to enter into restructuring transactions, consistent with their assets being more
broadly deployable. Firms with higher localized product market competition are less
likely to enter into restructuring transactions. These results are consistent with local
competition for restructuring opportunities. We find that firms protected by barriers
to entry are also more likely to enter into restructuring transactions. These results
are consistent with acquirers of firms in protected product markets obtaining patent
protected technologies through mergers or asset purchases instead of developing the
technologies or products within the existing firm.
Examining post-merger outcomes, we find that value creation upon announcement
and long-term profitability and sales growth are higher when acquirers purchase targets that 1) Increase the acquirer’s product differentiation relative to its nearest rivals
and 2) Have high similarity relative to the acquirer’s own products. These gains are
larger when barriers to entry exist, making it harder for rival firms to replicate the
given strategy. We also find evidence that product descriptions for the combined
acquirer and target firm increase when acquirers are in competitive product markets
and transacting firms have high product similarity.
Overall, our results are consistent with merging firms exploiting asset complementarities to create value through sales growth and new product introductions to increase
their product differentiation. More broadly, our results suggest that firms can actively
reduce their product market competition by engaging in strategic restructuring transactions to increase product differentiation through new product introductions.
33

Appendix 1
This Appendix explains how we compute the “product similarity” and “product
differentiation” between two firms i and j. We first take the text in each firm’s
product description (from its 10-K) and construct a binary vector summarizing its
usage of English words. The vector has a length equal to the number of unique words
used in the set of all product descriptions. For a given firm, a given element of this
vector is set to one if the word associated with the given element is in the given firm’s
product description. It is set to zero otherwise. Because we wish to measure product
descriptions, we seek to restrict the number of words in this vector to those that are
less commonly used across all product descriptions. Very common words are likely
to be articles, conjunctions, personal pronouns, abbreviations, or other words that
do not identify the firm’s product offerings. Hence, we restrict attention to words
that appear in fewer than five percent of all product descriptions in the given year.
For each firm i, we thus have a binary vector Pi , with each element taking a value
of one if the associated word is used in the given firm’s product description and zero
otherwise.
We next define the normalized frequency vector Vi , which normalizes the vector
Px,i to have unit length.
Vi = √

Pi
Pi · Pi

(1)

To measure the degree of similarity between the products of firms i and j, we simply
take the dot product of the two normalized vectors, a quantity we define as “product
similarity”. We utilize this measure throughout this study.
P roduct Similarityi,j = (Vi · Vj )

(2)

To measure product differentiation across firms i and j, we simply take one minus
the product similarity.
P roduct Dif f erentiationi,j = 1 − (Vi · Vj )

(3)

Because all normalized vectors Vi have a length of one, product similarity and product
differentiation both have the nice property of being bounded in the interval (0,1). This
normalization is important because it ensures that product descriptions with fewer

words are not penalized excessively relative to those using more words. Intuitively,
the differentiation between two products is zero if they are the same, and can never
exceed one if they are entirely different.

35

Appendix 2 (Table II Cont)
Word lists of merging firms with high similarity.
This appendix presents the common words for the mergers from Table I that are not already
presented in Table II. Merging firms are both (1) in different two-digit SIC codes and (2) have a
merger pair similarity in the highest percentile in 2005 (the most recent year in our sample).
Acquirer (Industry) + Target (Industry): list of common words
Enterprise Products Partners (SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum & Natural Gas) + El Paso Corp-Natural Gas
(SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission): abandonment, acreage, anadarko, basin, basins, border, bound, ceiling,
coal, coastal, compression, compressor, condensate, connects, continent, deepwater, depleted, differs,
discontinuation, downstream, exact, ferc, gulf, gulfterra, horsepower, hurricanes, inch, indian, inlet,
interconnections, interconnects, interruptible, intrastate, juan, justify, kerr, liquids, mainline, mcgee, midstream,
minerals, mmcf, morgan, mountains, northeastern, onshore, paso, permian, pipelines, reservoir, rockies, rocky,
Express Scripts Inc (SIC3=641, Insurance Agents, Brokers & Service) + Priority Healthcare Corp (SIC3=512,
Wholesale-Drugs & Druggists Sundries): accreditation, admit, advancepcs, alert, alerts, asthma, beneficiaries,
bids, broadened, calculations, caremark, cited, compiled, counseling, deadline, differently, dispense, dispensing,
enact, exclusion, false, filling, formularies, formulary, fraudulent, freedom, harbors, hipaa, hmos, implicate,
induce, inspector, interactions, journal, kickback, knowingly, marked, medco, medication, medications,
medicines, nurses, nursing, outpatient, paths, pbms, pharmacies, pharmacist, pharmacists, pharmacy, phoenix,
First Advantage Corp (SIC3=738, Services-Miscellaneous Business Services) + Credit Information Group
(SIC3=636, Title Insurance): corefacts, credco, dedicate, diversifying, eviction, fadv, forensics, here, insuring,
investigative, justify, landlords, malfeasance, misuse, mitigation, multifamily, nonetheless, omega, paperwork,
General Dynamics Corp (SIC3=373, Ship & Boat Building & Repairing) + Anteon International Corp (SIC3=737,
Services-Computer Programming): agrees, allied, appropriated, armed, army, attack, ballistic, battle, cargo,
civilian, combat, combatant, command, commanders, corps, deployments, destroyer, fighter, littoral, missile,
H&R Block Inc (SIC3=720, Services-Personal Services) + American Express Tax & Bus (SIC3=619, Finance
Services): accessibility, advantaged, affirmed, annuities, annuity, applicability, attest, attracted, attrition,
captured, censure, charging, clearing, contacting, custodian, delinquency, delinquent, franchisee, franchisees,
franchising, hsbc, inappropriate, iras, join, nasd, partnering, planners, preempt, professionally, ranked, rewards,
Hampshire Group Ltd (SIC3=225, Knitting Mills) + Kellwood Co-David Brooks Bus (SIC3=233, Women's,
Misses, and Juniors Outerwear): apparel, casual, dockers, juniors, knit, pants, quota, skirts, sportswear, styles,
Hewlett-Packard Co (SIC3=357, Computer & of fice Equipment) + Peregrine Systems Inc (SIC3=737, ServicesComputer Programming): alignment, allocating, americas, answer, architectures, comparing, continuity,
corrections, deliverables, descriptions, desk, diego, emea, geographies, heterogeneous, hewlett, infrastructures,
laptop, lifecycle, metrics, middleware, networked, packard, pdas, prevents, printer, redundancies, resides,
Highland Hospitality Corp (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Hilton Boston Back Bay Hotel (SIC3=701,
Hotels & Motels): airport, convention, courtyard, embassy, franchised, franchisees, franchisor, garden, guest,
hilton, homewood, hospitality, hotel, knew, lodging, omaha, parking, renovation, repositioning, reservation,
IRIS International Inc (SIC3=382, Laboratory Apparatus & Furniture) + Quidel Corp-Urinalysis Bus (SIC3=283,
Medicinal Chemicals & Botanical Products): bacteria, bayer, bench, characterize, classify, clearances, cleared,
diagnostics, exploit, glucose, infection, infections, nitrite, proposition, protein, reagents, seizure, specimen,
Journal Communications Inc (SIC3=271, Newspapers: Publishing Printing) + Emmis Comm-Radio Stations(3)
(SIC3=483, Radio Broadcasting Stations): absent, adult, advertiser, advertisers, affiliation, affirmed, allotted,
appropriations, arbitron, asking, assignments, assigns, attribution, audience, audiences, broadcaster,
broadcasters, broadcasting, broadcasts, brokered, carriage, circulation, circulations, classic, clusters,
compelling, conclusion, contemporary, denial, dividing, egregious, electing, equitable, failing, frequencies,
Kinder Morgan Energy Partners (SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission) + Terra Nitrogen Co-Blytheville
(SIC3=287, Agricultural Chemicals): accidents, acre, ammonia, analogous, anhydrous, barge, barges, basin,
beaumont, blend, carbon, cars, cercla, coincide, creek, crop, crops, depleted, dioxide, drainage, environmentally,
exported, exports, farm, feed, feedstock, fertilizer, fertilizers, gallons, gasoline, grain, groundwater, gulf,
LaSalle Hotel Properties (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Hilton San Diego Resort,CA (SIC3=701, Hotels
& Motels): accommodations, airline, airport, bankrupt, contrary, convention, diego, earthquake, franchisor,
guests, hilton, hospitality, hotel, indianapolis, instructions, insuring, knew, leisure, lodging, luxury, omaha, pines,
Leggett & Platt Inc (SIC3=251, Household Furniture) + Foamex International-Rubber (SIC3=308, Miscellaneous
Plastics Products): bedding, carpet, cushioning, cushions, fabricated, fibers, foam, leggett, mattress, mattresses,
mexican, molded, pillows, platt, quilting, scrap, seat, seating, shape, springs, upholstered
Lionbridge Technologies Inc (SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming) + Bowne Global Solutions
(SIC3=275, Commercial Printing): adapting, bowne, cultural, culturally, freelance, globalization, instructions,
languages, leverages, lifecycle, linguistic, localization, multimedia, shorten, standardizes, translated, translation,

Appendix 2 Continued
This appendix presents the common words for the mergers from Table I that are not
already presented in Table II. Merging firms are both (1) in different two-digit SIC
codes and (2) have a merger pair similarity in the highest percentile in 2005 (the
most recent year in our sample).
Acquirer (Industry) + Target (Industry): list of common words
MarkWest Energy Partners LP (SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum & Natural Gas) + Javelina Gas Processing
(SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission): accidental, acreage, anadarko, appalachian, basin, basins,
cogeneration, compression, compressor, condensate, condensed, counterparty, diminished, disciplined, exact,
ferc, grouped, haul, horsepower, inch, injected, inlet, insignificant, intrastate, lateral, liquids, midstream, mmcf,
McDATA Corp (SIC3=366, Telephone & Telegraph Apparatus) + Computer Network Technology (SIC3=357,
Computer & office Equipment): backbone, backup, broadened, brocade, campus, cisco, dell, depended,
diagnose, disk, disruptive, encompassing, escon, extensibility, fabric, fibre, ficon, forecasting, fractional,
heterogeneous, hewlett, hitachi, infrastructures, interoperability, iscsi, mainframe, mcdata, merits, migrate,
Nektar Therapeutics (SIC3=283, Medicinal Chemicals & Botanical Products) + AeroGen Inc (SIC3=384,
Surgical & Medical Instruments & Apparatus): absorbed, absorption, activated, adult, aerogen, aerosol, aerosols,
aeruginosa, alkermes, antibiotic, antibiotics, aradigm, bachelor, battelle, biologic, biology, bloodstream, breath,
buccal, carbon, cgmp, clinically, collaborations, commercialized, conceived, cystic, diabetes, diabetic, dioxide,
dosage, dose, doses, dosing, fibrosis, filling, formulated, formulations, founder, glucose, harvard, inconvenience,
NRG Energy Inc (SIC3=491, Electric Services) + West Coast Power LLC (SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum &
Natural Gas): absent, acid, ahead, allegedly, approves, asbestos, attainment, balancing, baseload, basin, bids,
bilateral, bilaterally, blanket, boiler, btus, cabrillo, cair, capped, caps, carbon, cdwr, cercla, coal, combustion,
commences, compel, consumed, cooling, cooperatives, cpuc, crisis, crude, curve, defines, depressed,
Pacific Energy Partners LP (SIC3=461, Pipe Lines (No Natural Gas)) + Valero LP- Terminal & Pipeline
(SIC3=291, Petroleum Refining): barges, barrels, benchmark, blend, blended, blending, cercla, complements,
connects, conocophillips, crude, deepwater, denver, diesel, distillate, dock, exxonmobil, feedstock, feedstocks,
futures, gasoline, grades, grandfathered, groundwater, gulf, heavier, hydrocarbon, inch, oils, paso, pipe,
Polo Ralph Lauren Corp (SIC3=232, Men's & Boys Work Clothg & Allied Garments) + Ralph Lauren Footwear
Co Inc (SIC3=302, Rubber & Plastics Footwear): accessory, amortize, apparel, appearances, athletic,
atmosphere, attitude, boys, caribbean, casual, catalogs, chile, classic, clubs, coincide, colombia, compensatory,
contemporary, designer, distinctive, dress, eyewear, famous, flagship, footwear, girls, gloves, golf, gucci, hilfiger,
hosiery, importing, jeans, knit, launches, lauren, leather, lifestyle, madrid, malaysia, message, mills, newest,
Renaissance Learning Inc (SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming) + AlphaSmart Inc (SIC3=357,
Computer & office Equipment): administrators, bundled, classroom, curricula, districts, educators, english,
grammar, handles, instructional, learning, literacy, math, multimedia, principals, quizzes, renaissance, sessions,
RH Donnelley Corp (SIC3=731, Services-Advertising) + Dex Media Inc (SIC3=274, Miscellaneous Publishing):
accountable, advertise, advertisement, advertiser, advertisers, affiliation, amdocs, bell, billboards, bottom, bound,
bundled, circulation, citysearch, cmrs, column, completeness, decentralized, delinquent, directional, directories,
directory, donnelley, enduring, english, fingers, george, golf, google, guides, households, incumbent, listings,
logos, longest, newspaper, newspapers, official, permission, phrase, portals, postal, premise, proposition,
Stonemor Partners LP (SIC3=650, Real Estate) + Service Corp Intl-Cemeteries (SIC3=720, Services-Personal
Services): bronze, burial, casket, caskets, cemeteries, cemetery, closings, cremation, crypts, funeral, funerals,
gardens, heritage, interment, lawn, lots, mausoleum, memorial, memorials, openings, receptacles, spaces,
Sunstone Hotel Investors Inc (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Renaissance Hotels-Hotel (SIC3=701,
Hotels & Motels): accommodations, affiliation, airline, airports, amenities, booked, bookings, contagious,
courtyard, cured, earthquakes, floods, franchisees, franchisor, franchisors, guest, guests, hospitality, hotel,
indemnities, intermediaries, justify, laundry, leisure, lodging, marriott, parking, portugal, qualifies, renovation,
Sunstone Hotel Investors Inc (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Renaissance Washington DC (SIC3=701,
Hotels & Motels): accommodations, affiliation, airline, airports, amenities, booked, bookings, contagious,
courtyard, cured, earthquakes, floods, franchisees, franchisor, franchisors, guest, guests, hospitality, hotel,
indemnities, intermediaries, justify, laundry, leisure, lodging, marriott, parking, portugal, qualifies, renovation,
Titan Tire Corp (SIC3=331, Steel Works, Blast Furnaces & Finishing Mills) + Goodyear Tire & Rubber-North
(SIC3=301, Tires & Inner Tubes): australian, belts, bridgestone, carbon, earthmoving, exports, farm, goodyear,
haul, highway, luxembourg, michelin, mills, pounds, rubber, textile, tire, tires, titan, tread, wheel

References
Andrade, Gregor, Mark Mitchell, and Erik Stafford, 2001, New evidence and
perspectives on mergers, Journal of Economic Perspectives 15, 103–120.
Andrade, Gregor, and Erik Stafford, 2004, Investigating the economic role of mergers,
Journal of Corporate Finance 1, 1–36.
Baker, Jonathan, and Timothy Bresnahan, 1985, The gains from merger or collusion
in product differentiated industries, Journal of Industrial Economics 33, 427–444.
Betton, Sandra, Espen Eckbo, and Karin Thorburn, 2007, Corporate takeovers,
forthcoming Handbook of Corporate Finance: Empirical Corporate Finance:
Elsevier/North-Holland.
Boukus, Ellyn, and Joshua Rosenberg, 2006, The information content of fomc
minutes, Yale University working paper.
Chamberlain, EH, 1933, The Theory of Monopolistic Competition (Harvard
University Press: Cambridge).
Davis, James, Eugene Fama, and Kenneth French, 2000, Characteristics, covariances,
and average returns: 1929-1997, The Journal of Finance 55, 389–406.
Eaton, Curtis, and Richard Lipsey, 1989, Product Differentiation, Handbook of
Industrial Organization (Elsevier).
Fan, Joseph, and Vidhan Goyal, 2006, On the patterns and wealth effects of vertical
mergers, Journal of Business 79, 877–902.
Hanley, Kathleen, and Gerard Hoberg, 2008, Strategic disclosure and the pricing of
initial public offerings, Working Paper, Securities Exchange Commission and the
University of Maryland.
Harford, Jarrad, 2005, What drives merger waves?, Journal of Financial Economics
77, 529–560.
Hart, Oliver, and John Moore, 1995, Debt and seniority: an analysis of the role of
hard claims in constraining management, American Economic Review 85, 567–85.
Healy, Paul, Krishna Palepu, and Richard Ruback, 1992, Does corporate performance
improve after mergers?, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135–175.
Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2008, Real and financial industry booms and
busts, Working Paper, University of Maryland.
Hotelling, H., 1929, Stability in competition, Economic Journal pp. 41–57.
Jensen, Michael, 1993, The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of
internal control systems, The Journal of Finance 48, 831–80.
Jovanovic, Boyan, and P Rousseau, 2002, The q-theory of mergers, American
Economic Review 92, 198–204.
Kaplan, Steve, and Michael Weisbach, 1992, The success of acquisitions: evidence
from divestitures, The Journal of Finance 47, 107–138.
Li, Feng, 2006a, Account report readibility, current earnings and earnings persistence,
University of Michigan Working Paper.
Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 2004, Why has ipo underpricing changed over time?,
Financial Management 33, 5–37.
Macskassy, Sofus, Maytal Saar-Tsechansky, and Paul Tetlock, 2004, More than words:
Quantifying language to measure firms’ fundamentals, Forthcoming, Journal of
Finance.

38

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Gordon Phillips, 2001, The market for corporate assets:
Who engages in mergers and asset sales and are there efficiency gains?, The
Journal of Finance 56, 2019–2065.
, 2008, The industry life-cycle, acquisitions and investment: Does firm
organization matter?, The Journal of Finance 63.
, and Nagpurnanand Prabhala, 2008, Post-merger restructuring and the
boundaries of the firm, University of Maryland Working Paper.
Mitchell, Mark, and Harold Mulherin, 1996, The impact of industry shocks on
takeover and restructuring activity, Journal of Financial Economics 41, 193–229.
Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1988, Management ownership
and market valuation: an empirical analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 20,
293–315.
Nevo, Aviv, 2000, Mergers with differentiated products: the case of the ready to eat
cereal industry, Rand Journal of Economics 31, 395–421.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and David Robinson, 2008, The market for mergers and the
boundaries of the firm, Forthcoming, Journal of Finance.
Tetlock, Paul, 2008, Giving content to investor sentiment: the role of media in the
stock market, The Journal of Finance 62, 1139–1168.
Yang, Liu, 2008, The real determinants of asset sales, Forthcoming, Journal of
Finance.

Table I: Merging firms in 2005 with highest percentile similarity but different two-digit SIC codes
This table presents a list of firms that are both (1) in different two-digit SIC codes and (2) have a merger pair similarity in the 100th percentile in 2005 (the
most recent year in our sample).

Acquirer
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc
Americredit Financial Services
Atlas Pipeline Partners LP
Belo Corp
Buckeye GP LLC
CareerStaff Unlimited Inc
ChevronTexaco Corp
Correctional Properties Trust
Eagle Hosp Prop Trust Inc
EMCORE Corp
Enterprise Products Partners
Express Scripts Inc
First Advantage Corp
General Dynamics Corp
H&R Block Inc
Hampshire Group Ltd
Hewlett-Packard Co
Highland Hospitality Corp
IRIS International Inc
Journal Communications Inc
Kinder Morgan Energy Partners
LaSalle Hotel Properties
Leggett & Platt Inc
Lionbridge Technologies Inc
MarkWest Energy Partners LP
McDATA Corp
Nektar Therapeutics
NRG Energy Inc
Pacific Energy Partners LP
Polo Ralph Lauren Corp
Renaissance Learning Inc
RH Donnelley Corp
Stonemor Partners LP
Sunstone Hotel Investors Inc
Sunstone Hotel Investors Inc
Titan Tire Corp

Target
RPC Inc-Technical Services
Bay View Acceptance Corp
Energy Transfer Partners
WUPL-TV, New Orleans
Atlas Oil Co-Refined Petroleum
ProCare One Nurses LLC
Unocal Corp
Geo Group Inc-Lawton
Hilton Glendale
JDS Uniphase Corp
El Paso Corp-Natural Gas
Priority Healthcare Corp
Credit Information Group
Anteon International Corp
American Express Tax & Bus
Kellwood Co-David Brooks Bus
Peregrine Systems Inc
Hilton Boston Back Bay Hotel
Quidel Corp-Urinalysis Bus
Emmis Comm-Radio Stations
Terra Nitrogen Co-Blytheville
Hilton San Diego Resort
Foamex International-Rubber
Bowne Global Solutions
Javelina Gas Processing
Computer Network Technology
AeroGen Inc
West Coast Power LLC
Valero LP- Terminal & Pipeline
Ralph Lauren Footwear Co Inc
AlphaSmart Inc
Dex Media Inc
Service Corp Intl-Cemeteries
Renaissance Hotels-Hotel
Renaissance Washington DC
Goodyear Tire & Rubber-North

Acquirer SIC-3
SIC3=735, Equipment Rental + Leasing
SIC3=619, Finance Services
SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission
SIC3=271, Newspapers: Publishing + Printing
SIC3=461, Pipe Lines
SIC3=805, Services-Nursing + Personal Care
SIC3=291, Petroleum Refining
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=355, Special Industry Machinery
SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum + Natural Gas
SIC3=641, Insurance Agents, Brokers + Service
SIC3=738, Miscellaneous Business Services
SIC3=373, Ship + Boat Building + Repairing
SIC3=720, Services-Personal Services
SIC3=225, Knitting Mills
SIC3=357, Computer + of fice Equipment
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=382, Laboratory Apparatus + Furniture
SIC3=271, Newspapers: Publishing Printing
SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=251, Household Furniture
SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming
SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum + Natural Gas
SIC3=366, Telephone + Telegraph Apparatus
SIC3=283, Medicinal Chemicals + Botanicals
SIC3=491, Electric Services
SIC3=461, Pipe Lines (No Natural Gas)
SIC3=232, Men's + Boys Work Clothg
SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming
SIC3=731, Services-Advertising
SIC3=650, Real Estate
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing
SIC3=331, Steel Works, Blast Furnaces + Mills

Target SIC-3
SIC3=138, Drilling Oil + Gas Wells
SIC3=602, National Commercial Banks
SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum + Natural Gas
SIC3=483, Radio Broadcasting Stations
SIC3=590, Retail-Miscellaneous Retail
SIC3=874, Services-Management Services
SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum + Natural Gas
SIC3=874, Services-Management Services
SIC3=701, Hotels + Motels
SIC3=366, Telephone + Telegraph Apparatus
SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission
SIC3=512, Wholesale-Drugs + Sundries
SIC3=636, Title Insurance
SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming
SIC3=619, Finance Services
SIC3=233, Women's and Juniors Outerwear
SIC3=737, Services-Computer Programming
SIC3=701, Hotels + Motels
SIC3=283, Medicinal Chemicals + Botanicals
SIC3=483, Radio Broadcasting Stations
SIC3=287, Agricultural Chemicals
SIC3=701, Hotels + Motels
SIC3=308, Miscellaneous Plastics Products
SIC3=275, Commercial Printing
SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission
SIC3=357, Computer + office Equipment
SIC3=384, Surgical + Medical Instruments
SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum + Natural Gas
SIC3=291, Petroleum Refining
SIC3=302, Rubber + Plastics Footwear
SIC3=357, Computer + office Equipment
SIC3=274, Miscellaneous Publishing
SIC3=720, Services-Personal Services
SIC3=701, Hotels + Motels
SIC3=701, Hotels + Motels
SIC3=301, Tires + Inner Tubes

Table II: Common words for merging firms from Table I with high similarity
This table presents the common words for the first 10 mergers from Table I. Firms have both (1)
in different two-digit SIC codes and (2) have a merger pair similarity in the highest percentile in
2005 (the most recent year in our sample). The word lists for the remaining mergers from Table I
are presented in Appendix II as Table XIII.

Acquirer (Industry) + Target (Industry): list of common words
Allis-Chalmers Energy Inc (SIC3=735, Equipment Rental & Leasing) + RPC Inc-Technical Services Bus
(SIC3=138, Drilling Oil & Gas Wells): accessing, bore, casing, coiled, depths, diameter, downhole, drill, drilled,
economical, fluids, forklifts, geological, gulf, halliburton, hammer, hevi, hydraulic, hydrocarbons, inject, injected,
laydown, motors, mountains, nitrogen, oilfield, onshore, permeability, pipe, pipelines, pumps, reservoirs, retrieve,
Americredit Financial Services (SIC3=619, Finance Services) + Bay View Acceptance Corp (SIC3=602, National
Commercial Banks): advise, aforementioned, applicants, captive, dealership, dealerships, defenses,
delinquencies, depress, depressed, discriminating, discriminatory, earns, franchised, obligors, recession,
Atlas Pipeline Partners LP (SIC3=492, Natural Gas Transmission) + Energy Transfer Partners-Elk (SIC3=131,
Crude Petroleum & Natural Gas): abandonment, analogous, atlas, basin, basins, bbls, cercla, compressing,
condensate, cubic, diameter, discrimination, discriminatory, ebitda, ferc, fractionation, gallon, gather, gathered,
gatherer, geothermal, grange, grievances, hazard, hydrocarbon, hydrocarbons, intrastate, liquids, midstream,
Belo Corp (SIC3=271, Newspapers: Publishing or Publishing & Printing) + WUPL-TV, New Orleans, LA
(SIC3=483, Radio Broadcasting Stations): advertiser, advertisers, affiliation, affirmed, assignments, attribution,
audience, audiences, austin, broadcaster, broadcasters, broadcasting, broadcasts, carriage, charlotte,
compulsory, contests, digitally, distant, dmas, duopolies, duopoly, empowers, fare, finds, flag, frequencies,
george, hispanic, households, indecency, indecent, informational, inquiry, insulated, king, louis, magazines,
morning, multichannel, necessity, netratings, newspaper, newspapers, nielsen, norfolk, orleans, paramount,
passive, phoenix, piracy, portland, primetime, providence, purport, random, rank, ranked, reauthorization,
Buckeye GP LLC (SIC3=461, Pipe Lines) + Atlas Oil Co-Refined Petroleum (SIC3=590, Retail-Miscellaneous
Retail): allentown, barge, cercla, citgo, crude, diesel, fuels, gasoline, harrisburg, haven, legality, newark,
philadelphia, propane, refineries, refiners, spite, superfund, trigger, unitholder, unitholders
CareerStaff Unlimited Inc (SIC3=805, Services-Nursing & Personal Care Facilities) + ProCare One Nurses LLC
(SIC3=874, Services-Management Services): accrue, acted, acuity, admissions, adult, arranging, arthritis,
basket, beds, beneficiaries, careerstaff, contest, disabled, disabling, divested, elderly, encouraged, ethical,
exclusion, false, hipaa, hospice, incrementally, induce, inpatient, inspector, intermediaries, kickback, knowing,
knowingly, licensure, liquidated, manuals, mental, nurse, nurses, nursing, offenses, outpatient, payor, pediatric,
punitive, refinement, rehabilitation, rehabilitative, reimbursable, reimbursements, reimburses, remuneration,
ChevronTexaco Corp (SIC3=291, Petroleum Refining) + Unocal Corp (SIC3=131, Crude Petroleum & Natural
Gas): accidental, acreage, alaska, appraisal, argentina, averaged, barrels, basin, basins, bids, border, canyon,
caspian, coal, commerciality, concession, concessions, condensate, congo, consortium, consumed, crude,
cubic, deepwater, delineation, democratic, discoveries, drill, drilled, exploitation, exploratory, exported, extracted,
exxonmobil, farm, fired, formulas, fuels, gasoline, gasolines, geothermal, gulf, hydrocarbon, hydrocarbons,
indonesia, java, liquids, malo, megawatts, memorandum, onshore, petrochemical, philippine, philippines,
pipelines, ports, producible, progressed, prospect, proved, ramp, refined, refinery, refining, reservoir, reservoirs,
Correctional Properties Trust (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Geo Group Inc-Lawton (SIC3=874,
Services-Management Services): adelanto, adult, alcohol, appropriation, appropriations, architects, aurora,
awarding, beds, broward, cornell, correctional, corrections, counseling, customs, deems, desert, detainees,
detention, falck, george, golden, hobbs, immigration, inmate, inmates, jena, juvenile, karnes, lawton, male,
Eagle Hosp Prop Trust Inc (SIC3=679, Miscellaneous Investing) + Hilton Glendale, Glandale, CA (SIC3=701,
Hotels & Motels): accumulates, airport, booked, bookings, concessions, contrary, embassy, franchisees,
franchisor, guest, guests, hilton, hospitality, hotel, illiquidity, indoor, instructions, insuring, intermediaries, lodging,
EMCORE Corp (SIC3=355, Special Industry Machinery) + JDS Uniphase Corp-Analog CATV (SIC3=366,
Telephone & Telegraph Apparatus): achieves, addressable, agilent, alcatel, amplification, amplifiers, amplitude,
attest, band, brightness, broadest, cables, catv, cavity, centralizing, choosing, cisco, closer, complimentary,
consumed, contributors, converging, datacom, defect, defective, deferring, dense, deposition, destinations,
detectible, deteriorate, diode, diodes, disadvantages, discouraging, disproportionate, disruptive, diverting,

Table III: Summary Statistics
Summary statistics are reported for our sample based on 1997 to 2005. Product similarities are measures that lie in
the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see
Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to
those of other firms. We compute product similarities based on the ten nearest firms and based on all firms
excluding the 10 nearest. The fraction of nearest neighbors who were involved in restructuring transactions in the
past year is computed both based on the firm’s ten nearest neighbors and based on three-digit SIC codes. The %
neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the
10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent. Announcement returns are net of the
CRSP value weighted index and are measured relative to the three-day window bracketing the announcement date.
The gain in product differentiation is the product distance from the target to the acquirer’s ten nearest neighbors,
less the acquirer’s distance to its ten nearest neighbors. We compute three measures of ex-post acquirer real
performance. All are based on the first set of accounting numbers available after the transaction is effective (call this
the “effective year”), and we consider one to three year changes in performance thereafter (this method avoids bias
from trying to measure pre-merger performance of two separate firms). We compute profitability as operating
income divided by assets or sales in each year, and we then truncate the distribution at (-1,1) to control for outliers
(winsorizing produces similar results). We then compute the change in this variable from the effective year to one to
three years thereafter. We compute log sales growth as the natural log of ex-post sales divided by the level of sales
in the effective year.
Variable

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Minimum Median

Maximum Obs.

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.028
0.020
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.017
0.143
0.380
0.366
5.304
0.044
0.083

1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.055
0.639
0.810
1.000
13.962
0.229
0.900

47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394

0.023
0.000
0.077
0.080

4.941
1.906
0.944
0.246

4,932
5,274
5,274
5,274

0.985
0.985
1.321
1.486
3.559
7.179
0.930
0.962
0.935
1.029
0.291
0.304

4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451
4,451

Panel A: Firm Variables
Target Dummy
Acquirer Dummy
Target of Merger Dummy
Acquirer in Merger Dummy
Target of Acq. of Assets Dummy
Acquirer of Acq. of Assets Dummy
Product Similarity (Overall-10)
Product Similarity (10 nearest)
Fraction 10 Nearest Restructuring
Fraction SIC-3 Restructuring
Log Assets
SIC-3 Industry Sales-based HHI
% Neighbor Patent Words

0.151
0.282
0.043
0.104
0.108
0.177
0.017
0.159
0.377
0.371
5.374
0.048
0.147

0.358
0.450
0.202
0.305
0.311
0.382
0.005
0.069
0.115
0.138
2.132
0.026
0.182

Panel B: Transaction Level Variables
Target Ann. Return (-1,+1)
Acquirer Ann. Return (-1,+1)
Gain in Product Differentiation
Merger Pair Similarity

0.095
0.004
0.088
0.093

0.220
0.079
0.076
0.066

-0.878
-0.602
-0.355
0.007

Panel C: Acquirer Ex-Post Real Performance
1-Year
3-Year
1-Year
3-Year
1-Year
3-Year
1-Year
3-Year
1-Year
3-Year
1-Year
3-Year

∆ Profitability (scaled by assets)
∆ Profitability (scaled by assets)
∆ Profitability (scaled by sales)
∆ Profitability (scaled by sales)
Log Sales Growth
Log Sales Growth
∆ COGS (scaled by sales)
∆ COGS (scaled by sales)
∆ SG+A (scaled by sales)
∆ SG+A (scaled by sales)
∆ CAPX (scaled by assets)
∆ CAPX (scaled by assets)

-0.005
-0.016
-0.005
-0.020
0.159
0.270
0.005
0.011
-0.000
0.008
-0.000
-0.001

0.088
0.113
0.126
0.167
0.334
0.558
0.088
0.122
0.079
0.120
0.037
0.045

-0.940
-1.117
-1.136
-1.131
-4.039
-6.090
-0.791
-0.923
-0.974
-0.957
-0.381
-0.435

0.000
-0.004
-0.003
-0.013
0.125
0.233
0.003
0.009
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.000

Table IV: Pearson Correlation Coefficients
Pearson Correlation Coefficients are reported for our sample based on 1997 to 2005. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two
firms use the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to those
of other firms. We compute product similarities based on the ten and one hundred nearest firms and based on all firms excluding the 10 nearest. We also include the fraction of nearest
neighbors who were involved in restructuring transactions in the past year, as well as a similar fraction based on three-digit SIC code groupings. The % neighbor patent words variable
is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent.

Row

Product
Similarity
(All Firms-10)

Variable

Product
Similarity
(100 Nearest)

Product
Similarity
(10 Nearest)

Last Year
10 Nearest
% Restructured

Last Year
SIC-3
% Restructured

Industry
HHI

-0.204
-0.067
-0.080
-0.120

0.547
0.070
-0.431

0.084
-0.277

-0.048

Panel A: Correlation Coefficients
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Product Similarity (100 Nearest)
Product Similarity (10 Nearest)
% Restructured Last Year (100 Nearest)
% Restructured Last Year (SIC-3)
Industry Sales based Herfindahl Index (SIC-3)
% Neighbor Patent Words

0.601
0.520
-0.060
-0.007
-0.097
0.015

0.914
-0.275
-0.095
-0.115
-0.011

Table V: Effect of product similarity on profitability
OLS regressions with profitability defined as operating income divided by sales (Panel A) or Assets (Panel B) as the dependent variable. All specifications include yearly fixed effects
and standard errors account for clustering across year and SIC-3 industries. The sample is from 1997 to 2005, and product similarity is based on the word content of the product
description section of the 10-K filing. A higher similarity measure implies the firm has a product description more closely linked to those of other firms. We compute product
similarities based on the 10 most similar firms. We report Sales HHI (SIC-3) based on the two step fitted method described in Hoberg and Phillips (2008) (accounts for public and
private firms). Log assets is the natural log of COMPUSTAT assets. The log book to market ratio is as defined in Davis, Fama, and French (2000) and we use a dummy to indicate
when the raw book to market ratio is negative. We define Big (Small) firms as those with above (below) median ex-ante book assets.
Depdendent
Row Variable

Sample

Product
Similarity
(10 Nearest)

SIC-3 Sales
HHI
(fitted)

Log
Assets

Log
Book/
Market

Negative
B/M
Dummy

Year+
SIC-3
Fixed Effects

Adj
R2

Obs

0.015
(2.66)
-0.027
(-5.37)
0.025
(3.49)

-0.114
(-8.52)
-0.008
(-0.71)
-0.118
(-7.14)

Yes

0.374

46,312

Yes

0.355

23,160

Yes

0.314

23,152

-0.001
(-0.11)
-0.034
(-11.38)
0.009
(1.52)

-0.099
(-8.92)
0.041
(5.37)
-0.115
(-8.28)

Yes

0.252

46,312

Yes

0.318

23,160

Yes

0.270

23,152

Panel A: Profitability scaled by sales

44

(1)

oi/sales

All Firms

(2)

oi/sales

Big Firms

(3)

oi/sales

Small Firms

(4)

oi/assets

All Firms

(5)

oi/assets

Big Firms

(6)

oi/assets

Small Firms

-0.379
(-2.85)
-0.156
(-2.66)
-0.990
(-4.67)
-0.244
(-3.28)
-0.099
(-3.48)
-0.700
(-5.82)

-0.297
0.057
(-0.80)
(19.82)
-0.343
0.021
(-1.14)
(9.09)
0.099
0.090
(0.16)
(21.70)
Panel B: Profitability scaled by assets
0.004
(0.02)
0.130
(0.85)
0.182
(0.43)

0.037
(14.21)
0.003
(2.82)
0.081
(20.89)

Table VI: Mergers and Acquisitions and Product Similarity
The table displays marginal effects of logistic regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy indicating whether the given firm is an acquirer of a merger or an acquisition of
assets (Panel A) or a target (Panel B). Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K product
descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to those of other firms. The independent variables
include the fraction of nearest neighbors who were involved in restructuring transactions in the past year, as well as the average product similarity of each firm relative to its ten
nearest neighbors, and relative to all firms excluding its ten nearest neighbors. We also include the fraction of past-year restructurings based on three-digit SIC code groupings. The %
neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word
patent. The sample is from 1997 to 2005. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering at the year and industry level. Marginal effects are displayed as percentages.
Dependent
Row Variable

Product
Similarity
(All Firms-10)

Product
Similarity
(10 Nearest)

Industry
HHI (SIC-3)

Last Year
10 Nearest
% Restructured

Last Year
SIC-3
% Restructured

Last Year
% Neighbor
Patent Words

Last Year
Log Total
Assets

5.287
(16.32)
2.891
(10.25)

1.747
(4.61)
2.409
(5.96)
1.971
(5.14)
1.034
(2.16)
1.878
(4.88)

10.250
(34.92)
9.749
(32.18)
10.239
(35.23)
10.368
(35.68)
10.262
(34.96)

2.378
(12.36)
1.045
(5.22)

1.738
(6.50)
2.013
(7.39)
1.796
(6.57)
1.268
(4.79)
1.878
(6.83)

8.289
(44.36)
8.116
(43.98)
8.284
(44.41)
8.465
(44.43)
8.196
(43.80)

Obs

Panel A: Acquirer Likelihood
(1)

Acquirer?

(2)

Acquirer?

(3)

Acquirer?

(4)

Acquirer?

(5)

Acquirer?

2.073
(7.64)
0.671
(3.10)

-3.100
(-7.65)

6.258
(20.25)
7.133
(22.28)
6.499
(20.86)

-1.863
(-6.00)

1.942
(7.66)

-3.308
(-8.14)

-1.297
(-2.76)
-1.662
(-4.10)

4.849
(14.59)

47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394

Panel B: Target Likelihood
(6)

Target?

(7)

Target?

(8)

Target?

(9)

Target?

(10) Target?

0.626
(3.20)
0.061
(0.35)

-1.281
(-4.29)

3.559
(14.82)
3.891
(16.87)
3.632
(15.02)

-0.894
(-3.45)

0.657
(3.35)

-1.225
(-4.05)

0.566
(2.38)
0.420
(1.92)

3.013
(11.75)

47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394

Table VII: M+A and Product Similarity by Transaction Type
The table examines the likelihood of mergers and acquisition of assets. We display marginal effects from logistic regressions. In Panel A, the dependent variable equal to one if the
given firm was a target or acquirer in a merger as identified in column two. In Panel B, we focus on acquisition of assets transactions. Product similarities are measures that lie in the
interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a
product description more closely related to those of other firms. The independent variables include the fraction of nearest neighbors who were involved in restructuring transactions in
the past year, as well as the average product similarity of each firm relative to its ten nearest neighbors, and relative to all firms excluding its ten nearest neighbors. We also include
the fraction of past-year restructurings based on three-digit SIC code groupings. The % neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the
percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent. The sample is from 1997 to 2005. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering at the year
and industry level. Marginal effects are displayed as percentages.
Depdendent
Row Variable

Product
Similarity
(All Firms-10)

Product
Similarity
(10 Nearest)

Industry
HHI (SIC-3)

Last Year
10 Nearest
% Restructured

Last Year
SIC-3
% Restructured

Last Year
% Neighbor
Patent Words

Last Year
Log Total
Assets

0.975
(3.77)
0.724
(3.17)
0.915
(3.75)
-0.395
(-2.78)
-0.613
(-4.27)
-0.399
(-2.75)

4.793
(19.77)
5.005
(21.53)
4.910
(21.96)
1.151
(10.40)
1.301
(11.86)
1.154
(10.36)

0.573
(1.70)
0.195
(0.48)
0.810
(2.35)
2.055
(8.83)
1.739
(7.21)
2.203
(9.39)

5.251
(21.36)
5.185
(22.54)
5.142
(20.47)
7.009
(45.22)
7.060
(44.74)
6.918
(44.80)

Obs

Panel A: Mergers Only
(1)

Acquirer of a Merger

(2)

Acquirer of a Merger

(3)

Acquirer of a Merger

(4)

Target of a Merger

(5)

Target of a Merger

(6)

Target of a Merger

(7)

Acquirer of an Acq of
Assets
(8) Acquirer of an Acq of
Assets
(9) Acquirer of an Acq of
Assets
(10) Target of an Acq of
Assets
(11) Target of an Acq of
Assets
(12) Target of an Acq of
Assets

0.994
(4.11)

0.859
(3.88)
0.276
(2.64)

-0.586
(-1.99)

-0.868
(-3.02)
0.318
(2.43)

0.267
(2.53)

0.293
(2.24)

1.020
(4.59)

-2.660
(-8.28)

1.026
(4.58)
0.419
(2.42)

0.456
(2.64)

-2.611
(-8.09)
-1.891
(-7.44)

-1.816
(-7.11)

1.594
(6.56)
-2.088
(-5.39)
-2.144
(-5.45)

1.176
(5.03)
0.603
(4.76)

-0.246
(-1.94)
-0.150
0.529
(-1.19)
(3.87)
Panel B: Acquisition of Assets Only

1.546
(7.39)
0.946
(4.78)

0.334
(3.07)
0.146
(1.27)

4.644
(16.52)
0.469
(1.46)
0.176
(0.63)

0.731
(3.86)
0.498
(2.92)

3.706
(12.40)
2.980
(13.85)

2.519
(11.49)

3.592
(14.61)
1.873
(8.05)

1.986
(11.46)
0.877
(5.23)

47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394

47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394
47,394

Table VIII: Economic Magnitudes of Predicting Transaction Incidence
The table displays economic magnitudes associated with various findings reported earlier in this study. All magnitudes are predicted values, and all magnitudes are conditional and thus
account for the effects of industry, year and all control variables (based models in earlier tables as noted in panel headers). For each dependent variable being considered (noted in the
description column), we first set all control variables to their mean values and compute the model’s predicted value. The result of this calculation is the value displayed in the “mean”
column in each category. For each independent variable whose economic magnitude we are measuring (product similarity 10 nearest, product similarity overall, and neighbor patent
worlds), which is noted in the column headers, we also compute the model’s predicted value assuming the given independent variable is expected to be in the 10th and 90th percentile
of its distribution, while still holding all control variables fixed at their mean. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use
the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see Appendix 1). We consider similarity based on a firm’s ten closest rivals, and similarity based on all firms in the universe
excluding these ten firms. A higher similarity implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to those of other firms. The % neighbor patent words variable is the
average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent. The sample is from 1997 to 2005.

Row Description

Product Similarity (10 Nearest)
10 %ile
Mean
90 %ile

Product Similarity (All-10)
10 %ile
Mean
90 %ile

Neighbor Patent Words
10 %ile
Mean
90 %ile

Panel A: Target and Acquirer Logit Models (Based on models in Table VI)
1
2

All Firms: Target Incidence
All Firms: Acquirer Incidence

16.6%
19.4%

15.1%
15.1%

13.5%
14.3%
10.8%
12.5%
Panel B: Large Firms

15.1%
15.1%

15.9%
17.7%

12.7%
12.7%

15.1%
15.1%

17.5%
17.5%

3
4

Big Firms: Target Incidence
Big Firms: Acquirer Incidence

23.1%
41.8%

21.3%
37.1%

19.5%
19.7%
32.4%
34.5%
Panel C: Small Firms

21.3%
37.1%

22.8%
39.7%

16.4%
31.5%

21.3%
37.1%

26.2%
42.7%

5
6

Small Firms: Target Incidence
Small Firms: Acquirer Incidence

9.3%
8.9%
8.5%
8.9%
8.9%
22.6%
19.2%
15.8%
16.1%
19.2%
Panel D: Mergers Only (Based on models in Table VII)

8.9%
22.2%

8.7%
18.8%

8.9%
19.2%

9.0%
19.6%

7
8

Mergers Only: Target Incidence
Mergers Only: Acquirer Incidence

4.8%
9.2%

4.3%
10.4%

3.7%
11.6%

9
10

Acq Assets Only: Target Incidence
Acq Assets Only: Acquirer Incidence

8.0%
16.7%

10.8%
17.7%

13.7%
18.8%

3.9%
4.3%
4.7%
3.9%
4.3%
4.6%
11.6%
10.4%
9.3%
9.3%
10.4%
11.6%
Panel E: Acquisition of Assets Only (Based on models in Table VII)
13.1%
21.1%

10.8%
17.7%

8.5%
14.3%

10.3%
16.3%

10.8%
17.7%

11.4%
19.1%

Table IX: Announcement Returns
The table displays panel data regressions in which the dependent variable is the abnormal announcement return of combined target and acquirer. Announcement returns are computed
over various windows including day t=-10 to day t=0 (t=0 is the announcement date) as indicated in the event window column. The combined firm’s raw return is the total market
capitalization of both firms at the end of the event window minus the original market capitalization, divided by the original market capitalization. The abnormal return results after
subtracting the return of the CRSP value weighted market index over each event window. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which
two firms use the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to
those of other firms. We compute product similarities based on the ten nearest firms (for both the acquirer and the target). We also compute the pairwise similarity of the target and
the acquirer. The % neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word
root as the word patent. The same SIC-3 industry dummy is one if the target and acquirer reside in the same three-digit SIC code. The vertical similarity dummy is one if the target
and acquirer are more than 5% vertically related (based on Fan and Goyal (2006)). Target relative size is the ex-ante market value of the target divided by that of the acquirer. The
merger dummy is one if the transaction is a merger and zero if it is an acquisition of assets. Log total size is the natural logarithm of the summed ex-ante market values of the two
firms. Large targets are defined as those at least 10% of the size of the acquirer. The sample is from 1997 to 2005. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering at the year and industry level.

Event
Window

Acquirer
Product
Simil.
to Rivals

Target
Product
Simil.
to Rivals

Gain in
Prod.
Diff. vs.
Rivals

Target +
Acquirer
Pair
Simil.

% Neighbor
Patent
Words

Same
SIC-3
Industry
Dummy

Vert
ical
Simil.
Dummy

Acquirer
Industry
HHI
(SIC-3)

Target
Relative
Size

Full
Merger
Dummy

Merger x
Relative
Size

Log
Total
$ Size

0.000
(0.09)
0.000
(0.05)
0.001
(0.49)
0.001
(0.42)
0.003
(0.89)
0.002
(0.80)
-0.001
(-0.15)
-0.001
(-0.20)

-0.003
(-1.44)
-0.003
(-1.47)
-0.002
(-1.02)
-0.002
(-0.98)
0.003
(1.16)
0.003
(0.96)
0.006
(1.89)
0.006
(1.65)

0.021
(3.16)
0.021
(3.18)
0.023
(3.06)
0.023
(3.08)
0.022
(2.35)
0.022
(2.36)
0.028
(2.79)
0.028
(2.79)

-0.002
(-6.56)
-0.002
(-6.53)
-0.003
(-6.62)
-0.003
(-6.75)
-0.004
(-6.76)
-0.004
(-6.55)
-0.004
(-5.01)
-0.003
(-4.71)

R2

Obs

0.022

4,937

0.022

4,937

0.023

4,937

0.023

4,937

0.024

4,937

0.023

4,937

0.018

4,937

0.018

4,937

Combined Firm Announcement Returns
(1) t=0 only

0.017
(2.32)

-0.015
(-2.21)

(2) t=0 only
(3) t=-1 to 0

0.017
(2.41)
0.015
(1.66)

-0.018
(-2.15)

(4) t=-1 to 0
(5) t=-5 to 0

0.020
(2.52)
0.032
(2.31)

(8) t=-10 to 0

0.026
(2.02)
0.041
(2.42)

0.002
(0.14)

-0.042
(-3.51)

(6) t=-5 to 0
(7) t=-10 to 0

0.007
(0.58)

0.024
(1.32)

-0.037
(-2.67)
0.033
(2.01)

0.047
(2.23)

0.006
(1.35)
0.007
(1.56)
0.006
(1.15)
0.007
(1.39)
0.005
(0.82)
0.008
(1.28)
0.003
(0.50)
0.006
(0.89)

-0.000
(-0.20)
-0.000
(-0.09)
0.002
(1.11)
0.002
(1.22)
0.002
(0.78)
0.001
(0.71)
0.003
(1.23)
0.003
(1.06)

-0.004
(-1.16)
-0.004
(-1.16)
-0.004
(-0.94)
-0.004
(-0.95)
0.000
(0.06)
-0.000
(-0.01)
0.002
(0.21)
0.001
(0.15)

0.012
(1.26)
0.010
(1.02)
0.011
(1.02)
0.008
(0.75)
0.004
(0.25)
-0.003
(-0.19)
-0.002
(-0.12)
-0.007
(-0.41)

Table X: Long Term Performance of Acquirers
The table displays panel data regressions in which three year ex-post (after the effective date) changes in industry-adjusted performance measures are the dependent variable. For a
transaction that becomes effective in year t, ex-post cashflow change or sales growth is the one to three year change in profitability from year t+1 until year t+2 (one year) or t+4
(three year) as noted in the horizon column. The measure of performance in Panel A is operating income divided by assets, in Panel B, it is operating income divided by sales, and in
Panel C, it is log sales growth. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K product
descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to those of other firms. The acquirer product similarity
(10 nearest) is the average similarity between the acquirer and its ten closest rivals. The target and acquirer product similarity is the pairwise similarity between the acquirer and
target firms’ products. The gain in product differentiation is the product distance from the target to the acquirer’s ten nearest neighbors, less the acquirer’s distance to its ten nearest
neighbors. The % neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word
root as the word patent. The same SIC-3 industry dummy is one if the target and acquirer reside in the same three-digit SIC code. The vertical similarity dummy is one if the target
and acquirer are more than 5% vertically related (based on Fan and Goyal (2006)). Target relative size is the ex-ante market value of the target divided by that of the acquirer. The
merger dummy is one if the transaction is a merger and zero if it is an acquisition of assets. Log total size is the natural logarithm of the summed ex-ante market values of the two
firms. The sample is from 1997 to 2005. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering at the year and industry level.

Row

Horizon

Acquirer
Product
Simil.
(10 Near.)

Gain
in Prod.
Diff. vs.
Rivals

Target +
Acquirer
Pair
Simil.

% Neighbor
Patent
Words

Same
SIC-3
Industry
Dummy

Vert
ical
Simil.
Dummy

Acquirer
Industry
HHI
(SIC-3)

Target
Relative
Size

Merger
Dummy

Merger x
Relative
Size

Log
Total
$ Size

0.005
(1.18)
0.017
(2.86)
0.005
(1.15)
0.017
(2.87)

0.002
(0.49)
0.000
(0.00)
0.001
(0.26)
-0.001
(-0.24)

-0.004
(-0.27)
0.005
(0.31)
-0.004
(-0.30)
0.004
(0.26)

0.013
(1.86)
0.026
(2.70)
0.013
(1.88)
0.026
(2.73)

-0.001
(-0.24)
-0.003
(-0.30)
-0.001
(-0.15)
-0.003
(-0.35)

0.069
(3.79)
0.071
(2.36)
0.070
(3.86)
0.074
(2.45)

0.014
(0.99)
-0.006
(-0.26)
0.012
(0.90)
-0.008
(-0.33)

R2

Obs

0.000
(0.35)
-0.002
(-1.39)
0.001
(0.72)
-0.001
(-1.00)

0.004

4,451

0.017

4,451

0.006

4,451

0.018

4,451

-0.006
(-0.35)
0.009
(0.34)
-0.006
(-0.36)
0.009
(0.33)

-0.004
(-2.42)
-0.006
(-3.19)
-0.004
(-2.49)
-0.006
(-3.18)

0.008

4,451

0.017

4,451

0.008

4,451

0.017

4,451

0.049
(1.20)
-0.019
(-0.26)
0.046
(1.13)
-0.025
(-0.33)

-0.015
(-4.27)
-0.014
(-2.63)
-0.014
(-3.82)
-0.012
(-2.22)

0.030

4,451

0.018

4,451

0.027

4,451

0.015

4,451

Panel A: Operating Income/Assets
(1)

1 Year

(2)

3 Year

(3)

1 Year

(4)

3 Year

0.035
(1.39)
0.071
(2.47)
0.034
(1.88)
0.052
(2.27)

0.054
(2.28)
0.085
(2.74)

0.006
(0.49)
0.001
(0.04)
0.007
(0.56)
0.001
(0.05)

-0.003
(-1.01)
-0.008
(-1.96)
-0.004
(-1.12)
-0.009
(-2.05)

-0.006
(-0.75)
-0.031
(-2.86)
-0.006
(-0.74)
-0.031
(-2.81)

0.033
(1.11)
0.080
(1.88)
0.034
(1.17)
0.083
(1.97)

Panel B: Operating Income/sales
(5)

1 Year

(6)

3 Year

(7)

1 Year

(8)

3 Year

(9)

1 Year

(10)

3 Year

(11)

1 Year

(12)

3 Year

0.020
(0.42)
0.049
(0.96)
0.020
(0.58)
0.015
(0.38)

-0.002
(-0.05)
0.032
(0.64)

0.025
(1.75)
0.023
(0.89)
0.024
(1.68)
0.021
(0.84)

-0.005
(-1.13)
-0.010
(-1.78)
-0.005
(-0.99)
-0.010
(-1.69)

0.296
(3.78)
0.488
(3.56)

0.002
(0.05)
-0.016
(-0.16)
-0.005
(-0.11)
-0.029
(-0.30)

0.009
(0.80)
0.011
(0.59)
0.009
(0.83)
0.012
(0.64)

-0.002
(-0.21)
-0.044
(-2.97)
-0.002
(-0.18)
-0.044
(-2.95)

0.056
(1.60)
0.077
(1.44)
0.058
(1.73)
0.082
(1.53)

Panel C: Log Sales Growth
0.410
(5.83)
0.714
(5.31)
0.275
(4.37)
0.472
(4.05)

-0.001
(-0.04)
-0.008
(-0.16)
0.003
(0.10)
-0.001
(-0.02)

-0.180
(-2.05)
-0.022
(-0.16)
-0.153
(-1.78)
0.026
(0.19)

Table XI: Ex-post Product Descriptions of Acquirers
The table displays panel data regressions in which three year ex-post (from year t+1 to t+4) logarithmic growth in the size of the firm’s product description is the dependent variable.
Size of the product description is measured as the number of words. Firms with larger increases in the size of their product description are interpreted as having introduced more
products relative to other firms. For a transaction that becomes effective in year t, ex-post product line growth is the one to three year growth in the size of the product description
size from year t+1 until year t+2 (one year), t+3, and t+4 (three year) as noted in the horizon column. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the
degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K product descriptions (see Appendix 1). A higher similarity measure implies that the firm has a product description more
closely related to those of other firms. The acquirer product similarity (10 nearest) is the average similarity between the acquirer and its ten closest rivals. The target and acquirer
product similarity is the pairwise similarity between the acquirer and target firms’ products. The gain in product differentiation is the product distance from the target to the
acquirer’s ten nearest neighbors, less the acquirer’s distance to its ten nearest neighbors. The % neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest neighbors of the
percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent. The same SIC-3 industry dummy is one if the target and acquirer reside in the
same three-digit SIC code. The vertical similarity dummy is one if the target and acquirer are more than 5% vertically related (based on Fan and Goyal (2006)). Target relative size is
the ex-ante market value of the target divided by that of the acquirer. The merger dummy is one if the transaction is a merger and zero if it is an acquisition of assets. Log total size is
the natural logarithm of the summed ex-ante market values of the two firms. The initial product description size is the natural logarithm of the total number of words in the firm’s
initial (year t+1) product description. The sample is from 1997 to 2005. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering at the year and industry level.

Row

Horizon

(1)

1 Year

(2)

2 Year

(3)

3 Year

(4)

1 Year

(5)

2 Year

(6)

3 Year

Acquirer
Product
Simil.
(10 Near.)

Gain
in Prod.
Diff. vs.
Rivals

Target +
Acquirer
Pair
Simil.

% Neighbor
Patent
Words

0.891
(4.68)
0.943
(4.54)
0.812
(3.69)

0.074
(1.19)
0.074
(1.13)
0.209
(2.97)
0.068
(1.10)
0.064
(0.98)
0.195
(2.77)

Same
SIC-3
Industry
Dummy

Vert
ical
Simil.
Dummy

Acquirer
Industry
HHI
(SIC-3)

Target
Relative
Size

Merger
Dummy

Merger x
Relative
Size

Log
Total
$ Size

Initial
Prod.
Desc.
Size

-0.011
(-0.34)
-0.013
(-0.38)
-0.014
(-0.40)
-0.026
(-0.83)
-0.029
(-0.80)
-0.027
(-0.74)

0.108
(1.69)
0.094
(1.16)
-0.009
(-0.10)
0.100
(1.59)
0.085
(1.05)
-0.019
(-0.20)

0.015
(2.86)
0.018
(2.98)
0.014
(2.59)
0.019
(3.47)
0.022
(3.49)
0.018
(3.10)

-0.275
(-11.72)
-0.361
(-15.83)
-0.396
(-17.01)
-0.273
(-11.83)
-0.357
(-15.84)
-0.389
(-16.90)

R2

Obs

0.118

3,898

0.155

3,898

0.177

3,898

0.120

3,898

0.156

3,898

0.176

3,898

Panel A: Ex post growth in product description
0.610
(3.56)
0.727
(4.22)
0.716
(3.58)
0.213
(1.35)
0.263
(1.66)
0.181
(1.06)

-0.024
(-1.24)
-0.021
(-0.88)
-0.002
(-0.10)
-0.034
(-1.77)
-0.031
(-1.31)
-0.011
(-0.45)

0.122
(2.69)
0.119
(2.17)
0.162
(2.85)
0.125
(2.72)
0.123
(2.28)
0.166
(2.91)

0.021
(0.15)
0.056
(0.30)
0.056
(0.27)
0.076
(0.55)
0.124
(0.69)
0.133
(0.67)

-0.051
(-1.43)
-0.037
(-0.94)
-0.027
(-0.67)
-0.047
(-1.32)
-0.031
(-0.80)
-0.020
(-0.50)

Table XII: Economic Magnitudes of Returns and Real Outcomes
The table displays economic magnitudes associated with various findings reported earlier in this study. All magnitudes are predicted values, and all magnitudes are conditional and
thus account for the effects of industry, year and all control variables. For each dependent variable being considered (noted in the panel headers and the description column), we first
set all control variables to their mean values and compute the model’s predicted value. The result of this calculation is the value displayed in the “mean” column in each category. For
each independent variable whose economic magnitude we are measuring (product similarity 10 nearest, product similarity overall, and neighbor patent worlds), which is noted in the
column headers, we also compute the model’s predicted value assuming the given independent variable is expected to be in the 10th and 90th percentile of its distribution, while still
holding all control variables fixed at their mean. Product similarities are measures that lie in the interval (0,1) based on the degree to which two firms use the same words in their 10-K
product descriptions (see Appendix 1). We consider similarity based on a firm’s ten closest rivals, and similarity based on all firms in the universe excluding these ten firms. A higher
similarity implies that the firm has a product description more closely related to those of other firms. The % neighbor patent words variable is the average over a firm’s ten nearest
neighbors of the percentage of words in the 10-K product description having the same word root as the word patent. The sample is from 1997 to 2005.

Row Description

10 %ile

Product Similarity (10 Nearest)
Mean
90 %ile

10 %ile

Neighbor Patent Words
Mean
90 %ile

Panel A: Announcement Returns (Based on models in Table IX)
1
2

Combined Firm Ann Returns (t=0)
Combined Firm Ann Returns (t=-10 to t=0)

3
4
5
8
7
8

∆ OI/Assets: 1 Year (A)
∆ OI/Assets: 3 Year (A)
∆ OI/Sales: 1 Year (A)
∆ OI/Sales: 3 Year (A)
Sales Growth: 1 Year (A)
Sales Growth: 3 Year (A)

0.3%
0.5%
0.6%
0.4%
2.2%
2.6%
3.0%
2.5%
Panel B: Profitability and Sales Growth (Based on models in Table X)
-0.9%
-2.3%
-0.6%
-2.4%
11.9%
20.0%

-0.5%
-1.6%
-0.5%
-2.0%
15.9%
27.0%

-0.2%
-0.9%
-0.3%
-1.5%
19.9%
33.9%

-0.7%
-1.6%
-1.0%
-2.4%
15.8%
27.3%

0.5%
2.6%

0.6%
2.7%

-0.5%
-1.6%
-0.5%
-2.0%
15.9%
27.0%

-0.4%
-1.6%
0.1%
-1.5%
15.9%
26.6%

3.3%
3.3%

5.0%
7.9%

Panel C: Growth in Product Descriptions (Based on models in Table XI)
9
10

Prod Desc Growth: 1 Year (A)
Prod Desc Growth: 3 Year (A)

-2.4%
-3.4%

3.3%
3.3%

9.1%
10.1%

1.7%
-1.3%

Figure 1:
The large dashed circles give a visual depiction of Symantec’s and Veritas’s ten closest rival firms determined using our measure of product similarity
described in Section II. Symantec and Veritas are both within each other’s circle of ten nearest rivals. Each firm has a header beginning with the letter “S”
or “V” followed by a number. This identifies which firm’s circle of ten nearest rivals the given firm exists in, and also how close the given firm is to either
Symantec or Veritas. For example, McAfee has a code “S7” and is thus Symantec’s seventh closest rival. Veritas is Symantec’s 18th closest rival, and thus is
an example of a firm that is similar to Symantec, but a firm that also might offer Symantec added product differentiation relative to its very closest rivals.
For each firm, we also report its primary three-digit SIC code in parentheses.

S9 CDSS
Wind Dn
(678)

S6 Watch
guard
(737)

S7 Mc
Afee
(737)

S8 Tipp
ingpoint
(366)

S10 Sec
ure Comp
(737)
S4 Web
sense
(737)
S2 Cyb
erguard
(737)
S5 Saba
Software
(737)

V9 BEA
Systems
(737)
S1 Inter
Net Sec
(737)

V37
Symantec
(737)

S3 Bind
iew Dev
(737)

V1 Que
st Soft.
(737)

V3
Datalink
(737)

S18
Veritas
(737)

V2 Fal
constore
(357)

V4 Net
work App
(357)

V10 Crit
ical Path
(737)

V7 Sun
Micro.
(357)

V5 EMC
Corp
(357)

V6
Altiris
(737)

V8
Novell
(737)

Figure 2:
The large dashed circles give a visual depiction of Disney’s and Pixar’s ten closest rival firms determined using our measure of product similarity described
in Section II. Disney and Pixar are both within each other’s circle of ten nearest rivals. The one firm in the middle (News Corp) is common to both Disney
and Pixar’s circle of ten nearest rivals. Each firm has a header beginning with the letter “D” or “P” followed by a number. This identifies which firm’s circle
of ten nearest rivals the given firm exists in, and also how close the given firm is to either Disney or Pixar. For example, Six Flags has a code “D4” and is
thus Disney’s fourth closest rival. Pixar is Disney’s ninth closest rival, and thus is an example of a firm that is similar to Disney, but a firm that also might
offer Disney added product differentiation relative to its very closest rivals. For each firm, we also report its primary three-digit SIC code in parentheses.

D10 Nat.
Lampoon
(678)

D6 Cedar
Fair
(799)

D7 Ion
Media
(483)
D4 Six
Flags
(799)
D2 CBS
(483)

D5 Cable
vision
(484)

D8 Live
Nation
(790)

P5 Activision
(737)

D3 Gay
Lord Ent
(710)

P9 Marvel
Ent.
(679)

P1 Dreamworks
(781)
P6
Disney
(737)
D1+P8
NewsCorp
(781)

D9
Pixar
(781)
P2 IMAX
Corp
(386)

P10
Majesco
(737)

P3 DTS
Inc
(679)

P4 Avid
Tech
(386)

P7 Point
360
(781)

Figure 3:
Distribution of product similarity for random firm pairings and merger pairings. Each plot is an
empirical density function, and total probability mass sums to one. The lower axis reflects
similarities between zero and 100 (similarities are displayed as percentages for convenience). We
truncate displayed results at 50%. The small number of outliers with values higher than 50% are
represented by the probability mass assigned to the last bin. The random firm pairings group is
based on the subsample of firms that merged, but the differences are taken with respect to a
randomly chosen pair of firms in this subsample (results nearly identical in set of firms that did not
merge). The lower four plots are based on actual merger pairs.
Random Firm Pairings
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

50

48

46

44

42

40

38

36

34

32

30

28

24

26

22

20

18

16

14

12

8

10

6

4

2

0

0

Merger Pairings (All)
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

40

42

40

42

44

46

48

50

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

38

40

42

44

46

48

50

50

38
38

36
36

46

36
36

34
34

48

34
34

44

32
32

32
32

30

28

26

24

20

22

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

Merger Pairings (Same SIC-3)
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

Merger Pairings (Same SIC-2)

0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0

Merger Pairings (Different SIC-2)

30

28

26

24

22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

