NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL BUDGET RULES:
THE US EXPERIENCE
Alan J. Auerbach
Working Paper 14288
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14288

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

This paper was presented at a conference on Fiscal Rules and Institutions organized by the Economic
Council of Sweden, Stockholm, October 2007. I am grateful to my discussant, Torbjörn Becker, to
other conference participants, and to Dhammika Dharmapala, Bill Gale, Richard Kogan and Dan Shaviro
for comments on earlier drafts. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Alan J. Auerbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Federal Budget Rules: The US Experience
Alan J. Auerbach
NBER Working Paper No. 14288
August 2008
JEL No. D78,H62,J11
ABSTRACT
Like many other developed economies, the United States has imposed fiscal rules in attempting to
impose a degree of fiscal discipline on the political process of budget determination. The federal government
has operated under a series of budget control regimes that have been complex in nature and of debatable
impact. Much of the complexity of these federal budget regimes relates to the structure of the U.S.
federal government. The controversy over the impact of different regimes relates to the fact that the
rules have no constitutional standing, leading to the question of whether they do more than clarify
a government's intended policies.
In this paper, I review US federal budget rules and present some evidence on their possible effects.
From an analysis of how components of the federal budget behaved under the different budget regimes,
it appears that the rules did have some effects, rather than simply being statements of policy intentions.
The rules may also have had some success at deficit control, although such conclusions are highly
tentative given the many other factors at work during the different periods. Even less certain is the
extent to which the various rules achieved whatever objectives underlay their introduction.

Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
508-1 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Like many other developed economies, the United States has imposed fiscal rules in
attempting to impose a degree of fiscal discipline on the political process of budget
determination. But the U.S. experience has differed from that of the European Union under
the Stability and Growth Pact, for example, in that U.S. budget rules operate at different levels
of government. Relatively tight rules apply at the level of U.S. states, with virtually all states
operating under some sort of annual balanced budget requirement, with the consequence that
state fiscal responses to budget shocks tend to be rapid and sharp.1 At the national level,
however, occasional attempts over the years to pass a balanced-budget amendment to the U.S.
constitution have not succeeded, and the federal government has operated under a series of
budget control regimes that have been complex in nature and of debatable impact.
Much of the complexity of these federal budget regimes relates to the structure of the
U.S. federal government, with its constitutionally specified separation of powers between the
legislative and executive branches and its bicameral legislature, which often has different
operating rules and procedures in the House and the Senate. The controversy over the impact
of different regimes relates to their temporal nature: as the rules are adopted by the
government to which they apply and have no constitutional standing, they can be (and have
been) frequently modified over time, leading to the question of whether the rules do more than
clarify a government’s intended policies.
In this paper, I review the federal budget rules that have been practiced in the United
States in recent decades and present some evidence on the effects that these rules may have
had on the fiscal policies of the federal government. Although the focus is primarily positive
in nature – what the rules have accomplished – I will also touch on the normative question of
how rules might be designed.

1

See Bohn and Inman (1996), Poterba (1997), Auerbach (2003).

1. Budget Regimes
The modern period for U.S. budget policy is often viewed as dating from 1974, with
the passage of the Congressional Budget Act (CBA). The CBA elevated the role of Congress
in the budget process, establishing a Budget Committee in each house of Congress and
creating the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) to provide budget projections needed to
implement the legislation. Under the CBA, both houses of Congress pass a resolution laying
out limits on revenues and spending for the coming year, and subsequent legislation is
supposed to adhere to these limits.
The CBA provided a coordination mechanism for Congressional budget actions, and
also introduced the practice of providing multi-year budget projections to Congress, a practice
that eventually would play a role in the formulation of budget rules. However, the CBA did
not restrict the size of government or the ability of government to increase spending or cut
taxes. Indeed, historically large (as a share of GDP) peacetime deficits followed soon after, in
the 1980s, as a consequence of the very large Reagan tax cuts in 1981 and two recessions, one
very severe, early in the decade.2
In late 1985, Congress passed the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings (GRH) bill, which
specified a series of annual deficits to be achieved, culminating in a balanced budget in fiscal
year 1991. The legislation required that the budget the President submitted each year be
consistent with that year’s deficit target, and that Congress pass legislation in accord with the
deficit target. If legislated policy was projected to miss the deficit target, then an automatic
“sequestration” process would ensue, cutting the budget according to a specified allocation
rule in order to meet the deficit target. The sequestration procedures were modified in 1987
after the first version of GRH was found unconstitutional by the Supreme Court on the basis

2

Although there was also a large increase in defense spending during the period, there was also a cut in nondefense spending, so that there was little overall trend in federal spending as a share of GDP during this period.
See Figure 1 below and, for further discussion, Auerbach (2006a).

-2-

that Congress had assumed a role constitutionally reserved for the Executive branch; the 1987
legislation also relaxed the target deficit reduction path to one in which a zero deficit was to
be achieved in 1993, rather than in 1991.
The sequestration process was avoided while GRH remained in force, but the
combination of declining target deficits and a recession that began in the summer of 1990 led
to a budget crisis when policies producing very large deficit cuts would have been required to
stay on the prescribed deficit path. In the fall of that year, as the culmination of a protracted
“budget summit” meeting of President George H. W. Bush and leaders of Congress, GRH was
scrapped and replaced with the Budget Enforcement Act (BEA).
The BEA eliminated annual deficit targets and instituted targets for discretionary
spending, a category that excludes social insurance spending for health, Social Security
(public retirement and disability pensions), unemployment and other “entitlement” programs.
For the budget as a whole, BEA specified “pay-as-you-go” (PAYGO) restrictions on taxes
and entitlement spending (other than Social Security), requiring that legislation on such items
not increase the deficit, in the aggregate. Thus, except for discretionary spending, the budget
rule now applied to legislated changes in policy, rather than to actual levels of spending or
revenue. Changes in taxes or entitlement spending that resulted from economic growth,
inflation, shifts in the income distribution or any other economic factors not directly
attributable to policy actions were ignored when determining if the budget rule were satisfied.
Thus, any cyclical or trend movements in the deficit, revenues or expenditures, except those
associated with discretionary spending, were left outside the process.
The BEA also introduced the use of a multi-year budget “window,” requiring initially
that the PAYGO requirement be satisfied over a five-year period, based on CBO projections,
rather than just for the immediate fiscal year in which legislation was enacted. The aim of
including several years was to incorporate the future effects of policy actions and to reduce

-3-

the scope for using short-term timing changes to meet a one-year deficit target. The BEA
originally applied through 1995, but it was extended to 1998 and then to 2002 by legislation in
1993 and 1997, respectively, before officially expiring in 2002.
For much of the period during which the BEA was in force with respect to
Congressional legislation, the Senate followed additional rules with respect to its own
operations.3 In 1993, the Senate adopted a 10-year PAYGO rule. In addition to imposing a
longer horizon on budget policy, the Senate rule also effectively included a supermajority
provision: a point of order could be raised in objection to legislation that violated the PAYGO
rule, and 60 votes (of 100 in the Senate) are required to overrule a valid point of order.
Another restriction on Senate budget policy was included in the so-called Byrd rule
(adopted in 1983), which made subject to a point of order certain proposals that would
increase the deficit beyond the budget window. The Byrd rule became quite relevant in 2001,
when the tax cuts proposed by President George W. Bush were adopted for only a ten-year
period. Because of the possibility that Republicans would be unable to muster 60 votes to
override the point of order based on the Byrd rule, the tax cuts were enacted to apply only
during the budget window. Although there have been subsequent modifications to some
provisions of the 2001 legislation, current law still specifies that marginal income tax rates
will rise in 2011 to their pre-2001 levels, and that the federal estate tax, having been fully
phased out in 2010, will reappear in 2011 in its pre-2001 form.
Although the BEA was officially in place through 2002, it began to erode after 1998,
the fiscal year in which the United States had its first budget surplus since the 1960s. At first,
the erosion took the form of procedures used to get around the BEA’s restrictions. For
example, 1999 saw a huge increase in “emergency” discretionary spending, a spending
category not subject to the BEA’s discretionary spending caps (CBO 1999); much of this

3

See Heniff (2007).

-4-

spending had little to do with actual emergencies. Eventually, however, Congress simply
changed the budget rules as it went, adjusting the discretionary spending caps to conform to
actual spending and setting aside the PAYGO rules on a case-by-case basis, even before they
expired. Thus, it was possible to adopt a large tax cut in 2001 with no offsetting revenue
increases or entitlement spending reductions, even though BEA was still officially in force.
In the years since, Congress has acted essentially without budget rules of the type
embodied in GRH or BEA, even though it has used the Congressional Budget Act and the
annual budget plans it requires to impose limits on the budget effects of certain legislation, as
in 2003, when a 10-year budget cost of $350 billion was imposed before the details of a tax
cut were worked out. (This episode is discussed further below.) The 2007 change in the
control of Congress that resulted from the November, 2006 elections has led to a renewal of
interest in budget rules and the enactment by the House and Senate of 10-year PAYGO rules
applicable to the consideration of legislation by these bodies, although this development
comes after the sample period covered by the data analyzed below.
The repeal of GRH in 1990 and the collapse of BEA after 1998 both illustrate a
characteristic of U.S. federal budget rules: the rules cease to operate once they deviate too far
from consensus policy. In 1990, GRH called for deficit reduction far greater than Congress
wished to enact. After 1998, adherence to BEA would have resulted in significant budget
discipline for which Congress had little taste, given that the federal budget had moved into
surplus and that CBO was projecting even larger surpluses for the years to come, assuming
continued compliance with BEA’s discretionary spending caps and PAYGO rules.
That these rules should ultimately have failed is not surprising, given that they were
adopted by majority vote and could be repealed by majority vote. Indeed, one might question
whether they had any impact at all, given that they could be adjusted at will and indeed were
frequently modified. That is, unlike a constitutional amendment which, once adopted, is very

-5-

difficult to repeal, U.S. federal budget rules have the same permanence as any other piece of
legislation.
At the same time, it is possible that a change in the budget process, even if adopted by
simple majority, can change budget outcomes, by altering each legislator’s incentives and
ability to promote deficit-increasing legislation even while a majority continues to support the
budget rule. For example4, suppose that each legislator prefers a low overall deficit to a
higher one, but also wishes to promote his own spending priorities. Under this assumption,
each legislator might prefer an equilibrium outcome of low spending and a low deficit to one
with proportionally higher spending on all programs and a higher deficit. With no budget rule
in place, however, there may be no commitment mechanism in place to facilitate cooperation
on keeping spending low. Legislators may find it optimal to push their own spending
programs, knowing that other legislators will do the same; if any legislator failed to push his
own program in this case, the deficit would still be high and he would lose out on the
spending side. With an overall spending limit in place, however, the lobbying of individual
members may cancel out, given that increasing spending for one program requires decreasing
it for another. This could lead to an equilibrium outcome with proportionately lower spending
and a low deficit, an outcome that legislators would prefer to the high-deficit-high-spending
outcome with no budget rule. Thus, the outcome achieved under a budget rule might be
consistent with the contemporaneous wishes of the majority, while at the same time
representing a different outcome than would occur without the budget rule in place.
Even if budget rules shift the equilibrium with respect to the deficit and the level and
composition of spending, there is a question of the extent to which the measured changes
reflect real economic changes, as opposed to short-run timing or manipulations of accounting

4

See Dharmapala (2006) for a rigorous analysis along these lines.

-6-

rules. For instance, Reischauer (1990) estimates that half of the deficit reduction achieved
during the GRH period fell into the “one-time savings” category including asset sales.
But there are more subtle types of timing and accounting manipulations than those that
can be easily identified. In 1997, for example, Congress introduced a tax-favored saving
scheme (the Roth Individual Retirement Account, or Roth IRA) that exempted returns from
taxation, as an alternative to an existing scheme (the traditional IRA) that provided a tax
deduction for contributions but then taxed all withdrawals of interest and principal. The
legislation also offered tax incentives to switch funds from traditional IRAs to Roth IRAs.
While the two schemes are economically similar (and equivalent when tax rates are constant
over time), the timing of tax revenues differs between the two. The Roth IRA generates
revenue losses of comparable present value as the traditional IRA, but these revenue losses
occur later. Switches of funds from traditional IRAs into Roth IRAs actually increase shortrun revenue by speeding up the payment of taxes on withdrawals from the traditional IRAs.
Thus, the introduction of the Roth IRA was actually estimated to increase tax revenue over the
budget window, even while representing a permanent reduction in the present value of tax
revenue, because of the tax incentives provided for switching.5
As the preceding example illustrates, it difficult if not impossible to specify which
budget changes are “real” and which are not, and this makes the task of measuring the effects
of budget rules more difficult. So, too, does the absence of a counterfactual policy path, for
determining whether policies followed under any particular budget rule would have occurred
under a different budget regime.
With these obstacles in mind, it is helpful to consider many different types of evidence
in trying to understand the potential impact of U.S. budget rules. Based on the discussion

5

The present value of tax revenue was also reduced by the fact that the overall limits to contributions to these
accounts are based on before-tax dollars, making the out-of-pocket contributions and hence the associated
revenue loss smaller under the traditional IRA than under the Roth IRA.

-7-

above, one can distinguish up to five potentially distinct periods, depending on data
availability: (1) the era prior to the 1974 Congressional Budget Act, under which no explicit
budget rules were in effect; (2) the CBA period, from the 1974 adoption of the CBA until the
1985 passage of the first Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act, during which budget policy was
coordinated but no exogenous restrictions on spending or taxes were imposed; (3) the GRH
period, from late 1985 until the late-1990 adoption of the Budget Enforcement Act, during
which explicit one-year deficit targets were specified; (4) the BEA period, from adoption of
BEA until its effective demise around 1999, during which discretionary spending caps and
PAYGO rules for taxes and entitlement spending were in force; and (5) the post-BEA period
from 1999 to the present, during which limited budget rules have applied. To the extent that
the rules of these different regimes were effective, one would expect the effects to be
different. We look for these differences in the analysis that follows
2. The Impact of Budget Rules
To provide a sense of how the U.S. budget evolved during the different policy regimes
just described, I begin with some figures showing spending, revenues and the budget deficit
over the past forty-five fiscal years.6
2.1. Overall Trends
Figure 1 shows total revenue and total non-interest spending at the federal level as a
share of potential GDP, along with a breakdown of non-interest spending into three
components, entitlement spending, defense spending, and other discretionary spending. It is
useful to break spending into these three components. Entitlement spending is less subject to
year-to-year policy changes and also has a strong positive trend related to demographic shifts

6

All annual data are taken from the Congressional Budget Office web site, which when this paper was written
provided information for fiscal years 1962-2006. The U.S. fiscal year runs from October 1 of the previous
calendar year through September 30 of the current calendar year.

-8-

and medical costs. Defense spending, even with the recent increase, has followed a
downward trend, with large temporary upward movements during the Vietnam War and the
first part of the Reagan administration that were clearly not related to short-term budget
conditions. Non-defense discretionary spending, on the other hand, shows no obvious trend
as a share of potential GDP for the period as a whole, although there are minor trends during
some of the budget regime sub-periods, including declines during the GRH and BEA periods
and an increase in the most recent, post-BEA, period.
Total non-interest spending and revenue each average just over 18 percent of potential
GDP for the period, again with no obvious trend for the period as a whole but sub-period
trends, notably with spending falling and revenue rising during the BEA period and the
reverse occurring in the post-BEA period.
Figure 2 presents the federal deficit as a share of potential GDP over the same period,
simply the difference between total spending and revenues from Figure 1, plus debt service.
The biggest trends here are the rise during the BEA period and the subsequent fall. The trends
during these periods are reduced if one considers the full-employment surplus, and it is clear
that the break in trend occurs not with the effective end of the BEA, dated here as after 1998,
but with the transition from the Clinton administration to the Bush administrations. This
distinction serves as a reminder that there were many changes in the policy environment
occurring over the period, making it difficult to determine the particular impact of budget
rules. It is therefore useful to focus on more subtle differences in revenue and spending
patterns among the regimes, rather than simple trends in spending, revenue, and the budget
deficit, which would be expected to vary with other important factors, such as the parties in
control of the Presidency and Congress.

-9-

2.2. The Responsiveness of Discretionary Spending
As just discussed, non-defense discretionary spending experienced no overall trend as
a share of potential GDP in the years since 1962. This spending category is perhaps the most
susceptible to budget restrictions, given that entitlement spending is not directly driven by
annual appropriations, and defense spending depends very strongly on factors external to the
budget process. Moreover, discretionary spending has figured differently in the various
budget regimes that have applied over time.
Absent any explicit budget rules, we might expect discretionary spending to increase
with the health of the budget, as measured by the most recent budget surplus, if the surplus
provides a signal of the resources available to the government. We might also expect
discretionary spending to increase with the size of the output gap between potential and actual
GDP, based on Keynesian objectives to stimulate the economy when in recession or a period
of slow economic growth.7
Table 1 provides estimates, based on annual fiscal year data, of the impact of the prior
year’s budget surplus and output gap on the change in non-defense discretionary spending
from the previous year, with all series scaled by potential GDP. The first column of the table
presents this relationship estimated for the full sample period. As the column shows, this
expected relationship holds weakly for the full sample period. The relationship is much
stronger for the period prior to the Congressional Budget Act, as illustrated in the next column
of Table 1. For the years 1963-1974, changes in non-defense discretionary spending rose by
17 cents for every dollar increase in the previous fiscal year’s budget surplus, and by 7 cents
for each additional dollar by which actual GDP fell short of potential GDP. This represents

7

Such spending increases would largely reflect explicit policy actions, rather than automatic stabilizers, as most
automatic stabilizers in the United States operate on the tax side, with revenues rising and falling with the level
of economic activity. Those components of spending that do respond to the business cycle, such as
unemployment compensation, are entitlement programs.

- 10 -

considerable sensitivity for a spending category that has averaged just below 4 percent of
GDP over years.
This strong relationship entirely disappears during the CBA period, which overlapped
the administrations of three presidents (from both parties), three recessions, and a rise and
then a fall in non-defense discretionary spending. There were certainly large year-to-year
changes in spending, but they appear not to have been related to the condition of the budget or
the economy. Whether this change in responsiveness is attributable to the increased
coordination of spending facilitated by the CBA is difficult to assess. It may be that the
change in responsiveness is related to the weakening of the power of Congressional
committee chairs that happened around the same time, as a consequence of procedural
reforms adopted during the post-Watergate era. These reforms may also have contributed to
the jump in non-defense discretionary spending and entitlements at the beginning of the CBA
period.
During the very short GRH period8, the very strong relationship of spending to the
budget surplus reappears, but the response to the GDP gap does not. Although so short a
sample period makes any conclusions tentative, both of these results are quite consistent with
what one would expect, given the way that the GRH rules worked. As each year’s budget
surplus was required to hit a pre-specified target, any improvement in the condition of the
budget made more resources available for spending increases or tax cuts. But an increase in
the output gap had no such effect, because the deficit targets were not adjusted for the
business cycle.

8

I exclude from the sample the fiscal year during which GRH was adopted, 1986, because the adoption of GRH
was accompanied by a very large cut in spending. Given the contemporaneous nature of these changes, it is hard
to argue that the spending cut is attributable to the budget rule. I follow the same procedure below, excluding the
observation that included the fiscal-year 1991 adoption of BEA, which resulted from a budget summit at which
spending cuts and tax increases (which reversed President Bush’s campaign pledge of “no new taxes”) were also
agreed to.

- 11 -

The behavior of discretionary spending under BEA was similar to that under CBA, not
responsive to the budget surplus and not significantly responsive to the GDP gap. With
discretionary spending caps in place, spending could only respond to the economy or to the
budget if the caps themselves could respond, or if exceptions (such as emergency spending)
could be arranged. The estimates suggest that neither of these channels was significant during
the period, even though the caps were revised in 1993 and 1997 when the provisions of BEA
were extended to later years. It must be noted that the majority of this period was one in
which the President and Congress were controlled by different parties, with President Bush
and a Democratic Congress during most of fiscal year 1992 and President Clinton and a
Republican Congress during most of fiscal years 1995-98. An alternative explanation of the
lack of spending responsiveness might be “gridlock” between the President and Congress, but
split government (a Republican President and a Democratic Congress) also characterized most
of the GRH period, when spending is estimated to have responded strongly to the budget.
In the most recent period, after the effective demise of BEA, discretionary spending
has reverted to a pattern of significant responses to both the budget surplus and the GDP gap.
The response to the surplus is weaker than under GRH, but this makes sense, given that there
is no explicit deficit target.
These results are consistent with budget rules having had some impact on non-defense
discretionary spending, although this conclusion applies to the responses of spending to the
economy and the budget, and not necessarily to the level of spending itself. Except perhaps
for the lack of responsiveness during the CBA period, the patterns are consistent with the
restrictions imposed during the different budget periods, and so represent a more subtle form
of evidence than that based on levels or the composition of spending, which might more easily
be explained by alternative hypotheses regarding policy decisions during the different periods.

- 12 -

In short, it is hard to argue that this evidence is consistent with the budget rules being simply
endogenous reflections of the policies of each period.
2.3. The Responsiveness of Spending and Revenue Legislation
Some elements of budget rules have involved levels of the deficit or its components.
For example, GRH had deficit targets and BEA had caps on discretionary spending. But BEA
also placed limits on legislated changes in spending and revenues, under its PAYGO rules.
Thus, we should observe changes in patterns of these legislated changes if BEA had an
impact.
To construct measures of legislated changes in revenue and expenditure, I utilize data
and procedures developed in earlier papers, including Auerbach (2003, 2006). CBO typically
publishes two major revisions in its projections of revenue and spending each year, in late
January or early February, and in August or September. Each revision indicates the changes
from the previous forecast and divides these changes into components due to legislation and
to other factors. By accumulating changes attributed to legislative action between each of
these forecasts (including intermediate revisions), one may derive a continuous, roughly
semiannual series of forecast policy changes in revenue and spending, beginning with changes
between winter and summer, 1984.9
For each observation, I measure the policy change with respect to revenue and noninterest spending. As each update includes legislative changes for the current fiscal year and
several subsequent years, these must be combined in some manner to provide a measure of the
legislation’s overall effect. I form the discounted sum of changes adopted during the interval
for the current and subsequent four fiscal years (relative to each year’s corresponding measure

9

Prior to 1984, there was a transition period during which observations were produced at different intervals.

- 13 -

of potential GDP), with the five weights normalized to sum to 1 and a discount factor of 0.5.10
Just as current policy changes have effects in future fiscal years, policy may respond to
future fiscal conditions as well. Thus, as an alternative to the most recent budget surplus, one
might wish to use a measure based on the budget surpluses projected over the budget period,
which are included in the CBO projections. To be consistent with the aggregate policy
measure just developed, I aggregate the projected surplus for the current and next four fiscal
years, as of the beginning of the period of observation, using the same discount factor as is
used in constructing the policy measure.
Table 2 presents results based on these constructed measures, starting with those for
the full period available, beginning with the observation for change in projections from winter
to summer 1984, labeled 1984:2, and ending with the changes in August, 2007. In the first
two columns of the table, the explanatory variables are the previous fiscal year’s actual budget
surplus, and the estimated GDP gap in the most recent quarter before the policy change being
explained. For example, the gap from the last quarter of calendar-year 2006 is used for the
last observation. The first column in Table 2 presents results for the full sample period with
revenue as the dependent variable; the second column has the same specification but with
non-interest spending as the dependent variable. Both sets of results show significant policy
responses to both the budget surplus and the output gap, in the anticipated directions, with
deficit-increasing policies resulting from higher surpluses or a higher output gap.
The third and fourth columns repeat these results, but with the weighted projected
surplus included in place of the lagged surplus. While these two series are highly correlated,
the projected surplus improves the fit of both regressions, and I will use this measure in the

10

That is, each successive future observation receives half the weight of the observation one period earlier. This
discount factor was chosen in my earlier work based on analysis using a simple goodness-of-fit measure (the
regression’s adjusted R2). I reduce the weight on the current fiscal year by one-half and increase weights on
subsequent years correspondingly, for winter-to-summer revisions, as these revisions cover only part of the
current budget year’s legislation.

- 14 -

remaining regressions. This change also increases the absolute value of all four coefficients
of interest. For both specifications, the equations suggest that responses are somewhat larger
on the spending side than on the revenue side, although these differences are not significant.
The lack of data from earlier periods means that we can consider the performance of
these equations only for the three most recent budget regimes described above, GRH, BEA,
and post-BEA. The results for each of these regimes, for both revenue and spending, are
presented in the remaining columns in Table 2.11
For GRH, none of the coefficients are significant, but it is interesting to note that the
coefficients on the GDP gap actually have the wrong sign, and do so only during this period.12
As discussed above in relation to a similar finding for discretionary spending, with binding
deficit targets not adjusted for the level of economic activity, there is no scope for
countercyclical policy. Indeed, given that automatic stabilizers cause revenue to fall as output
falls, the only way to keep the deficit from actually rising is to pass legislation to increase
taxes or reduce spending as output falls – precisely the pro-cyclical legislative policy reactions
estimated here.
Under the BEA regime, the regime for which these particular data on legislative
changes are perhaps the most relevant, significant impacts for both output and surplus
variables are restored on both the revenue side and the spending side. This result appears at
first to be somewhat puzzling. After all, if the PAYGO rules are in place, then how can
changes in the projected budget surplus or the output gap have any net impact on legislated
changes in the deficit? A potential answer to this puzzle lies in the manner in which the
PAYGO rules applied.

11

As before, I leave out the observations including the adoption of GRH (1986:1) and BEA (1991:1) to avoid
attributing concurrent policy changes to the rules just being adopted.
12

The results for GRH are similar when the lagged budget surplus is substituted in the equation for the weighted
projected surplus.

- 15 -

In simple terms, the PAYGO restrictions did not apply directly to the revenue and
spending variables being measured here. First, the restrictions applied to legislation enacted
in any given fiscal year, whereas the variables measured here are semiannual. Thus, the
PAYGO rules could be satisfied by offsetting deviations in successive observations. Second,
the PAYGO rules did not apply to the weighted sum of five years’ revenue or spending
changes. Under the original PAYGO rule, deficit-increasing legislation was ruled out for each
fiscal year prior to the end of the PAYGO period, 1995. This meant that legislation enacted in
the first fiscal year of the period, 1991, faced restrictions over five fiscal years, legislation
enacted in fiscal year 1992 faced restrictions over four fiscal years, and so on. When the
PAYGO rules were extended in 1993, a new five-year horizon was established, ending in
1998, but this horizon again had a fixed date. Only with its final extension did the PAYGO
rules apply to a five-year rolling horizon, but this happened only in 1997, nearly at the end of
what I have classified as the effective PAYGO period.13 Thus, legislation was only partially
restricted in the later years of the five-year budget window, so we might expect the overall
response based on the five-year weighted average to be smaller than with no restrictions but
not zero.
The Senate’s PAYGO rule, on the other hand, had a horizon even longer than the five
years covered by the dependent variables in Table 2, but the restrictions did not apply to
future years individually. Legislation could not increase the deficit in the current year or the
first five years as a whole, but it could increase the deficit in any one of years 2-5. As the
effects across years were simply added up with no discounting, it would be possible, for
example, to use small tax increases (relative to GDP) in later years to offset larger tax cuts in
earlier years (relative to GDP).

13

I am grateful to Richard Kogan for clarifying how the PAYGO horizon applied during this period.

- 16 -

Thus, the nature of the PAYGO rules suggests that policy responses as measured in
Table 2 might have been muted by the rules but not eliminated. The last two columns of the
table are consistent with this conclusion, showing that all four policy responses strengthened
after the demise of BEA.
In summary, the strength and signs of legislative policy responses under different
budget regimes are consistent with how the budget rules in each regime worked: pro-cyclical
policy responses under GRH, full policy responses after BEA, and muted policy responses
under BEA.
That policy responses existed under BEA doesn’t mean that policy was particularly
active. Figure 3 graphs the revenue and spending dependent variables used to measure policy
changes for the regressions in Table 2. The solid lines in the figure represent the actual policy
changes. It is clear from Figure 3 that the policy changes were generally of much smaller
magnitude during the BEA period than during GRH or after BEA; the only change of large
magnitude was the tax increase barely pushed through a reluctant Congress by President
Clinton in the first months of his administration.
Figure 3 also shows, as dotted lines, the policy responses predicted by the full-sample
models in Table 2. From a comparison of the predicted and actual policy responses, we can
see two factors contributing to the more modest policy actions occurring under BEA. First,
during the BEA period, there was much less volatility around the predicted values. There
were many large changes in policy during GRH and the post-BEA period that are not picked
up by the model. Thus, policy was less active during BEA, conditional on the policy
responses estimated in Table 2.
A second factor at work is that the predicted policy responses are of a smaller
magnitude during the BEA period, and not simply because of smaller estimated coefficients.
That is, even using the predicted policy responses from a single model, based on the full-

- 17 -

sample coefficients, the predicted values are generally much smaller in average absolute value
during the BEA period than before or after. In other words, one explanation for why policy
wasn’t especially active during the BEA period, other than the gridlock that might have
existed between the President and Congress, is that policy didn’t have to be active. There
were no new recessions during this period, and the budget deficits were not as high as during
the GRH period, nor were the surpluses as high as early in the post-BEA period. This may
also help explain why BEA lasted as long as it did: the outcomes specified by the rules may
simply have conformed relatively closely to the policies that would have been chosen without
the budget rules in place.
Thus, BEA appears to have had some impact on the strength of policy responses, and
may also have reduced the magnitude of policy changes arising from factors other than the
state of the budget or the economy. BEA’s duration, as compared to GRH for example, may
be due in part to the relative lack of stimuli for policy changes, although BEA also differed
from GRH in important ways that may have made it more stable, notably in eliminating the
inducement of pro-cyclical policy responses and in placing caps only on discretionary
spending.14
2.4. Summary
As I have stressed, it is probably easier to uncover the impact of budget rules in the
patterns of policy responses than in overall levels of spending or revenue, given that many
other factors influence these aggregates. Nevertheless, it is still of interest what these
aggregates looked like during the different regimes. Table 3 presents the average values of
the dependent variables used in producing the estimates in Tables 1 and 2, for the full sample

14

It would be desirable to add political variables to Table 2, but this makes identification difficult. For example,
the one Democratic administration during this sample period – the Clinton administration – overlaps
substantially with the BEA period. Adding a dummy variable for the Clinton administration, interacted with the
other explanatory variables, leaves the coefficients for both the BEA period and Democratic administrations
quite insignificant in both revenue and expenditure equations.

- 18 -

periods and for the different policy regime sub-periods. In addition to the actual means, the
table also provides adjusted means – what the means in the different periods would have been
under the estimated policy rules, but at the full-sample average values for the explanatory
variables. Adjusting the means help to distinguish the impact of policy rules from differences
underlying conditions.
The upper panel of Table 3 shows the average annual changes in non-defense
discretionary spending as a share of potential GDP, the dependent variable in Table 1. For the
full sample, this series has an average close to zero, consistent with the absence of a strong
trend for the series in Figure 1. The means are positive before CBA and after BEA and
negative during the CBA period and especially during the GRH and BEA periods, consistent
with budget rules having a downward impact on spending growth. But this intuitive pattern is
upset when the means are adjusted, suggesting, for example, that the strong growth of
discretionary spending in recent years is a consequence of underlying economic conditions
rather than the absence of budget discipline.
The lower panel of Table 3 shows the average semiannual legislative changes in
revenue and non-interest spending as a share of potential GDP, the dependent variables in
Table 2. The means indicate mild surplus reduction policy on both the revenue and spending
side for the sample as a whole, with strong deficit reduction policy on both sides under GRH,
a roughly deficit-neutral policy stance under BEA, and a very pro-deficit stance since then.
While adjustment of the means does change the picture somewhat, this same categorization of
the three regimes holds.
3. Further Lessons from the U.S. Experience
Even though the Budget Enforcement Act eventually became a victim of strong
incentives for policy action, the post-BEA period does offer additional lessons concerning the
effects of budget rule design. In particular, the long budget window used by the Senate during

- 19 -

its post-BEA deliberations appears to have had an impact on the pattern of tax legislation,
making so-called “sunset” provisions more common in tax legislation.
Even though the PAYGO rule was no longer in force at the time, deliberations leading
up to the 2003 tax cut included negotiations between the President and Congress, and between
the two houses of Congress, over the size of the tax cut and its components. An agreement
was reached by the leaders involved, all of the same party (Republican) to limit the tax cut to
a total revenue cost of $350 billion over the ten-year budget window, with the revenue cost
calculated as the simple sum of revenue losses over the ten years.
This calculation method meant that there was a trade-off under the cap between the
annual cost of the tax cut and the number of years over which the tax cut applied: a temporary
tax cut could have a larger annual cost. Also, with no discounting of future revenue costs, tax
cuts that applied only during the early years of the ten-year period were larger relative to the
size of the economy than those that applied only later in the ten-year period. This lack of
discounting, along with the greater uncertainty that future tax cuts could be sustained, made
temporary tax cuts that applied early in the budget window more attractive to tax-cut
proponents than tax cuts that were to be phased in only toward the end of the budget window.
The outcome in 2003, not surprisingly, was a temporary tax cut expiring before the
end of the budget window. (The actual tax cut expired roughly midway through the ten-year
window, although a larger tax cut of shorter duration was also considered during the
deliberation process.) This experience illustrates that even weak budget rules or procedures
can have some impact on the shape of legislation. It also provides a reminder that care is
needed in the design of budget rules.15

15

Sunsets have also arisen in reaction to the Senate’s Byrd rule, discussed earlier in connection with the tax cuts
of 2001. When binding, the Byrd rule effectively forced tax-cut legislation to lapse at the end of the budget
window.

- 20 -

A similar impact can be seen by looking at the GRH period, when only the immediate
fiscal year was relevant to budget rules. Figure 4 shows the impact of legislation during three
periods, CBA, GRH, and BEA, based on the semiannual data on legislation used to produce
the results in Table 2.16 For each regime, I sum over all legislative changes the estimated
amount of deficit reduction occurring in the year of enactment and in each of the four
succeeding fiscal years, dividing the amounts for each piece of legislation by the level of
potential GDP in the year enacted. One would normally expect permanent, deficit-reducing
legislation, such as a tax increase, to produce an upward profile, given that the economy is
growing over time. Indeed, this is the case under both CBA and BEA. In fact, deficit
reductions during each of these periods were back-loaded, actually increasing deficits in the
years of enactment, taking advantage of multi-year budget accounting to get some credit for
the deficit reductions enacted for future years. Under GRH, by contrast, the deficit reduction
pattern is weighted much more heavily toward the year of enactment, as the nature of
incentives under GRH would lead one to expect.
While the objective in 2003 was to limit the size of the tax cut, it was not to encourage
temporary policies that front-loaded tax cuts. Likewise, the designers of GRH were interested
in more than temporary deficit reduction. In each instance, a multi-year budget window with
discounting of future revenue costs might have led to a more rational outcome; it would have
provided some credit for future years’ deficit reduction under GRH, and would have reduced
the cost of future tax cuts under the budget cap in 2003. But the ideal parameters of such
adjustments would depend on a number of factors, such as the stability of government and the
political costs of modifying existing policies.17

16

A similar figure, based on a shorter sample period and a slightly different methodology, may be found in
Auerbach (1994). There are only three observations for the CBA period.
17

See Auerbach (2006b) for further discussion.

- 21 -

4. Conclusion
The United States has experimented with a variety of budget rules in recent decades,
none of which had the permanence of constitutional restrictions and all of which eventually
gave way. From an analysis of how components of the federal budget behaved under the
different budget regimes, it appears that the rules did have some effects, rather than simply
being statements of policy intentions. These effects are largely consistent with how the
budget rules worked. In some instances, as with induced pro-cyclical policy under GrammRudman-Hollings or the 2003 sunset provisions, there were some clear negative side-effects.
The rules may also have had some success at deficit control, although such conclusions are
highly tentative given the many other factors at work during the different periods.
Even less certain is the extent to which the various rules achieved whatever objectives
underlay their introduction, objectives which have not been discussed in this paper but
presumably relate to the growth of government and to the tendency to shift financial
responsibilities to future generations. Achievement of such objectives requires not only that
the rules matter, but also that the impacts conform to these underlying objectives. None of the
U.S. budget rules studied here, for example, incorporates the implicit liabilities associated
with the long-term commitments of entitlement programs. As a consequence, it has been
possible to engineer large increases in future implicit liabilities with only limited impact on
short-term budget measures. As economies evolve, a narrow perspective with respect to
liabilities and commitments is an increasingly serious shortcoming.

- 22 -

References
Auerbach, A. J. (1994), The U.S. fiscal problem: where we are, how we got here, and where
we’re going, in S. Fischer and J. Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Auerbach, A. J. (2003), Fiscal policy, past and present, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 2003, 75-138.
Auerbach, A. J. (2006a), American fiscal policy in the post-war era: an interpretive history, in
R. Kopcke, G. Tootell, and R. Triest (eds.), The Macroeconomics of Fiscal Policy,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Auerbach, A. J. (2006b), Budget windows, sunsets, and fiscal control, Journal of Public
Economics 90, 87-100.
Bohn, H., and Inman, R. (1996), Constitutional limits and public deficits: evidence from the
U.S. states, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 45, 13-76.
Congressional Budget Office (1999), Emergency Spending Under the Budget Enforcement
Act: An Update, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington.
Dharmapala, D. (2006), The Congressional budget process, aggregate spending, and statutory
budget rules, Journal of Public Economics 90, 119-141.
Heniff, B., Jr. (2007), Budget enforcement procedures: Senate’s pay-as-you-go (PAYGO)
rule, Congressional Research Service paper.
Poterba, J.M. (1997), Do budget rules work? in A. Auerbach (ed.), Fiscal Policy: Lessons
from Economic Research, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Reischauer, R.D. (1990), Taxes and spending under Gramm-Rudman-Hollings, National Tax
Journal 43, 223-32.

- 23 -

Table 1. Determinants of Non-Defense Discretionary Spending Changes, 1963-2006
Dependent Variable: Annual Change in Spending Relative to Potential GDP
(standard errors in parentheses)

Sample Period

Independent
Variable

1963-2006

1963-1974
(Pre-CBA)

1975-1985
(CBA)

1987-1990
(GRH)

1992-1998
(BEA)

1999-2006
(post-BEA)

Constant

0.0011
(0.0005)

0.0036
(0.0007)

-0.0002
(0.0033)

0.0052
(0.0008)

-0.0012
(0.0014)

0.0010
(0.0003)

Budget Surplus (-1)

0.0525
(0.0215)

0.1783
(0.0398)

-0.0199
(0.1431)

0.1605
(0.0232)

-0.0042
(0.1228)

0.0684
(0.0275)

GDP Gap (-1)

0.0278
(0.0171)

0.0668
(0.0165)

-0.0250
(0.0829)

0.0203
(0.0256)

0.0597
(0.1773)

0.0748
(0.0340)

R2

0.084

0.719

-0.229

0.953

0.155

0.377

Number of
Observations

44

12

Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

11

4

7

8

Table 2. Determinants of Policy Changes, 1984-2007
Dependent Variable: Semiannual Policy Change in Revenue or Spending (Excluding Interest) Relative to Potential GDP
(standard errors in parentheses)

Independent
Variable

1984:2—2007:2

Sample Period and Dependent Variable
1986:2—1990:2
1991:2—1999:1
(GRH)
(BEA)
Spending Revenue Spending Revenue Spending

1999:2-2007:2
(post-BEA)
Revenue Spending

Revenue

Spending

Revenue

Constant

-0.0014
(0.0004)

0.0020
(0.0006)

-0.0012
(0.0003)

0.0021
(0.0005)

-0.0002
(0.0034)

0.0025
(0.0067)

-0.0010
(0.0007)

0.0006
(0.0005)

-0.0014
(0.0005)

0.0022
(0.0007)

Surplus (-1)

-0.0634
(0.0140)

0.0845
(0.0221)

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

--

GDP Gap (-1)

-0.0603
(0.0199)

0.0894
(0.0313)

-0.0700
(0.0210)

0.1198
(0.0308)

0.0659
(0.0755)

-0.0219
(0.1502)

-0.0860
(0.0504)

0.0501
(0.0381)

-0.1028
(0.0463)

0.1449
(0.0650)

Projected
Surplus

--

--

-0.0714
(0.0154)

0.1125
(0.0225)

-0.0297
(0.1142)

0.1126
(0.2272)

-0.0802
(0.0412)

0.0384
(0.0311)

-0.0857
(0.0407)

0.1193
(0.0571)

R2

0.286

0.217

0.298

0.335

0.242

-0.073

0.111

-0.018

0.164

0.164

47

47

47

47

9

9

17

17

Number of
Observations

Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

16

16

Table 3. Average Policy Changes
Annual Change in Non-defense Discretionary Spending Relative to Potential GDP

Sample Period
1963-2006

1963-1974
(pre-CBA)

1975-1985
(CBA)

1987-1990
(GRH)

1992-1998
(BEA)

1999-2006
(post-BEA)

Mean

0.009

0.057

-0.016

-0.051

-0.028

0.059

Adjusted Mean

0.009

-0.006

0.010

0.177

-0.087

-0.024

Semiannual Policy Change in Revenue or Spending (Excluding Interest) Relative to Potential GDP

Sample Period
1984:2—2007:2

1986:2—1990:2
(GRH)
Revenue Spending Revenue Spending

1991:2—1999:1
(BEA)
Revenue Spending

1999:2-2007:2
(post-BEA)
Revenue Spending

Mean

-0.014

0.039

0.060

-0.076

0.016

0.010

-0.124

0.201

Adjusted Mean

-0.014

0.039

0.071

0.011

0.014

0.008

-0.018

0.054

Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

Figure 1. Revenue and Non-Interest Spending as a Share of Potential GDP
16

24
Total Revenue

12

18

Entitlements

8

12
Defense

4

6
Nondefense Discretionary

PRE-CBA

0
1962

1966

1970

CBA

1974

1978

GRH

1982

1986

Fiscal Year
Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

BEA

1990

1994

POST-BEA

1998

2002

0
2006

Percent of GDP, Totals

Percent of GDP, Components of Spending

Total Spending

Figure 2. Federal Budget Surplus, Relative to Potential GDP
4

Surplus, Percent of GDP

2

Full-Employment Surplus

0

-2

Surplus

-4

PRE-CBA

-6
1962

1966

1970

CBA

1974

1978

GRH

1982

1986

Fiscal Year
Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

BEA

1990

1994

POST-BEA

1998

2002

2006

Aug-84
Feb-85
Aug-85
Feb-86
Aug-86
Feb-87
Aug-87
Feb-88
Aug-88
Feb-89
Aug-89
Feb-90
Aug-90
Feb-91
Aug-91
Feb-92
Aug-92
Feb-93
Aug-93
Feb-94
Aug-94
Feb-95
Aug-95
Feb-96
Aug-96
Feb-97
Aug-97
Feb-98
Aug-98
Feb-99
Aug-99
Feb-00
Aug-00
Feb-01
Aug-01
Feb-02
Aug-02
Feb-03
Aug-03
Feb-04
Aug-04
Feb-05
Aug-05
Feb-06
Aug-06
Feb-07
Aug-07

Percent of Full-EmploymentGDP

Figure 3. Legislative Policy Responses, Actual (solid) and Predicted (dashed)

1

0.8
Spending

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6
Revenue

-0.8

-1
CBA
GRH

Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

BEA

Month and Year
post-BEA

Figure 4. Deficit Reduction Patterns Under Different Budget Regimes
0.6
BEA

0.4

Fration of Total Reduction

CBA

0.2

GRH

0

-0.2

-0.4
1

2

3
Budget Year

Data Source: Congressional Budget Office

4

5

