                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     UNDERSTANDING BANK RUNS:
    THE IMPORTANCE OF DEPOSITOR-BANK RELATIONSHIPS AND NETWORKS

                                             Rajkamal Iyer
                                              Manju Puri

                                         Working Paper 14280
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14280


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




We would like to thank Doug Diamond, Mark Flannery, Atif Mian, Adair Morse, George Pennacchi,
Debu Purohit, David Robinson, Claire Rosenfeld, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Phil Strahan, Per Stromberg,
David Smith, Amir Sufi, Anjan Thakor, Tanju Yorulmazer, and seminar participants at the American
Finance Association Meetings, New Orleans, Bank Structure and Competition conference, Fed Chicago,
Duke University, European School of Management and Technology, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
Washington, Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference, Anchorage, Harvard Business
School, Indian School of Business, NBER Corporate Finance Summer Institute, New York Fed and
NYU Stern conference on Financial Intermediation, University of Amsterdam, UBC Winter conference,
Whistler, World Bank, Vanderbilt University, and CAC-FIC-SIFR conference at Wharton for helpful
comments. We are grateful to Mr. Gokul Parikh, and the staff of the bank for all their help. We appreciate
the excellent research assistance of Ananth Raman. We thank the FDIC for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Rajkamal Iyer and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Understanding Bank Runs: The Importance of Depositor-Bank Relationships and Networks
Rajkamal Iyer and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 14280
August 2008
JEL No. E58,G21

                                               ABSTRACT

We use a unique, new, database to examine micro depositor level data for a bank that faced a run.
We use minute-by-minute depositor withdrawal data to understand the effectiveness of deposit insurance,
the role of social networks, and the importance of bank-depositor relationships in influencing depositor
propensity to run. We employ methods from the epidemiology literature which examine how diseases
spread to estimate transmission probabilities of depositors running, and the significant underlying
factors. We find that deposit insurance is only partially effective in preventing bank runs. Further,
our results suggest that social network effects are important but are mitigated by other factors, in particular
the length and depth of the bank-depositor relationship. Depositors with longer relationships and those
who have availed of loans from a bank are less likely to run during a crisis, suggesting that cross-selling
acts not just as a revenue generator but also as a complementary insurance mechanism for the bank.
Finally, we find there are long term effects of a solvent bank run in that depositors who run do not
return back to the bank. Our results help understand the underlying dynamics of bank runs and hold
important policy implications.


Rajkamal Iyer
University of Amsterdam
R.J.Iyer@uva.nl

Manju Puri
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu
1. Introduction


Bank runs are situations where depositors withdraw their deposits from banks for the fear of the
safety of their deposits. Historically, bank runs were a prominent feature of the great depression
era in the U.S, prompting the introduction of federal deposit insurance. Yet bank runs continue
to be an important phenomenon, as witnessed by current trends, the dire financial condition of
some banks, and recent aborted runs both in the US, and internationally [e.g., Countrywide Bank,
IndyMac Bank (U.S.), Northern Rock Bank (U.K.), ICICI Bank (India)]. Even in countries
which did not experience bank runs recently, the attempt to avoid them is at the root of deposit
insurance, and capital adequacy requirements, which in turn have led to a large literature on the
agency problems inherent in deposit insurance or “too big to fail” policies. Given the costs
associated with bank runs or crisis, understanding what factors drive depositor runs on banks is
important. 1


The theoretical literature on bank runs has helped identify potential causes for depositor runs.
The literature can broadly be divided into two classes. In one class of models, bank runs are a
result of coordination problems among depositors (Bryant, 1980; Diamond and Dybvig, 1983;
Postlewaite and Vives, 1987; Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005; Rochet and Vives, 2005). Runs occur
due to self-fulfillment of depositors’ expectations concerning the behavior of other depositors. In
the other class of models, bank runs are a result of asymmetric information among depositors
regarding bank fundamentals (Chari and Jagannathan, 1988; Jacklin and Bhattacharya, 1988;
Chen, 1999; Calomiris and Kahn, 1991). In these models, depositor beliefs regarding the
solvency of a bank play an important role in determining depositor actions.


As many of the theoretical models and some evidence suggest, even if the bank is fundamentally
solvent, bank runs can still occur because depositors can run in anticipation of a run. An
important question is how does such contagion effects of bank runs spread? What factors
mitigate this? Are there costs of a bank run, even if the bank survives? Understanding these



1
  For the costs of banking crises, see e.g. Friedman and Schwartz, 1963; Bernanke, 1983; Ongena et al., 2003;
Calomiris and Mason, 2003b; Dell'Ariccia et al., 2008. See also Lindengren, Garcia and Saal (1996) who show that
in the period between 1980-96, 133 countries experienced severe banking problems.


                                                                                                              2
factors are important from multiple perspectives – from the point of view of the bank, its
customers, and regulators.


In this paper, we take advantage of a unique experiment in which we examine micro depositor
level data for a bank in India that experienced a run when a neighboring bank failed. The bank
that we use for this study had no fundamental linkages with the failed bank in terms of interbank
linkages or loans outstanding with the failed bank. Furthermore, our bank faced depositor
withdrawals for a few days after the date of failure of the large bank, with activity returning to
pre-run levels in the subsequent period. We are able to obtain and use minute-by-minute
depositor withdrawal data to examine the effectiveness of deposit insurance, the role of social
networks, the importance of bank-depositor relationships, and other factors in influencing
depositor propensity to run.


Using micro depositor level data, we create proxies on three main dimensions across which
depositors differ. These are deposit insurance; bank-depositor relationships; and social networks.
First, in order to examine the effectiveness of deposit insurance, we create a measure to
distinguish whether the depositor balance with the bank is above or below the insurance
coverage limit. We also ask if the balance in the account, even within deposit insurance limits,
affects propensity to run. Second, we identify social networks. Here we use three distinct
measures. Our first measure is based on the neighborhood of residence of the depositor. Our
second measure is based on the ethnic group that the depositor belongs. We sort depositors
primarily into two categories Minority (Muslims) and Non-Minority (Hindus) using the last
name of the depositor. Finally, in India, a person wishing to open an account with a bank needs
an introduction from someone who already has an account with the bank. In general, an
acquaintance that has an account with the bank provides the introduction. We use the introducer
name associated with the depositors’ account to capture the social network of a depositor. Third,
we proxy for depositor relationships with the bank with two measures designed to capture length
and depth of the relationship. One is the age of the account, which is a measure of the length of
the relationship. The other is whether the depositor avails of loans from the bank, suggesting the
relationship is multi-pronged or has more depth than as suggested by simply holding a deposit
account.



                                                                                                3
Our investigation is at two levels. First, we examine which factors are significant in affecting
depositor behavior over the period of the run. We find a number of interesting results. One, we
find that deposit insurance is only partially effective in preventing bank runs. While depositors
who are over the deposit insurance limit are more likely to run, even if we consider accounts
below the deposit insurance limit, we find that account balance positively influences the
likelihood of a withdrawal. Second, the ethnic status of the depositor also has an effect on the
likelihood of a withdrawal. Depositors belonging to the minority community are more likely to
run during a crisis. Third, we find both the length and the depth of the bank-depositor
relationships matter. The longer the bank-depositor relationship, as proxied by the duration of
the deposit account, the lower the likelihood of a withdrawal during the crisis. Further,
depositors that have a deeper connection with the bank, as measured by a loan linkage, are less
likely to run. We conduct robustness checks to investigate why depositors with loan linkages are
less likely to withdraw, and find ex-ante differences in depositors or perceived set-offs cannot
fully explain these results. Interestingly, we find that even depositors that had availed of a loan
in the past (but currently have no outstanding loan) are also less likely to run. However, this
result does not hold for depositors who do not have a lending relationship at the time of the crisis
but forge a subsequent lending relationship suggesting that unobservable differences in
characteristics of depositors with loan linkages are unlikely to be the main driver. These results
suggest past loan taking and related interactions deepen the bank-depositor relationship in a way
that affects depositor behavior.


Next, we examine the time variation within the period of the run. Here we are able to use the
minute-to-minute depositor withdrawal data that we have access to. Our approach here is two-
pronged. First, to investigate the importance of social networks, we use a Cox proportional
hazard model with time varying covariates, where we measure hazard rate in one-minute spells
(using the exact time of depositor withdrawal). We find that a depositors’ likelihood of running
is increasing in the fraction of other people in his/her network that have run. We also find that
once we control for the effect of networks, minority community dummy loses significance




                                                                                                  4
suggesting that social networks play an important role in the behavior of minority community
depositors. 2


We further want to understand how contagion effects of bank run behavior spreads among
depositors. For this purpose we explore and employ methods from the rich epidemiology
literature that spends considerable effort in examining how diseases spread. There is a natural
parallel from this literature to bank runs. Specifically, epidemiologists model transmission
probability of a disease as the probability that a person gets infected through contact with another
infected person (Geoffard and Philipson, 1995; Halloran, 1998; Hudgens et al, 2002). The
parallel in bank runs can be thought of as the probability of running as result of contact with a
person who has already run. Using these models we are able to estimate and quantify
transmission probabilities. We estimate the average transmission probability is 3% via social
groups (introducer network) and 5% via neighborhood (neighborhood based network). We also
find that contagion due to social networks peaks in the second day of the crisis. We discuss
implications in terms of timing of regulatory or preventive measures.


Though social networks are important, there are significant factors that mitigate depositor
propensity to run. In particular, we find that the length and the depth of the relationship matter in
restraining depositors from running, even accounting for social network effects. We find the
longer the duration of the deposit account the lower the likelihood of a withdrawal during the
run. We also find that depositors that have a loan linkage with the bank are less likely to run.
These results suggest while large emphasis is placed by banks on cross-selling as a revenue
generator, cross-selling also serves another important function by acting as a complementary
insurance mechanism for the bank


Apart from the factors that affect depositor runs, from a policy point of view, an important
question that arises is whether depositors that run return back to the bank. What are the long term
effects of bank runs? If depositors that run re-deposit after the crisis, a temporary liquidity
provision (lender of last resort) by the central bank would suffice to bridge the liquidity gap, with


2
 Kelly and O’Grada (2000) find that Irish depositors in New York that came from the same county in Ireland are
more likely to run during the panic experienced by the Irish Immigrants bank in New York.


                                                                                                                 5
little long term consequence. We, however, find that the effects of the run are long lasting. Of the
depositors that withdrew during the crisis, only in 10% of the cases does the account balance
return to pre-crisis levels even after 6 months of the crisis. Further, we do not find that the
aggregate level of deposits of the bank return to the pre-crisis levels in the short run. This
suggests that there are real costs to the bank that can potentially influence their asset portfolio
and loans. Even if depositor runs do not lead to bank failure, the loss in deposits could lead
banks to cut down on loans, which could impose high costs on borrowers in the presence of
information asymmetry.


In the theoretical literature on bank runs, in models such as Goldstein and Pauzner (2005),
Morris and Shin (2003) depositors receive signals about fundamentals of the bank and use these
signals to co-ordinate expectations whether other depositors are likely to run. One interpretation
of our results is that depositors with stronger relationships with a bank receive better signals
about the fundamentals of the bank (signals have a higher average) and therefore are less likely
to run. Our results are also consistent with the information based theories of runs in that banks
that are fundamentally solvent banks are more likely to survive the crisis despite them facing
some runs.


Our paper is related to a number of strands of literature. First, our paper complements the
empirical literature on bank runs which has largely been conducted in a macro setting to answer
questions such as whether bank distress were not merely symptoms of the great Depression but
also helped to magnify the shocks that caused the depression (Bernanke, 1983; Calomiris and
Mason, 2003); whether solvent banks failed during the depression by examining if banks with
better fundamentals experience lower deposit withdrawals (Saunders and Wilson, 1994;
Calomiris and Mason, 1997). Our analysis differs from ex-ante literature by examining bank
runs on a micro level, in particular looking at minute-to-minute withdrawals of a bank that was
subject to a run to empirically identify factors that affect depositor propensity to run, and to
understand how contagion effects of depositor behavior spread in bank runs. Second, our paper
examines the role of deposit insurance in bank runs and suggests that deposit insurance is only
partially effective in preventing bank runs. Third, our paper suggests that while social networks
are important, the length and depth of bank-depositor relationships reduce the propensity to run,



                                                                                                  6
even in the presence of social network effects. While there is an increasing literature examining
the importance of cross-selling by banks related to revenue generation, our results suggest a new
rationale for cross-selling; viz., cross-selling protects the downside risk to a bank of runs, and
effectively acts as a complementary insurance mechanism for the bank. To the best of our
knowledge this role of relationships is new to the literature. Fourth, our results also contribute to
the growing literature on the importance of social networks in economic choices (Bertrand,
Mullainathan, and Luttmer 2000; Duflo and Saez, 2003; Munshi, 2003, Hong, Kubik and Stein,
2005). Fifth, our paper contributes to the literature that highlights the fragility of banks arising
from banks funding themselves through demand deposits (e.g., Allen and Gale (2000), Diamond
and Rajan (2001), Song and Thakor (2007)). Not only is the coexistence of deposit taking and
lending important in reducing fragility (Kashyap et al., 2002), our paper suggests it is beneficial
to tie deposits and loans to the same depositor. Finally, our paper also adds to literature that
studies the real effects of bank failures on a micro-level. We find the effects of a bank run are
long lasting, even if the bank remains solvent, since depositors who run do not return to the bank.
The resultant loss in deposits suggests real costs for the bank and related borrowers. These
findings suggest there may be a case for early intervention even for solvent bank runs where the
bank is able to survive the run.


The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting.
Section 3 provides details of the event. Section 4 describes the data set. Section 5 presents the
results. Section 6 presents the robustness checks. Section 7 concludes.




2. Institutional Details


The Indian banking system primarily constitutes of three types of banks: public sector banks,
private banks and cooperative banks. The main regulatory authority of the banking system in
India is the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Cooperative banks, however, come under dual
regulation, i.e. they are supervised by the RBI as well as by the local state government. The RBI
is responsible for monitoring the banks portfolios while the state government is responsible for
governance issues.



                                                                                                   7
The insurance cover granted under the deposit insurance scheme is Rs. 100,000 (approximately
USD 2,500) for each depositor at a bank. The deposit insurance is based on a flat premium.
Though deposit insurance is present, there are several delays in processing the claims of
depositors. The central bank first suspends convertibility when a bank approaches failure and
then takes a decision of whether to liquidate a bank or arrange a merger with another bank.
During this period depositors are allowed a one time nominal withdrawal up to a maximum
amount that is stipulated by the central bank. 3 In case of failure of a bank, the deposits held by a
depositor cannot be adjusted against loans outstanding. The stipulated cash reserve ratio and
statutory liquidity ratio to be maintained by the banks are 5.5% and 25% respectively. 4


With regard to the co-operative banks, depositors of cooperative banks are not required to hold
an equity claim in the cooperative bank. Furthermore, any depositor can avail of a loan from the
bank.    It is also not mandatory to open a deposit account when taking a loan.                              Further,
                                                                      5
shareholders of cooperative banks have limited liability. Thus the cooperative structure of the
banks does not lead to significant differences in characteristics of depositors as compared to
banks with other ownership structures. In the U.S. system the closest parallel to cooperative
banks are perhaps community banks, which play an important role in the U.S. economy (see e.g.,
Kroszner, 2007) 6 .


3. Event Description

3
  In most cases, depositors are allowed a one time withdrawal of up to Rs. 1,000 (25$) per account.
4
  Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) is the one which every banking company shall maintain in India in the form of
cash, gold or unencumbered approved securities, an amount which shall not, at the close of business on any day be
less than such percentage of the total of its demand and time liabilities in India as on the last Friday of the second
preceding fortnight.
5
  The bank issues shares at face value. To be a borrower the bank, the bank asks a depositor to buy shares worth 2%
of loan amount which can be redeemed at face value at the end of the loan. In general dividends are not paid by the
bank as reserves are used to build up capital to meet capital-adequacy requirements
6
  In a speech on March, 5, 2007, Federal Reserve Governor, Randall Kroszner states, “Community banks play an
important role in the United States economy, as they have throughout our history…many community banks continue
to thrive by providing traditional relationship banking services to members of their communities. Their local
presence and personal interactions give community bankers an advantage in providing financial services to those
customers for whom, despite technological advances, information remains difficult and costly to obtain...I believe
that the most significant characteristics of community banks are: 1) their importance in small-business lending; 2)
their tendency to lend to individuals and businesses in their local areas; 3) their tendency to rely on retail deposits
for funding; and 4) their emphasis on personal service.” Cooperative banks display the same four significant
characteristics as community banks.


                                                                                                                     8
We now turn to the description of the event that we use in this paper. The precipitating event was
a fraud in the largest cooperative bank in the state of Gujarat. The bank had granted loans to
stock brokers without appropriate collateral in contravention of the guidelines prescribed by the
central bank. 7 The amount of loans given to stock brokers amounted to nearly 80% of the deposit
base (Rs. 10 billion were advanced as industrial loans to stock brokers without appropriate
collateral). On the 8th of March 2001, some major brokers defaulted on their pay-in obligations
to the stock exchange. Rumors were floating around that the bank had over-stretched lending
positions to a major stock broker who had suffered huge losses in his share dealings in a select
group of stocks. This led to a run on the bank on the 9th and 12th of March 2001. As the bank
failed to repay depositors on the 13th of March 2001, the central bank temporarily suspended
convertibility and restrained the bank from making payment to depositors beyond Rs. 1,000 per
account. The failure of this bank triggered runs across other cooperative banks in the state.
Several other banks in the state witnessed runs immediately after the failure (Iyer and Peydro,
2007). However, there were no other banks that failed during the event window. Note that at the
time of the failure the state economy was performing well thus the runs are result of an
idiosyncratic shock rather than a product of weak economic fundamentals (Gorton, 1988).


After the collapse of the large bank there was a huge debate whether it should be bailed out. The
revival scheme was organized in terms of a privately arranged bailout. However, the revival
scheme was a non-starter.


4. Data


We obtain data from a cooperative bank that was located in the same city as the failed bank.
After the failure of the large cooperative bank this bank faced runs in the subsequent days. There
was no media report/press coverage about the bank that we use for the analysis during the event
window or going forward. The press coverage was largely limited to discussions about the failed
bank. Furthermore, the runs stopped on their own. There was no suspension of convertibility or
intervention by the central bank. In terms of deposits, the total deposit base of this bank was

7
    See the report of the Joint Parliamentary Committee at www.manupatra.com/downloads/JPC/part%201.pdf


                                                                                                          9
approximately Rs 300 million. This bank hardly had any interbank exposure to the failed bank.
Its exposure was 0.001% of the total assets. Also, this bank did not have any correspondent
banking relationship with the failed bank.


First, we obtain all the transactions for the depositors that have an account at the head quarters of
the bank (the bank had 2 branches with the bulk of the deposits in the head office). The
transaction data provides us details of every transaction undertaken by a depositor in the period
between January 2000 and January 2002. For each transaction, we can identify whether it is a
deposit or withdrawal along with the time and date. We also have the opening balance of each
account at the beginning of the month. This enables us to compute the total balance in each
account and also the daily inflow and outflow in each account. Additionally, for each deposit
account we have details of the date on which the account was opened along with information
about the name of the depositor and the address of the depositor. 8 Apart from the details of
deposit accounts, we also have information on the loans that have been made by the bank. For
the loan accounts also we can identify the name of the person who has taken the loan, the
address, the type of loan. For the fixed deposit accounts, we have information on the name,
address, the initial amount of the term deposit, the maturity amount, maturity date and the date at
which the term deposit was liquidated. Our data set also allows us to identify the mode of each
transaction undertaken. For instance, if on any of the days there is a withdrawal made from an
account, we can identify if the withdrawal was made in person or through a cheque or the
withdrawal was due to an internal transfer. Note that the bank did not have electronic banking or
any automatic teller machines (ATMs), so the sequential service constraint is met. The only way
to obtain cash is to queue up outside the bank.


To construct daily balance in an account, we first use the data on daily transactions and compute
the outstanding balance in an account on a daily basis. Thus for each account we compute the
balance at the close of each day. The difference in the daily balances provides us information on
whether there is a net inflow or net outflow from the account for the interval. To make sure that
the algorithm we use to compute daily balances is correct, we compare the balance that we
obtain at the end of the month using our algorithm with the monthly closing balance for each

8
    The exact address is sometimes missing because of random inputting errors in the bank records.


                                                                                                     10
account provided by the bank. We do not find any difference in these two variables. We also
compute the length of the days the account has been active by computing the difference between
the opening date of the account and the 13th of March, 2001. Note that as computerization of the
bank data occurred only in April, 1995, for some accounts the information on the opening date is
not filled. These accounts had been opened before the 1st of April 1995. We assume the opening
date of these accounts to be 1st of April 1995 for computation. This provides us with the duration
of each account as on the 13th of March, 2001. To obtain the total number of transactions
undertaken by an account, we count the number of transactions for an account beginning the 1st
of January 2000 till the 13th of March 2001. For example, if an account had 4 transactions in the
period between 1st of January and 13th of March, 2001, we record the total transaction count as
4 for that account.


To determine if there are loan linkages associated with an account, we first match all the
accounts by the name and address associated with the account. Thus for each account we have
two separate matches. The name match indicates whether there is another account with the same
name. The address match indicates whether there is another account that has the same address.
The name and address match algorithm that we use provides a unique number to two accounts
that have the same name and similarly another unique number if two accounts have the same
address. After the initial match using the algorithm, we manually matched the names and
addresses. We then create an address match identifier that acts as indicator of accounts that
belong to the same household. As loans could be taken by any member of the household, we
define an account to have a loan linkage if any member of the household has/had a loan
outstanding with the bank. Thus, loan linkage is a dummy variable that takes the value of one for
an account if any member of the household has/had a loan outstanding with the bank on/before
the 13th of March 2001. In defining the loan linkages we exclude overdrafts or cash facilities
that are taken against fixed deposits with the bank as these may have restrictions in terms of
liquidation of deposits.


To determine the ethnic status of a depositor, we first use an algorithm that sorts depositors
based on their last names. The two main ethnic groups which depositors belong to are Muslims
and Hindus (Gujarati). In most of the cases it is very easy to identify the ethnic profile of a



                                                                                               11
depositor based on the last name. However, since we do not have an exhaustive of last names
that are associated with Muslims or those who are Gujarati, we manually categorize the ethnic
status of each depositor. The manual procedure also helps in correctly categorizing depositors
that could have the same surname as a Hindu depositor but have a very distinctive Muslim first
name. For example, ‘Patel’ is a last name that is used by both Hindus and Muslims. However,
from the first name it is easy to categorize a depositor with the name ‘Ahmed Patel’ as a Muslim
as against ‘Vaibhav Patel’. Thus, we create a minority dummy that takes the value of one if the
ethnic group of the depositor is Muslim and zero otherwise.


To capture the effect of past deposits and past withdrawals, we generate two variables. The
variable ‘change in deposits’ is defined as the fraction of balance outstanding as on the 12th of
March, 2001 that is deposited with the bank in the interval between the 12th and the 13th of
March. The variable change in deposits takes the value of zero if there are no deposits. Similarly,
the variable ‘change in withdrawals’ is defined as the fraction of balance outstanding as on the
12th of March, 2001 that is withdrawn from the bank in the interval between the 12th and the
13th of March. We also create a dummy variable called ‘above insurance cover’ that takes the
value of one if the total balance of the depositor with the bank as on the 13th of March, 2001 is
greater than the deposit insurance level. In addition, we generate a variable called ‘opening
balance’ that is the opening balance in an account as on the 13th of March, 2001 if the account is
below the deposit insurance level and zero otherwise.


For transaction accounts we have the exact time of the day when withdrawal is made. We utilize
the time of withdrawal for each depositor to create a variable called ‘failure time’. We set the
starting time as the time of failure of the large bank (13th of March, 2001). We evaluate failures
in one minute intervals, beginning from 10:30 am on the 13th of March, 2001. 9 For example, the
withdrawal by a depositor on the 13th of March, 2001 at 10:36:36 am, would have a failure time
of 7.




9
  The banking hours are from 10:30 am to 4:00 pm, thus we measure time of failure in reference to the time when
the bank is open for business.


                                                                                                            12
Finally, we capture the network of a depositor in 3 different ways. We first use the name of the
introducer that is associated with a depositor’s account. This information is available for the
transaction accounts. In India, it is a common requirement for banks to ask a person wishing to
open an account to be introduced by someone who already has an account in the bank. The main
purpose of the introduction is to establish the identity of the depositor. In India, there is no social
security number that can be used to easily verify the identity of a person. In general, people are
introduced by an acquaintance that has an account with the bank. The introducer does not incur
liability or receive any incentives from the bank. We first link all people who share the same
introducer. In case we find more than one introducer within a household, we cross the networks.
For example, if household no. 1 has introducer A and B; we pool all depositors with introducer
name A or B into a single network. We then construct a variable called runners introducer
network (t-1) at each point in time (t) that captures the fraction of other depositors in the
introducer network that are have run until time (t-1) excluding those within the household of a
depositor. In case we find that the introducer is a member of the household itself or, if we find
no introducer name associated with an account, we do not associate the account to any network
and the variable runners introducer network (t-1) takes the value of 0.


We also define two other variables to capture networks. These network measures are based on
neighborhood of the depositor and his/her ethnic status. Runners in neighborhood (t-1) captures
the fraction of other depositors in the neighborhood that are have run until time (t-1) excluding
those within the household of a depositor. Note that neighborhood is defined as the municipal
ward that a depositor resides in (the average area that a ward covers is approximately 4 sq kms).
We have 71 neighborhoods in the sample. Similarly minority runners in neighborhood (t-1)
capture the fraction of minority community depositors in the neighborhood that have run until
time (t-1). We also define a variable called Distance that captures the physical distance of the
depositors’ residence from the bank. We measure distance by measuring the travel costs incurred
for taking an auto-rickshaw from the depositors’ neighborhood to the bank.


5. Empirical Results




                                                                                                    13
Before presenting the summary statistics, a look at the graphs helps highlight the magnitude of
the runs faced by the bank. Graph 1 presents the net amounts that are liquidated from the fixed
deposit accounts in the period between the 1st of February 2001 and 1st of May 2001. As can be
seen from the graph, there is a sharp spike in the liquidations beginning the 13th of March 2001
up to the 15th of March. This coincides with the date of failure of the large cooperative bank.
Graph 2 presents the evolution of the transaction accounts for the same interval of time. Again a
similar picture unfolds. The graph shows there is sharp increase in withdrawals from transaction
accounts immediately after the failure of the large bank. Thus, these graphs highlight the extent
of runs faced by the bank in the period subsequent to the failure of the large bank. To further
examine the pattern of withdrawals by depositors we plot the fraction of outstanding balance that
is liquidated by depositors that withdrew during the crisis. From Graph 3, it can be seen that of
the depositors who withdraw, most of them withdraw 75% or more of their balance, showing
abnormal withdrawal activity in this period.


Table 1A (panel 1) presents the summary statistics for fixed deposit accounts. As on the 13th of
March 2001, there are 4574 depositors that have fixed deposit accounts active at the head office
of the bank. Out of these accounts only 6.6% of the depositors have an account balance more
than the deposit insurance coverage limit (USD2500). This suggests that the majority of
depositors are small depositors. For depositors that hold balances below the deposit insurance
coverage limit, the average balance in fixed deposit account is Rs. 23823. We also see that 8% of
depositors have/had some loan linkage with the bank. In terms of the ethnic profile of depositors,
29% of the depositors belong to the minority community. The average age of the account is 1057
days. The average time to maturity of the deposits is 384 days.


Table 1A (panel 2) presents the summary statistics for the transaction accounts (savings and
current accounts). As on the 13th of March 2001, there are 10691 depositors with transaction
accounts at the head office of the bank. Out of these accounts, only 1% of the depositors have an
account balance that is more than the deposit insurance level. For depositors with balances
within the deposit insurance coverage limit, the average account balance is Rs. 3258. The extent
of depositors with loan linkage is similar to that of fixed deposit accounts (7.4%). The average
number of transactions per depositor in the period between 1st of January 2000 and 13th of



                                                                                               14
March 2001 is 14.68. In terms of the ethnic profile of the depositors, 26% of the depositors
belong to the minority community. We also see that for depositors that deposited cash with the
bank in the day prior to the crisis, the average deposit is 14% of the outstanding balance. On the
other hand for depositors that withdrew cash in the day prior to the crisis, the average withdrawal
is 0.5% of the outstanding balance. The average age of a transaction account is 2286 days.


To analyze the characteristics of depositors that withdrew during the crisis, we conduct the
analysis separately for fixed deposit accounts and transaction accounts. It is necessary to separate
the analysis, as there are higher costs to liquidation of fixed deposits as against withdrawals from
transaction accounts. The bank charges a penalty of 2% of interest accrued if the fixed deposit
account is liquidated before maturity. Furthermore, splitting the analysis also provides an
additional robustness to the strength of the findings. For the fixed deposit accounts, we construct
a dummy variable that takes the value of one if the depositor liquidated any part of his fixed
deposit in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, 2001. For the transaction accounts,
classification of a depositor as a runner is more difficult as transaction accounts are also used to
meet daily liquidity needs. We therefore, categorize a depositor as a runner if he/she withdraws
more than 75% of the deposit outstanding as on the 13th of March 2001. The analysis is carried
out a depositor level as some of the important variables like deposit insurance coverage is at a
depositor level. In all estimations we cluster standard errors by household. As robustness, we
also use other thresholds like 50% and 25% and do not find any significant change in the main
results.


Table 1B presents the summary statistics for the runners and stayers separately. A t-test of
difference in means across the two groups shows that there are significant differences. Firstly, we
find that depositors from the minority community are more likely to run. We also find that
runners have shorter length of relationship with the bank. Runners are also less likely to have
loan linkages with the bank. Runners have higher number of transactions with the bank and have
deposits with shorter maturity. Finally, we also see that while for transaction accounts runners
are more likely to have deposits above the insurance cover, we do not find any significant
difference for fixed deposit accounts.




                                                                                                 15
We next run probit estimations to understand better the factors that influence depositor runs, the
results of which are reported in Table 2. We find three main results. First, deposit insurance
seems only partially effective in preventing runs. Depositors with deposit balance above the
deposit insurance coverage limit are more likely to liquidate their deposits. However, we also
find that even for depositors with balances below the deposit insurance limit, higher account
balances increase the likelihood of running. Second, we find that depositors belonging to the
minority community (Muslims) are more likely to run as compared to other depositors.
Interestingly, however, when we control for neighborhood of the depositor the minority dummy
is no longer significant in explaining depositor runs for fixed deposit accounts (though it
continues to be significant for transaction accounts), which suggests this result warrants further
investigation which we undertake later in the paper. Third, we find that the length and depth of
the depositor-bank relationship matters. The longer the depositor has had an account with the
bank, the less likely is the depositor is to run. The depth of relationship as proxied by loan
linkages also matters. We find that depositors that have/had a loan linkage with the bank are less
likely to run during a crisis. We are careful in measuring loan linkages to not include overdrafts
taken against fixed deposits. Thus loan linkages do not capture the mechanical effect that could
arise due to an overdraft. 10


We further investigate the importance of loan linkages by categorizing depositors that have
account balances above the insurance level based on whether there have loan linkages. In effect,
we divide depositors with account balance above the insurance level into ones that have loan
linkages and ones that do not have any linkage. As results in Table 3 show, there is a striking
difference in the behavior of depositors with loan linkages. We find that depositors with accounts
above the insurance coverage level without loan linkages are more likely to run while accounts
above the insurance level with loan linkages are not likely to run (column 2 and 4). Though, the
number of observations of depositors above insurance cover with loan linkages is small, these
results help highlight the importance of loan linkages, given the findings in Table 2, that
depositors with accounts that have deposits above the insurance level have 30% higher



10
 Depositors that have taken an overdraft against a fixed deposit cannot liquidate their deposit. Thus including
overdrafts in the definition of loan linkages could mechanically lead to a negative coefficient.


                                                                                                            16
likelihood of running. 11 To make sure that the effect of loan linkages is not limited to depositors
who hold balances above the deposit insurance level, in Table 3, column 1 and 4, we estimate the
probit only for accounts below the deposit insurance coverage limit. We find similar effect of
loan linkages as reported in Table 2. Thus, we find that even for depositors who hold balances
below the deposit insurance level, loan linkages are important.


The findings in Table 2 and 3 suggest that loan linkages significantly reduce the likelihood of
running. This raises the question: why are depositors with loan linkages less likely to run? There
are several potential explanations. First, in the event of bank failure, deposits might be offset
against outstanding loans, so depositors would not benefit from running. However, by regulation
banks are not allowed to set-off deposits outstanding with the bank against loans outstanding in
the event of failure. Nonetheless, depositors with loan linkages might perceive a set-off/offset
and therefore might be less likely to run. 12 Second, depositors with loan linkages could be
subject to a hold-up problem, as they may fear that in case they withdrew their deposits and the
bank survives the run, the bank could pull back on their credit in future. Third, depositors with
loan linkages could have better relationships with the bank and are therefore less likely to run.
Finally, depositors with loan linkages might differ from other depositors in terms of education,
wealth etc that might make them less likely to run.


We conduct a number of tests to distinguish between these explanations. We first look at
whether depositors that had a loan linkage in past but currently have no outstanding loan linkage
differ in their behavior as compared to other depositors. Interestingly, we find that depositors
with loan linkages in the past are also less likely to run (Table 4). We find that both depositors
that had a loan linkage in the past and depositors that have a loan currently outstanding are less
likely to run (column 1). As depositors with loan linkages in past are less likely to face a hold up
problem by the bank and also do not have the benefit of any set-off in case of failure, the results
above suggest that the explanations of set-off or hold up are unlikely to explain this result. We
also check whether depositors with past loan linkages take a loan out in the future with the bank.

11
   For fixed deposit accounts, there are 61 depositors who hold balances above the insurance cover and have loan
linkages. For transactions accounts the number is 6.
12
   Only, under exceptional circumstances, with the permission of the Central bank, set-offs could be allowed. Even
in those cases, the recovery of assets and the payment to depositors is carried out independently as separate
procedures.


                                                                                                               17
Only 10% of depositors fall in this category, again suggesting that hold up issues do not appear
to be the rationale why past loan linkage depositors do not run.


We conduct additional robustness checks to see if there are differences in depositors with loan
linkages in other, unobservable dimensions that we do not capture, that might explain our results.
We examine depositors who started a loan relationship with the bank after the crisis but have a
deposit account with the bank at the time of the crisis. These depositors have a deposit account
with the bank at the time of the crisis, but do not have any loan linkage with the bank in the past
or any loan that is currently outstanding. In addition these depositors availed of a loan from the
bank for the first time after the crisis. 13 Results in Table 4, column 2 and 4 show that depositors
who have/had loan linkages with the bank as on the date of the crisis are less likely to run but not
depositors who obtain a loan only in the future. Assuming time-consistency, future loan takers
should be similar in characteristics to current and past loan takers. However, a F-test rejects
equality of coefficient between the depositors with outstanding loan linkage as compared to
depositors with future loan linkage at 4% (column 2). Furthermore, we do not find any ex-ante
differences between the depositors that availed of loan linkages after the crisis and depositors
that have/had loan linkages with the bank as on the date of the crisis on a variety of additional
dimensions (see table 8 and table 9). In sum, the results taken together suggest that the effect of
loan linkages on deposit behavior is most likely to be a result of relationship with the bank, that
is, that past loan taking and related interactions deepen the bank-depositor relationship in a way
that affects depositor behavior.




5.1. Social Networks


While so far we have examined the importance of relationship with the bank in affecting
depositor’s propensity to run, one can imagine depositors talking to other depositors who have
run and in turn deciding to withdraw their own deposits. In effect, information obtained from the
actions of other depositors may be an important factor in deciding whether to run (Bikhchandani,



13
     We measure future loan linkages until January 2006.


                                                                                                 18
Hirshleifer, and Welch 1992; Banerjee 1992). In the light of this, we examine the importance of
social networks in depositor runs.


We create three different measures of depositor networks. Our first measure is based on the
neighborhood of residence of a depositor. We examine the effect of the actions of other
depositors in the neighborhood on the behavior of a depositor. Our second measure of network is
derived by crossing the neighborhood of the depositor with his/her ethnic status depositor. The
idea being that, people might be more likely to interact with other people in their neighborhood
who belong to their own ethnic group. Finally, we use the introducer name associated with the
deposit account to create our third measure of network.


To estimate the effects of networks, we use the Cox model with time varying covariates. 14 We
measure the effect of the networks by exploring whether the fraction of other depositors in a
depositors’ network that have run till time t-1 has an influence on the hazard rate of a depositor
at time t. The Cox model we estimate is given by: λi (t⎮X,β) = λo (t) exp{X′β } where λo (t) is
the base line hazard function, X and β are vectors of variants and regression coefficients
respectively. For estimation of the model, we use 1 minute spells, i.e., we measure withdrawals
every minute. 15 Note that none of the depositors that run in the sample withdraw more than once
(there are no multiple withdrawals).


As results from the estimation of the Cox model in Table 5, column 2 show, we find that higher
fraction of runs by other depositors in the neighborhood increases the hazard rate. To further
investigate the importance of neighborhood contacts, we cross the neighborhood of a depositor
with the ethnic status of the depositor. In column 3, we find that runs by other minority
community depositors in the neighborhood increases the hazard rate for a minority community




14
  We also estimated the model with a frailty term for loan linkages. All the results are robust to this.
15
  In total the bank is open for 5 ½ hrs a day (10.30-4pm). Thus we have 307 withdrawals over 3 days (990 minutes).
In effect, on average we have 1 withdrawal every 3 minutes. Also in day 2 and 3 of the crisis between 11-12am,
there are around 45 withdrawals. Thus on average there is a one withdrawal every 1.33 minutes. Therefore in order
avoid ties in the withdrawal time, we use 1 min intervals.


                                                                                                               19
depositor. 16 Interestingly, we do not find any significant of effect of runs by other majority
community depositors in the neighborhood on runs by minority community depositors. We also
find that minority community dummy is no longer significant. This suggests minorities run not
because they are minorities per se, but only if other minorities in their neighborhood run. This
results indicate that social networks play an important role in the behavior of minority
community depositors.


While the results in Table 5, column 2 and 3 suggest that networks based on the neighborhood of
a depositor play an important role, one could argue that these effects are driven by other omitted
individual characteristics that might be correlated with neighborhoods. Thus the interpretation of
network effects based on neighborhood and ethnic status of depositors could suffer from what
Manski (1993) refers to as the “reflection” problem. To circumvent many of the omitted
variables concerns, we look at the effect of networks based on introducer name. The advantage
of using networks based on introducer name is that they are based on actual contacts. This helps
us overcome a major hurdle that has plagued the empirical literature on social networks as
datasets rarely contain information on the actual contacts of people.


As results in column 4 shows, we again find that the behavior of other depositors in the
introducer network has a significant effect. Higher fraction of runners in the social group (based
on introducer network) of a depositor increases the hazard rate. However, the length and depth
of the relationship, as proxied by account age and loan linkages, both go towards reducing the
propensity to run. One potential concern with the results reported in column 4 could be that
introducer networks where some of the depositors are running could be different in unobservable
dimensions from those networks that do not have depositors running. To address this concern, in
Table 5, column 5, we estimate the model by limiting the sample to introducer networks where at
least one other depositor in the network is running. Interestingly, we find that even within this
network, the hazard rate is lower if a depositor has loan linkages with the bank and has a longer
length of relationship with the bank. These results suggest that even after controlling for the



16
  To check if all minorities are concentrated in some neighbourhoods, we look at the correlation of the number
majority community people in a neighbourhood and minority people in a neighbourhood. The correlation is 0.81
suggesting that there is a good mix of people from both communities in neighbourhoods’.


                                                                                                           20
effect of networks, the length and depth of relationships with the bank have a significant effect
on depositor behavior.


5.2 Bank-Depositor Relationships


An intriguing result is the effect of the length and depth of relationships as proxied by the age of
the account and loan linkages. As we see in the Cox regressions, both age of the account and
loan linkages are significant in mitigating depositor propensity to run, over and above the
network effect. And even, when we restrict the estimation to those networks where at least one
other depositor runs, we still find both variables – account age and loan linkages – to be
significant. These results are also consistent with and lend support to the results that we obtained
earlier in tables 2-4 which suggest that account age and loan linkages are significant factors in
reducing the probability that depositors’ run.


In the banking literature, much importance is placed on the bank-client relationship. In this
literature, relationships typically give the bank information about the client. Here, however, the
reverse seems to be happening. How do we relate what is happening with the theoretical
literature?   In the classic Diamond-Dybvig (1983) model, all depositors have the same
information set, and there are sunspot equilibrium – either everyone runs or no one runs. There
have been many models since then modifying the assumption in Diamond-Dybvig (1983). For
instance, in Goldstein-Pauzner (2005) depositors receive noisy private signals about bank
fundamentals, and use their signals to form expectations about the actions of other depositors.
They obtain a unique equilibrium in which there are bank runs if fundamentals are below a
certain threshold. One question that arises from such models is why would depositors who are
otherwise similar, get different private signals? Our results suggest one rationale. Depositors
with loan linkages get a higher signal about bank fundamentals, perhaps through repeated
interaction with, and/or access to bank officers. Our results suggest that depositors also take into
account the fact that others in their networks are running (as in Diamond-Dybvig (1983), see also
Madies (2006)). If others in their network run, they are more likely to run, but loan linkages add
to the signal and lower the probability of running. Thus, bank-depositor relationships are
important but not the way traditionally envisaged by the banking literature, where these



                                                                                                 21
relationships give the bank information about its clientele. Rather, here the information flow is
in the opposite direction, helping the depositor get a positive signal on bank fundamentals,
mitigating their propensity to run.


5.3 Transmission Probabilities


On a big picture level, one of the things that we want to understand is the magnitude of
contagion in bank runs. In order to model this we draw on a long time-honored literature on
contagion of infectious diseases in the epidemiology literature. Epidemiologists have a long
history of modeling transmission of infectious diseases. They model transmission probability as
the probability that a person gets infected through contact with another infected person. The
parallel in bank runs is the probability of running as result of contact with a person who has
already run. A commonly used model in epidemiology for modeling transmission probability is
the following (see e.g., Geoffard and Philipson, 1995; Halloran, 1998; Hudgens et al, 2002):
λ i (t) = Ci(t) ∏(t) P exp {β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βz x iz }                     (1)


Interpreting the model in the context of the AIDS epidemic, λ i (t) is the probability that person i
gets infected with AIDS in the time interval t. If we assume that the only way a person contracts
AIDS is through sexual intercourse with another infected person, we can think of contact Ci(t) as
the number of acts of sexual intercourse by person i in the interval of time t. ∏(t) is the fraction
of population with AIDS in the time interval t (prevalence of the disease at time t). In turn, the
transmission probability P is the average probability of getting infected though a single contact
with an infected person. Xi1 Xi2 are other covariates like age, education etc.
In the context of bank runs, we estimate the following model:
λ i (t) = C ∏i(t) P (t) exp {β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βz x iz }                   (2)
where C is the number of people in ones social network or neighborhood that one comes in
contact and is assumed to be 1 per time interval. ∏i(t) is runners introducer network(t-1) or
runners in neighborhood (t-1). P (t) is the transmission probability, which is the probability for
running due a single contact with a person who has already run. Xi1 Xi2 are covariates like age of
the account, loan linkage etc.




                                                                                                 22
The model specified by equation (2) can be easily specified in terms of a Cox model. If we take
the standard Cox model: λ i (t) = λ o (t) exp {β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βz x iz }                 (3)
and introduce a covariate log (C ∏i(t)), then the model specified in equation 3 can we written as
λ i (t) = λ o (t) exp {β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βz x iz + β∏ log (C ∏i(t))}                       (4)
If we constrain β∏ in model (4) to be equal to one, then model (4) can be specified as
λ i (t) = C ∏i(t) λ o (t) exp{β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βz x iz }                                  (5)


In effect, from model (2) and (5), transmission probability P(t) in model (2) can be thought of as
base hazard rate of the Cox model specified in equation (5) (Geoffard and Philipson, 1995;
Halloran, 1998; Hudgens et al, 2002). 17


We fit the transmission probability model specified by equation (2) using the procedure
described above and estimate the transmission probability. As results in Table 6 show, we find
that the average transmission probability across time is 3% via social groups (introducer
network) and 5% via neighborhoods. The maximum value that the transmission probability takes
is 21% for social groups and 52% for neighborhood-based network. Interestingly, the
transmission probabilities based on neighborhood networks are highest in the morning and then
drops during the day. However, the transmission probability based on introducer social network
peaks around lunch time the first day as opposed to when the bank opens. This is intuitive given
the nature of the network. Social networks through introducer is presumably through work
related or other contacts, which likely occur after working hours begin, as opposed to
neighborhoods where people meet or get to know their neighbors are running first thing in the
morning. Averaging across transmission probabilities in 1 hour, 10 minute intervals, we find that
the average transmission probabilities are higher in day 1 and day 2 of the crisis and drop in day
3 of crisis. Understanding transmission probabilities is important if there is a case for
intervention in solvent bank runs. Our results suggest that if there is intervention it should be
when the transmission probabilities are highest which is early in the crisis.




17
     In the model above the hazard rate of running is zero if ∏i (t) is equal to zero.




                                                                                                23
From a policy point of view, does it make sense to intervene, if the bank remains solvent? The
answer to this question depends on whether there are long term costs to a bank run. We now turn
our attention to this question.


5.2. Do depositors that run return back to the bank?

While so far our analysis focuses on factors that affect depositor runs, an interesting question that
arises is whether there are long term effects of a bank run. In particular, a question of interest is
do depositors that run re-deposit their money in the bank after an interval of time? To the best of
our knowledge, previous literature has not been able to answer this question because of data
constraints. From graph 6, we see that depositors that withdrew during the crisis do not re-
deposit to the pre-crisis levels.18 To further examine this question, we first take all the
transaction accounts that withdrew during the crisis. For these accounts, we compute the fraction
of depositors for which the deposit balance returns to the pre-crisis levels after the crisis. As
results in table 7, panel A, show, we find a maximum of 11% of the depositors return back to the
bank. We also find that for 72% of the depositors that withdrew during the crisis, the deposit
balance after 3 months remains 75% lower than the outstanding balance before the crisis (panel
B, column 2). Thus, it does appear that depositors that panic do not return back to the bank. We
also find that in terms of aggregate deposits, the bank does not receive fresh deposits from other
depositors to compensate for the loss in deposits. As compared to the aggregate transaction
account balance of Rs 41.9 million on the 15th of March 2001 (immediately after the crisis), the
aggregate transaction balance stood at Rs. 42.3 million, Rs. 41.8 million and Rs. 42.2 million on
the 1st of May, July and October 2001 respectively. This suggests that the effects of the runs are
not reversed in a short interval of time. This could have economic real costs as it could affect
credit available to borrowers of the bank who might find it difficult to raise funds from other
sources due to information asymmetry problems (Khwaja and Mian, 2007). 19



18
   Also, from Graph 6, one can see that the withdrawal patterns of runners was not very volatile before the crisis.
Thus, further reaffirms that the runs we document are not likely to be a result of liquidity needs of depositors.
19
   For the sample of depositors we surveyed, we find that 85% would re-deposit the money that they withdrew in a
public sector bank, 11% in private bank, 2% in post office and 2% at would keep the money at home. This finding is
also corraborated by the aggregate data that shows an increase in deposits at public sector banks in the subsequent
quarter. Note that even if deposits do not move out of the banking system due to information asymmetry, it is still
likely that borrowers find it difficult to substitute credit, especially in case of small borrowers.


                                                                                                                24
6. Robustness

We conduct a number of robustness checks.            First, we have carried out the analysis for
transaction accounts defining a depositor as running if they withdraw 75% or more of their
account balance. To make sure that our results are not sensitive to the choice of threshold, we re-
estimate the model using 50% and 25% as threshold levels. As can be seen from Table 10,
column 1 and 2, we do not find significant differences in the results if we change the threshold
level. Furthermore, that we find similar results when we analyze fixed deposit accounts adds
further validity to the robustness of the results.

Second, we expand the time period being analyzed. In our analysis so far, we begin measuring
depositor withdrawals as on the date of failure of the large bank (13th of March 2001). However,
given that the large bank faced runs beginning the 9th of March, it is possible that a few
depositors could have withdrawn their deposits in the period between the 9th and 13th of March
2001. Hence as a robustness check we rerun our regressions using the period between the 9th and
the 15th of March 2001 as the event window. As can be seen in Table 10, column 3, we do not
find any significant difference in the results.


Third, we use a different measure of account age. One potential concern one could have is that
our measure of account age does not correctly reflect the length of the relationship with the bank.
One could argue that the true length of the relationship is the earliest date of opening an account
by any member of the household. To address this concern, in Table 10, column 4, we re-estimate
the model where we measure account age as the maximum length of the account associated with
the household of a depositor. As the results show, we still find that the length of the relationship
with the bank reduced the likelihood of withdrawing. We also included in the regressions (not
reported) amount of shares in the co-operative, if any, held by depositors, we find that all our
results are robust to this.


Finally, to further investigate the robustness of the results, for a sample of depositors we
collected information on age, education and proxies for wealth using a survey. We randomly
selected 100 depositors that withdrew during the crisis from their transaction account, along with
300 other depositors that did not withdraw and conducted a survey. The 400 depositors that we


                                                                                                 25
choose belong to different households. To construct a measure of depositor wealth, we asked
whether the household of the depositor owns a car, bike, land, and apartment. The survey
questions are listed in the Appendix. We use these responses to create a measure of depositor
wealth by weighting the asset ownership based on the fraction of the other people that own the
asset. 20 For example, if 40 out of the 400 depositors own a car. The weight each depositor with a
car will receive is 0.025 (1/40). Our proxy for wealth for an individual depositor is derived by
summing up the weights for the 4 questions of asset ownership. Apart from the questions on
asset ownership we also surveyed depositors for their age and level of education. We conduct
additional tests with this sample.


In univariate tests, we did not find any significant differences between runners and stayers in
terms of education, age or wealth. We also did not find any significant differences between
depositors with loan linkages and other depositors along these dimensions.


In table 11, we run multivariate tests. In column 1, we introduce dummies for level of education
of depositors. We find that the level of education of a depositor does not have a significant effect
on the likelihood of withdrawing (not reported). We also find that even for this sub-sample that
represents different households, the results are in the line with those reported before (Table 2,
column 3). Note that loan linkages perfectly predict not running in this sub-sample (there are 14
depositors with loan linkages). In column 2, we introduce the age of the depositor. We do not
find any significant effect of age. We also find that even after controlling for age of the
depositor, account age has a significant effect on the likelihood of withdrawing. This helps
address the concern that the effect of account age on withdrawing could be driven by the age of
the depositor rather than the length of relationship with the bank. In column 3, we introduce the
proxy for the level of wealth of a depositor. We find that the level of wealth does not have a
significant effect on the likelihood of withdrawing. More importantly, we find all our results are
robust to controlling for proxies of wealth, age and education. 21


20
   In total, we were able to survey 282 depositors out of the 400.
21
    In addition, we also looked at effect of literacy and wealth level (proxied by the density of slums) in the
neighborhood of the depositor based on census data. We did not find any significant effect of these variables on the
likelihood of withdrawing.



                                                                                                                26
7. Conclusion


This paper uses a new, unique dataset from a bank that faced a run. We are able to access
minute-to-minute depositor withdrawal data to understand the role of deposit insurance,
networks and bank-depositor relationships.


Our analysis suggests that deposit insurance is only partially effective in preventing bank runs.
An intriguing finding is that the length and depth of bank-depositor relationships (as measured
by account age and loan linkages) are important factors in mitigating the propensity to run. We
also find that social networks are important. The more people in the depositors’ network that
run, the more likely is the depositor to run. However, even within the network, the length and
depth of relationships acts as a dampening factor on the depositor propensity to run. One
interpretation of these results is in the light of theoretical models such as Goldstein and Pauzner
(2005), and Morris and Shin (2003) where depositors with longer and deeper relationships get
more positive signals about the bank fundamentals, and therefore are less likely to run despite the
negative information received about other people in their network running.        From the bank’s
point of view our results highlight the importance of relationships with a bank in influencing
depositors’ incentive to run. Our results also suggest that one rationale to encourage cross-selling
of deposits and loans to depositors, is not simply to enhance revenues as is often thought, but can
also help protect the bank’s downside by acting as complementary insurance mechanism.            In
terms of policy implications, our results suggest that allowing banks to provide an umbrella of
products could help strengthen the relationship with the depositor, which in turn could help
reduce fragility.


Our findings on the importance of bank-depositor relationships raise food for thought on a
number of dimensions, particularly in the context of the broader banking literature. The banking
literature suggests that small banks generally supply more credit to small borrowers and give
better terms. The interpretation of this result has been that small banks are better at processing
soft information. Our results suggest, even absent soft information, small banks should lend to
their small borrowers to help reduce their vulnerability to runs. Similarly another result in the



                                                                                                 27
banking literature is that banks tend to give better terms to depositors who borrow from them.
The rationale provided for this has been informational economies of scope. Again our results
suggest, even absent informational economies of scope, it makes sense for banks to lend to their
depositors, even at slightly better terms, as this acts as a complementary insurance mechanism.


An important question that has not been addressed in prior literature is whether there long lasing
effects of a bank run for the bank, even if it remains solvent? Our results suggest the effects of a
bank run are indeed long lasting since few depositors who run return to the bank. The effect of
long term erosion of the depositor base can affect bank lending, and affect credit to borrowers,
particularly as research has shown that liquidity crunches in banks typically affect smaller and
information intensive firms (see e.g., Khwaja and Mian, 2007). If there are adverse long run
effects of bank runs then we need to understand the appropriate timing of intervention. We
address this by employing methods from the epidemiology literature, which examine how
diseases spread, to estimate when the transmission probabilities of depositors running is highest
which turns out to be the initial period of the run.




                                                                                                  28
                                         References


Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale, 2000, Comparing Financial Systems, MIT Press.

Banerjee, Abhijit, 1992, A Simple Model of Herd Behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107, 797-817

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Esther Duflo, 2002, Do Firms Want To Borrow More? Testing Credit
Constraints Using A Directed Lending Program, working paper, MIT.


Bernanke, Ben, 1983, Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in Propagation of the Great
Depression. American Economic Review 73, 257-276.


Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2000, Network Effects and
Welfare Culture, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 1019-55.


Bharath, Sreedhar, Sandeep Dahiya, Anthony Saunders and Anand Srinivasan, 2007, So What
Do I get? A Bank's View of Lending Relationships, Journal of Financial Economics, 85, 787-
821.


Bikchandani, Sushil, Daniel Hirshleifer and Ivo Welch, 1992, A Theory of Fads, Fashion,
Custom, and Cultural Change as Information Cascades, Journal of Political Economy, 100, 992-
1026.


Bryant, John, 1980, Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance, Journal of Banking
and Finance 4, 335-344.


Calomiris, Charles, and Joseph Mason, 1997, Contagion and Bank Failures during the Great
Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic, American Economic Review 87, 863-883.


Calomiris, Charles, and Joseph Mason, 2003b, Consequences of Bank Distress During the Great
Depression. The American Economic Review 93, 937-947.



                                                                                          29
Chari, Varadarajan, and Ravi Jagannathan, 1988, Banking panics, Information, and Rational
Expectations Equilibrium, Journal of Finance 43, 749-763.


Calomiris, Charles, and Charles Kahn, 1991, The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
Optimal Banking Arrangements. American Economic Review 81, 497 -513.


Chen, Yehning, 1999, Banking Panics: The Role of the First-Come, First-Served Rule and
Information Externalities, Journal of Political Economy, 107, 946-968.


Dell'Ariccia, Giovanni, Enrica Detragiache, and Raghuram Rajan, 2008. The Real Effect of
Banking Crises, Journal of Financial Intermediation.


Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig, 1983, Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,
Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.


Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan, 2001, Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial
fragility: A theory of banking, Journal of Political Economy, 109(2), 287-327.


Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2003, The Role of Information and Social Interactions in
Retirement Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118, 815-42.


Drucker, Steven, and Manju Puri, 2005, On the Benefits of Concurrent Lending and
Underwriting, Journal of Finance 60, 2763-2800.


Geoffard, Pierre-Yves, and Tomas Philipson, 1995, The Empirical Content of Canonical Models
of Infectious Diseases: The Proportional Hazard Specification, Biometrika 82, 101-11.


Goldstein, Itay and Ady Pauzner, 2005, Demand Deposit Contracts and the Probability of Bank
Runs, Journal of Finance 60, 1293-1327.



                                                                                         30
Gorton, Gary, 1988, Banking panics and business cycles. Oxford Economic Papers 40, 751-781.


Halloran, M. E., 1998, Concepts of Infectious Disease Epidemiology. In Modern Epidemiology,
2nd edn, Philadelphia: Lippincott Raven.


Hong Harrison, Jeffrey Kubik and Jeremy Stein, 2005, Thy Neighbor’s Portfolio: Word-of-
Mouth Effects in the Holdings and Trades of Money Managers, Journal of Finance 60, 2801-
2824


Hudgens Michael G, Ira M. Longini, Jr et al., 2002, Subtype-specific Transmission Probabilities
for Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 among Injecting Drug Users in Bangkok, Thailand,
American Journal of Epidemiology 155, 159-168.


Jacklin, Charles, and Sudipto Bhattacharya, 1988, Distinguishing Panics and Information-Based
Bank Runs: Welfare and Policy Implications. Journal of Political Economy 96, 568-592.


Kashyap, Anil, Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy Stein, 1992, Banks as Liquidity Providers: An
explanation for the co-existence of lending and deposit-taking, Journal of Finance 57, 33-73.


Kelly, Morgan and Cormac O Grada, 2000, Market Contagion: Evidence from the Panics of
1854 and 1857, American Economic Review 90, 1110-1124.


Khwaja, Asim and Atif Mian, 2007, Tracing the Impact of Bank Liquidity Shocks: Evidence
from an Emerging Market, Forthcoming American Economic Review.


Kroszner, Randall, 2007, Community Banks: The Continuing Importance of Relationship
Finance, Speech at America’s Community Bankers Government Affairs Conference,
Washington, D.C.


Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Gillian Garcia and Matthew I. Saal, 1996, Bank Soundness and
Macroeconomic Policy, International Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., US.



                                                                                                31
Madies, Philippe, 2006, An Experimental Exploration of Self-Fulfilling Banking Panics: Their
Occurrence, Persistence, and Prevention, Journal of Business, 79(4), 1831-1866.


Manski, Charles, 1993, Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,
Review of Economic Studies, 60, 531-42.


Mian, Atif, 2006, Distance Constraints: The Limits of Foreign Lending in Poor Economies,
Journal of Finance, 61, 1465-1505.


Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, 2003, Global Games: Theory and Applications, Advances
in Economics and Econometrics (Proceedings of the Eighth World Congress of the Econometric
Society), edited by M. Dewatripoint, L. Hansen and S. Turnovsky, Cambridge University press,
56-114.


Munshi, Kaivan, 2003, Networks in the Modern Economy: Mexican Migrants in the U.S. Labor
Market, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 549-99.


Ongena, Steven., David Smith and Dag Michalsen, 2003, Firms and their distressed banks:
lessons from the Norwegian banking crisis (1988-1991). Journal of Financial Economics, 67, 81-
112.


Peterson, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan, 1994, The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence
from Small Business Data, Journal of Finance, 49, 3-37.


Postlewaite, Andrew, and Xavier Vives, 1987, Bank Runs as an Equilibrium Phenomenon,
Journal of Political Economy, 95, 485-491.


Rochet, Jean-Charles and Xavier Vives, 2004, Coordination Failure and the Lender of Last
Resort, Journal of European Economic Association 2, 1116-1147.




                                                                                           32
Saunders, Anthony and Berry Wilson, 1996, Contagious Bank Runs: Evidence from the 1929-
1933 Period, Journal of Financial Intermediation 5, 409-423.


Song, Fenghua, and Anjan Thakor, 2007, Relationship Banking, Fragility, and the Asset-
Liability Matching Problem, Review of Financial Studies, 2129-2177.




                                                                                    33
Graph 1: Withdrawals from Fixed deposit accounts from Feb-May 2001 (13th of March is the date of failure of the large bank)


                                                   Fixed deposit a/c withdrawals


                                     6000000

                                     5000000

                                     4000000
          Net withdrawal (in Rs.)




                                     3000000

                                     2000000

                                     1000000

                                           0

                                     -1000000

                                     -2000000
                                                        Date (1st Feb 2001-1st May 2001)




Graph 2: Deposit Balance in transaction accounts for the period between February-May 2001


                                                    Transaction account balance


                                     60000000.00

                                                                       failure of large bank
                                     50000000.00
          Account balance (in Rs.)




                                     40000000.00


                                     30000000.00


                                     20000000.00


                                     10000000.00


                                            0.00
                                                           Date (1st Feb 2001-1st May 2001)




                                                                                                                              34
Graph 3: Percentage of outstanding account balance (transaction a/c) withdrawn by a depositor that withdrew during the crisis


                                              Transaction a/c


                       350

                       300
    No of depositors




                       250

                       200

                       150

                       100

                       50

                        0
                             <10%   10%-25%    25%-50%     50%-75%   75%-100%   100%
                                                 % of withdrawals




                                                                                                                                35
                                           Table 1A: Summary statistics
Minority community is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the account belongs to a depositor from the minority
community. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if his/her balance in the bank as on
the event date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits between the
12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an inflow and is zero otherwise. Change in withdrawals is the percentage change in
deposits between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise. Opening balance is the deposit
balance (amount in Rs.) in an account as on the event date if the depositor is below the deposit insurance coverage limit. Age of
account is the length of time (days), for which the account has been open as on the event date. No. of transactions is the total
number of transactions (deposits, withdrawals, transfers) associated with an account between the 1st of January 2000 and event
date. Loan linkage is dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a deposit account if the household (associated with the account)
has/had a loan account with the bank as on event date. Days to maturity are the number of days left for maturity for the fixed
deposit account.

Fixed Deposit a/c (panel 1)         Observation         Mean         Median       Std. Dev         Min           Max
Minority community                      4574            0.293           0          0.455             0            1
Above Insurance Cover                   4574            0.066           0          0.248             0            1
Opening balance                         4271            23823         16813        21365            402         99906
Age of account                          4574            1057          1105          562              1          7585
Loan linkage                            4574            0.080           0          0.272             0            1
No of Days to maturity                  4574             384           262          378              0          2248
Transaction a/c (panel 2)
Minority community                      10691           0.267          0            0.442            0           1
Above Insurance cover                   10691           0.010           0           0.103            0           1
Opening balance                         10575           3258          683           9131           0.39        99780
Change in deposits                      10691           0.141           0           5.711            0         428.08
Change in withdrawals                   10691           0.005           0           0.062            0         0.994
Age of account                          10691           2286          2173          1307            8          16640
No. of transactions                     10691           14.68           4           50.26            0          1421
Loan linkage                            10691           0.074           0           0.262            0           1



                                                             Table 1B
For fixed deposit accounts, runner is defined as a depositor who liquidates any part of his/her account in the period between the
13th and the 15th of March, stayer otherwise. For transaction account runner is defined as a depositor who withdraws more than
75% of the opening balance as on the event date in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, stayer otherwise. In the row
with opening balance, we only report statistics for depositors with accounts below the deposit insurance cover.


                                           Runners                               Stayers
Fixed deposit a/c                obs        Mean        Std.Dev       Obs        Mean        Std.Dev      Diff (t-stat)
Minority community               249        0.369        0.483        4325       0.289        0.453         2.704***
Above Insurance cover            249        0.080        0.272        4325       0.065        0.247          0.918
Opening balance                  229        27177        19900        4042       23633        21432         2.443**
Age of account                   249         873          591         4325       1067          559          -5.310***
Loan linkage                     249        0.024        0.153        4325       0.083        0.276         -3.365***
No. of Days to maturity          249         261          423         4325        391          374          -5.273***
Transaction a/c
Minority community               307        0.335        0.472       10384        0.265       0.441          2.71***
Above Insurance cover            307        0.133        0.340       10384        0.007       0.084          21.50***
Opening balance                  266        22903        23247       10309        2752        7718          37.87***
Age of account                   307        1872         69.33       10384        2298        12.83         -5.63***
No. of transactions              307        49.23        118.2       10384        13.66       46.40          12.30***
Loan linkage                     307        0.022        0.149       10384        0.076       0.265         -3.50***




                                                                                                                              36
                                                             Table 2
                                                      Which Depositors Run?
This table presents results of probit models (co-efficients reported are marginal effects). For fixed deposit accounts, the dependent variable is an
indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depositor liquidates any part of his/her account in the period between the 13th and the 15th
of March. For savings and current account the dependent variable takes the value of one if the depositor withdraws more than 75% of the
opening balance as on the event date in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, 2001. The analysis is conducted separately for fixed
deposit accounts and transaction accounts (savings and current a/c). Minority community is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the
account belongs to a depositor from the minority community. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a
depositor if his/her balance in the bank as on the event date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Opening balance is the balance
(amount in ten thousands of Rs.) in an account as on the event date if the depositor is below the deposit insurance coverage limit. Loan linkage
is dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if the household (associated with the depositor) has/had a loan account with the bank
as on event date. Account age is the log of the length of time, for which the account has been open as on the event date. Days to maturity are the
log of the number of days left for maturity for the fixed deposit account plus one. No. of transactions is the total number of transactions
(deposits, withdrawals, and transfers) in hundreds associated with an account between the 1st of January 2000 and event date. Change in
withdrawals is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise.
Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March 2001 and event date if there is an inflow and is zero
otherwise. All dummy variables are 0 otherwise. Distance is the physical distance of the depositors residence from the bank and is measured as
the traveling cost to the bank in tens of Rs. Neighborhood controls represents the municipal ward where the depositor resides. White
heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. In column 2 and 4 the standard errors are clustered at the household
level. The symbols ***, **, * indicate significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
                                               Fixed deposit a/c                                       Transaction a/c
                                  (1)                     (2)                         (3)                        (4)
  Minority community               0.007                 0.004                        0.006**                    0.007**
                                  (0.005)                (0.010)                      (0.002)                    (0.003)
  Above Insurance cover            0.020*                   0.024                     0.307***                   0.331***
                                  (0.014)                   (0.023)                   (0.053)                    (0.049)
  Opening balance                 0.003***                  0.004***                  0.013***                   0.013***
                                  (0.001)                   (0.001)                   (0.001)                    (0.001)
  Loan linkage                    -0.032***                 -0.038***                 -0.014***                  -0.013***
                                  (0.005)                   (0.007)                   (0.002)                    (0.002)
  Account age                     -0.015***                 -0.013***                 -0.005***                  -0.005***
                                  (0.002)                   (0.003)                   (0.001)                    (0.001)
  Days to Maturity                -0.020***                 -0.022***
                                  (0.001)                   (0.002)
  No. of transactions                                                                 0.003***                   0.002*
                                                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)
  Change in withdrawals                                                               0.025*                     0.031**
                                                                                      (0.013)                    (0.013)
  Change in deposits                                                                  0.002*                     0.002*
                                                                                      (0.001)                    (0.001)
  Distance                                                  -0.006                                               -0.000
                                                            (0.005)                                              (0.001)
  Neighborhood control            no                        yes                       no                         yes
  N                               4574                      3182                      10691                      8708
  Pseudo/Adj R2                   0.140                     0.163                     0.248                      0.272




                                                                                                                                   37
                                                                        Table 3
                                                             How important are loan linkages?
This table presents results of probit models (co-efficients reported are marginal effects). Column 1 and 4 report the results excluding depositors above the
insurance coverage limit. For fixed deposit accounts, the dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the depositor liquidates any
part of his/her account in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March. For savings and current account the dependent variable takes the value of one if
the depositor withdraws more than 75% of the opening balance as on the event date in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, 2001. The analysis is
conducted separately for fixed deposit accounts and transaction accounts (savings and current a/c). Minority community is a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if the account belongs to a depositor from the minority community. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a
depositor if the depositors’ balance as on the event date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Above Insurance with loan linkage is a dummy variable
that takes the value of 1 if a depositor is over the deposit insurance limit and has a loan linkage with the bank. Above Insurance with no loan linkage is a
dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the depositor is over the deposit insurance limit and the depositor has no loan linkage with the bank. Opening
balance is the deposit balance (amount in ten thousands of Rs.) in an account as on the event date if the depositor is below the deposit insurance coverage limit.
Loan linkage is dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if the household (associated with the depositor) has/had a loan account with the bank
as on event date. Account age is the log of the length of time, for which the account has been open as on the event date. Days to maturity are the log of the
number of days left for maturity for the fixed deposit account plus one. No. of transactions is the total number of transactions (deposits, withdrawals, and
transfers) in hundreds associated with an account between the 1st of January 2000 and event date. Change in withdrawals is the percentage change in deposits
between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise. Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits between
the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an inflow and is zero otherwise. Distance is the physical distance of the depositors residence from the bank
and is measured as the traveling cost to the bank in tens of Rs. Neighborhood controls represents the municipal ward where the depositor resides. White
heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. The standard errors are clustered at the household level in column 2 and 4. The
symbols ***, **, * indicate significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. The symbol &&& indicates perfect prediction of failure (not running).

                                                                    Fixed deposit a/c                                      Transaction a/c
                                                     (1)                      (2)                           (3)                  (4)
      Minority community                             0.005                   0.005                           0.005**             0.007**
                                                     (0.006)                 (0.010)                        (0.002)              (0.003)
      Above Insurance with loan linkage                                        &&&                                               &&&


      Above Insurance with no loan linkage                                     0.033                                             0.349***
                                                                               (0.027)                                           (0.051)
      Opening balance                                0.003***                  0.004**                      0.012***             0.013***
                                                     (0.001)                   (0.001)                      (0.001)              (0.001)
      Loan linkage                                   -0.027***                 -0.035***                    -0.012***            -0.012***
                                                     (0.006)                   (0.008)                      (0.002)              (0.002)
      Account age                                    -0.016***                 -0.013***                    -0.005***            -0.005***
                                                     (0.002)                   (0.003)                      (0.001)              (0.001)
      Days to Maturity                               -0.019***                 -0.023***
                                                     (0.001)                   (0.002)
      No. of transactions                                                                                   0.000                0.002*
                                                                                                            (0.001)              (0.001)
      Change in withdrawals                                                                                 0.030***             0.032**
                                                                                                            (0.011)              (0.013)
      Change in deposits                                                                                    0.002*               0.002*
                                                                                                            (0.001)              (0.001)

      Distance                                                                 -0.007                                            -0.000
                                                                               (0.005)                                           (0.001)
      Neighborhood control                           no                        yes                          no                   yes
      N                                              4271                      3133                         10575                8702
      Pseudo/Adj R2                                  0.137                     0.162                        0.212                0.273



                                                                                                                                               38
                                                             Table 4
Is there a difference in the behavior of depositors who had availed of a loan in the Past versus depositors who avail of a
loan in the Future?
This table presents results of probit models (co-efficients reported are marginal effects). For fixed deposit accounts, the dependent variable is an indicator
variable that takes the value of one if the depositor liquidates any part of his/her account in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March. For
transactions account the dependent variable takes the value of one if the depositor withdraws more than 75% of the opening balance as on the event date in
the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, 2001. The analysis is conducted separately for fixed deposit accounts and transaction accounts. Minority
community is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the account belongs to a depositor from the minority community. Account age is the log of the
length of time, for which the account has been open as on the event date. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor
if the depositors’ balance as on the event date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Opening balance is the deposit balance (amount in ten thousands
of Rs.) in an account as on the event date if the depositors balance is below the deposit insurance coverage limit. Outstanding loan linkage is a dummy
variable that takes the value of 1 for a deposit account if the household (associated with the account) has a loan account with the bank as on event date. Past
loan linkage is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if any member of the household (associated with the account) had a loan account with the bank
before event date and there is no outstanding loan linkage. Future loan linkage is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a deposit account if the
household (associated with the account) had no loan account with the bank before/on the event date but availed of a loan from the bank in the future. Days to
maturity are the log of the number of days left for maturity for the fixed deposit account plus one. Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits
between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an inflow and is zero otherwise. Change in withdrawals is the percentage change in deposits
between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise. No. of transactions is the total number of transactions (deposits,
withdrawals, and transfers) in hundreds associated with an account between the 1st of January 2000 and event date. Distance is the physical distance of the
depositors residence from the bank and is measured as the traveling cost to the bank in tens of Rs. Neighborhood controls represents the municipal ward
where the depositor resides. White heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. In column 2 and 4 the standard errors are
clustered at the household level. The symbols ***, **, * indicate significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.

                                                       Fixed Deposit a/c                                          Transaction a/c
                                           (1)                  (2)                            (3)                          (4)
     Minority community                    0.007                0.005                          0.006**                      0.007**
                                           (0.005)              (0.010)                        (0.002)                      (0.003)
     Account age                           -0.015***              -0.012***                    -0.005***                     -0.005***
                                           (0.002)                (0.003)                      (0.001)                       (0.001)
     Above Insurance cover                 0.019                  0.024                        0.307***                      0.338***
                                           (0.014)                (0.023)                      (0.044)                       (0.050)
     Opening balance                       0.003***               0.004**                      0.013***                      0.013***
                                           (0.001)                (0.001)                      (0.001)                       (0.001)
     Outstanding loan linkage              -0.034***              -0.040***                    -0.013**                      -0.013**
                                           (0.005)                (0.006)                      (0.001)                       (0.003)
     Past loan linkage                     -0.028*                -0.033**                     -0.013**                      -0.012**
                                           (0.008)                (0.009)                      (0.000)                       (0.002)
     Future loan linkage                                          -0.008                                                     -0.012
                                                                  (0.026)                                                    (0.004)
     Days to maturity                      -0.020***              -0.022***
                                           (0.001)                (0.002)
     Change in deposits                                                                        0.002*                        0.002*
                                                                                               (0.001)                       (0.001)
     Change in withdrawals                                                                     0.025*                        0.031**
                                                                                               (0.013)                       (0.013)
     Number of transactions                                                                    0.003***                      0.002*
                                                                                               (0.001)                       (0.001)
     Distance                                                     -0.007                                                     0.000
                                                                  (0.005)                                                    (0.001)
     Neighborhood controls                 no                     yes                          no                            yes
     N                                     4574                   3182                         10691                         8708
     Pseudo R2                             0.139                  0.164                        0.248                         0.273

                                                                                                                                            39
                                                            Table 5
               Cox proportional hazard model with time varying covariates to analyze networks effects
This table presents coefficients from the estimation of the cox model with time varying covariates. The failure time is the time in minutes until withdrawal
by a depositor with starting time of 10:30 am on the 13th of March 2001 (date of failure of the large bank). Each interval of time represents one minute.
Runners in neighborhood (t-1) is the fraction of other depositors in the neighborhood of the depositor that have run until time t-1 (excluding runs
associated with the depositor household). Minority runners in neighborhood (t-1) is the fraction of minority community depositors in the neighborhood of
the depositor that have run until time t-1 (excluding runs associated with the depositor household). Majority runners in neighborhood (t-1) is the fraction
of majority community depositors in the neighborhood of the depositor that have run until time t-1 (excluding runs associated with the depositor
household). We also construct the social network of the depositor using the introducer name associated with the deposit account. Runners introducer
network (t-1) is the fraction of other depositors in the social network of the depositor that have run until time t-1 (excluding runs associated with the
depositor household). Column 5 report results of the estimation where at a point in time, only depositors in whose network there is at least one other
depositor running (runners network (t-1)>0) are included in the estimation. The Breslow method is used to adjust for ties in the cox regression (ties
represent two subjects with same failure time). The cox model estimated in column 1 does not have any time varying covariates. The symbols ***, **, *
indicate significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.

                                                                                                Transaction accounts
                                                                 (1)              (2)              (3)            (4)                  (5)
     Minority community                                          0.301**          0.301**          0.005          0.274**              0.298
                                                                 (0.122)          (0.124)          (0.199)        (0.122)              (0.239)
     Account age                                                 -0.284***        -0.291***         -0.306***        -0.260***         -0.323***
                                                                 (0.057)          (0.057)           (0.057)          (0.057)           (0.093)
     Above Insurance cover                                       3.039***         3.062***          3.120***         3.028***          2.913***
                                                                 (0.183)          (0.186)           (0.187)          (0.183)           (0.338)
     Opening balance                                             0.475***         0.485***          0.485***         0.475***          0.453***
                                                                 (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.019)          (0.019)           (0.037)
     loan linkage                                                -1.328***        -1.276***         -1.390***        -1.346***         -1.408***
                                                                 (0.387)          (0.387)           (0.417)          (0.386)           (0.526)
     Runners in neighborhood (t-1)                                                17.438***
                                                                                  (5.906)
     Majority runners in neighborhood (t-1)                                                         15.981**
                                                                                                    (6.586)
     Majority runners Neighbor (t-1) x Minority community                                           7.800
                                                                                                    (10.723)
     Minority runners in neighborhood (t-1)                                                         1.562
                                                                                                    (5.088)
     Min runners Neighbor (t-1) x Minority community                                                12.707*
                                                                                                    (6.517)
     Runners introducer network (t-1)                                                                                5.157***          4.131***
                                                                                                                     (0.622)           (0.795)
     Change in deposits                                          0.012**          0.012**           0.011***         0.012***          0.040***
                                                                 (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.013)
     Change in withdrawals                                       0.539            0.713             0.341            0.580             2.094***
                                                                 (0.649)          (0.650)           (0.723)          (0.639)           (0.676)
     Number of transactions                                      0.206***         0.186***          0.194***         0.202***          0.069
                                                                 (0.046)          (0.050)           (0.050)          (0.047)           (0.144)
     No of subjects                                              10691            10383             9927             10691             1509
     No of obs                                                   10691            2342915           2239864          2411757           306398
                                                                 χ2(8)=609.1      χ2(9)=605.3       χ2(12)=607.4     χ2(9)=646.4        χ2(9)=205.8
     Prob>χ2                                                     0.0000           0.0000            0.0000           0.0000            0.0000

                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                              Table 6

                                                      Estimation of transmission probability
Transmission probability is the probability of running (getting infected) as result of single contact with a person who has already
run (infected person).

This table presents results of estimation of transmission probability using the model: λ i (t) = C ∏i P(t) exp {β1xi1 + β2xi2 + βzxiz}
where ∏i is runners network(t-1) or neighborhood runners (t-1) . C is the number of people in ones social network or
neighborhood that one comes in contact and is assumed to be 1 per time interval. P (t) is the transmission probability, that is the
probability for running due contact with a person who has already run. This model can be thought of as the cox model with the
base hazard rate equal to P(t) and log-transformed ∏ that is x∏ =log (∏), is a covariate having a coefficient equal to one. The
transmission probability via social networks is estimated using the model described above with the covariates specified in table 7
column 1 along with runners network(t-1) whose coefficient is constrained to be one. Note that in the estimation at any point in
time, only depositors in whose network there is at least one other depositor running (runners network (t-1)>0) are included in the
estimation. Similarly the transmission probability via neighborhood is estimated with the coefficient of neighborhood runners (t-
1) constrained to be one. Also the estimation at any point in time, only includes depositors in whose network there is at least one
other depositor running (neighborhood runners (t-1)>0). The Breslow method is used to adjust for ties (ties represent two
subjects with same failure time). Each interval of time represents one minute. The mean transmission probability is the average of
P(t) across time.


Transmission Probability                              Mean                Std. Dev                      Min                            Max
via social network                                    0.030                 0.040                     0.0004                          0.213
via neighborhood                                      0.052                 0.076                     0.0007                          0.520



The graph 5, below represents the average transmission probability via social networks and neighborhood at different points in
time (1 hr 10 minute intervals). The average transmission probability for an interval is obtained by computing the average of
estimated transmission probabilities across failure times within an interval.



                                                                       transm ission probability

                                                                             social    neighborhood

                  0.2
                 0.18
                 0.16
                 0.14
   probability




                 0.12
                  0.1
                 0.08
                 0.06
                 0.04
                 0.02
                   0
                        10:30-12:20pm   12:20-14:10   14:10-16:00   10:30-12:20pm   12:20-14:10    14:10-16:00   10:30-12:20pm   12:20-14:10   14:10-16:00

                                           Day1                                        Day2                                         Day3




                                                                                                                                                             41
                                                      Do depositors that withdraw during the crisis return?

       Graph 6, below presents the deposit balance in transaction account from 1st February 2001 through to 1st May 2001 for depositors
       that withdrew during the crisis


                                                                Transaction account balance of runners


                                        14000000.00
                                                                                      failure of large bank
             Account balance (in Rs.)




                                        12000000.00
                                        10000000.00
                                         8000000.00
                                         6000000.00
                                         4000000.00
                                         2000000.00
                                               0.00




                                                                           Date (1st Feb 2001-1st May 2001)




                                                                                Table 7

This table reports the fraction of depositors who withdrew during the crisis and retuned to the bank after the crisis. After 1 month (May
1st, 2001), After 3 months (July 1st 2001), After 6 months (Oct 1st, 2001) are the dates in the future where the deposit balance is examined.




                                                                                                               Transaction a/c
                                                      Panel A                                  After 1 month   After 3 months    After 6 months
   fraction of depositors with balance higher than pre-crisis level                            0.058           0.110             0.065
   fraction of depositors with balance 25% higher than pre-crisis level                        0.035           0.068             0.048
   fraction of depositors with balance 50 % higher than pre-crisis level                       0.032           0.068             0.042
   fraction of depositors with balance 75 % higher than pre-crisis level                       0.022           0.045             0.029

                                                      Panel B
   fraction of depositors with balance 75% lower than pre-crisis level                         0.824           0.729             0.762
   fraction of depositors with balance 50 % lower than pre-crisis level                        0.872           0.791             0.843
   fraction of depositors with balance 25 % lower than pre-crisis level                        0.902           0.843             0.889




                                                                                                                                         42
                                                     Table 8 A
Ex-ante differences in characteristics of depositors with loan linkages as compared to depositors without loan
linkages

Table 8A and 8B presents the comparison of means for accounts with loan linkages versus accounts without loan linkages. Table 8C reports the
percentage of depositors with loan linkages based on different account balances. The analysis is conducted separately for fixed deposit accounts
and transaction accounts (savings and current a/c). Accounts with loan linkages is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if
the household (associated with the depositor) has/had a loan account with the bank as on event date. Account Balance is the opening balance
(amount in Rs.) in an account as on the event date. Account age is the log of the length of time, for which the account has been open as on the
event date. ***, **, * indicates significantly different than zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, in a two-sided t-test of the mean of
accounts without linkages versus accounts with loan linkages.

                                                 Fixed deposit a/c                                  Transaction a/c
                                         Account Balance    Account age                 Account Balance Account age
  Accounts without loan linkages
  Mean                                   36149                    6.703                 3280                   7.556
  Standard Error                         (1378)                   (0.014)               (93.47)                (0.007)
  N                                      4206                     4206                  9893                   9893
  Accounts with Loan Linkages
  Mean                                   78716                    6.653                 3226                   7.578
  Standard Error                         (11723)                  (0.054)               (303.57)               (0.024)
  N                                      368                      368                   798                    798
  Diff between means (t-stats)           -7.331***                0.948                 0.158                  -0.847


                             Table 8 B: Excluding depositors above insurance cover
                                                  Fixed deposit a/c                                 Transaction a/c
                                          Account Balance     Account age              Account Balance     Account age
  Accounts without loan linkages
  Mean                                    23705                    6.700               3259                     7.559
  Standard Error                          (339)                    (0.015)             (92.74)                  (0.007)
  N                                       3964                     3970                9783                     9783
  Accounts with Loan Linkages
  Mean                                    25345                    6.640               3246                     7.587
  Standard Error                          (1206)                   (0.061)             (305.7)                  (0.024)
  N                                       307                      307                 792                      792
  Diff between means (t-stats)            -1.295                   1.033               0.03                     -1.058

                                Table 8 C: distribution of depositors with loan linkages


                                                                                Fixed deposit a/c                   Transaction a/c
  % of depositors with loan linkages with account balance
  lower than 1000                                                                     0.032                               0.066
  between 1000 and 25000                                                              0.069                               0.089
  between 25000 and 50000                                                             0.082                               0.062
  between 50000 and 75000                                                             0.068                               0.088
  between 75000 and 100000                                                            0.082                               0.029
  Higher than 100000                                                                  0.208                               0.054




                                                                                                                                  43
                                                                    Table 9

Ex-ante differences in characteristics of depositors with loan linkages as compared to depositors who obtained a loan in
the future

This presents the comparison of means for accounts with loan linkages versus accounts with loan linkages in the future. The analysis is
conducted separately for fixed deposit accounts and transaction accounts. Accounts with loan linkages is a dummy variable that takes the value
of 1 for a deposit account if the household (associated with the account) has/had a loan account with the bank as on event date. Accounts with
future loan linkage is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a deposit account if the household (associated with the account) had no loan
account with the bank before/on the event date but availed of a loan from the bank in the future. Account Balance is the opening balance
(amount in Rs.) in an account as on the event date. Account age is the log of the length of time, for which the account has been open as on the
event date. ***, **, * indicates significantly different than zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively, in a two-sided t-test of the mean of
accounts with linkages versus accounts with future loan linkages.

                                                           Fixed deposit a/c                               Transaction a/c
                                                   Account Balance    Account age                 Account Balance Account age
      Depositors with Loan Linkage
      Mean                                         78716                    6.653                 3226                   7.578
      Standard Error                               11723                    0.054                 303.5                  0.024
      N                                            368                      368                   798                    798
      Depositors with future loan linkage
      Mean                                         44030                    6.771                 4153                   7.444
      Standard Error                               5577                     0.104                 1218.2                 0.114
      N                                            59                       59                    84                     84
      Diff between means (t-stats)                 1.180                    -0.832                -0.912                 -1.567




                                                                                                                                       44
                                                       Table 10 (Robustness)

This table presents results of probit models (co-efficient reported are marginal effects). In column 1, the dependent variable takes the value of one
if the depositor withdraws more than 50% of the opening balance as on the event date in the period between the 13th and the 15th of March, 2001.
Similarly in column 2 the threshold is set at 25%. In column 3, the dependent variable takes the value of one if the depositor withdraws more than
75% of the opening balance with the event window defined as withdrawals between the 9th and the 15th of March, 2001. Column 4 presents the
results with the standard event window (withdrawal between 13th and 15th March, using the 75% threshold) where account age is defined as the
maximum time that an account has been open in the household of the depositor. Minority community is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1
if the account belongs to a depositor from the minority community. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a
depositor if his/her balance in the bank as on the event date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Opening balance is the balance (amount
in ten thousands of Rs.) in an account as on the event date if the depositor is below the deposit insurance coverage limit. Loan linkage is dummy
variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if the household (associated with the depositor) has/had a loan account with the bank as on event
date. No. of transactions is the total number of transactions (deposits, withdrawals, and transfers) in hundreds associated with an account between
the 1st of January 2000 and event date. Change in withdrawals is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March, 2001 and event
date if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise. Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March 2001 and
event date if there is an inflow and is zero otherwise. All dummy variables are 0 otherwise. Neighborhood controls represents the municipal ward
where the depositor resides. White heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, * indicate
significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.


                                                                                Transaction a/c
                                             50% threshold            25% threshold       Event window
                                                                                            9th-15th March
        Minority community                   0.005                    0.006               0.006**                        0.006**
                                             (0.003)                  (0.004)             (0.002)                        (0.003)
        Account age                          -0.008***                -0.008***                -0.006***                 -0.004***
                                             (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)                   (0.001)
        Above Insurance cover                0.325***                 0.360***                 0.423***                  0.337***
                                             (0.047)                  (0.049)                  (0.057)                   (0.047)
        Opening balance                      0.018***                 0.020***                 0.013***                  0.012***
                                             (0.001)                  (0.001)                  (0.001)                   (0.001)
        loan linkage                         -0.015***                -0.012**                 -0.013***                 -0.012***
                                             (0.003)                  (0.004)                  (0.002)                   (0.002)
        Change in deposits                   0.003*                   0.003*                   0.006***                  0.002**
                                             (0.002)                  (0.002)                  (0.002)                   (0.001)
        Change in withdrawals                0.059***                 0.074***                 -0.030                    0.031**
                                             (0.015)                  (0.016)                  (0.020)                   (0.012)
        Number of transactions               0.008***                 0.012***                 0.005***                  0.002*
                                             (0.001)                  (0.002)                  (0.001)                   (0.001)
        Neighborhood controls                yes                      yes                      yes                       yes
        N                                    9910                     9910                     9993                      9910
        Pseudo R2                            0.240                    0.242                    0.290                     0.265




                                                                                                                                   45
                                                        Table 11 (Robustness)

This table presents results of probit models (co-efficient reported are marginal effects). For transaction account the dependent variable takes the
value of one if the depositor withdraws more than 75% of the opening balance as on the event date in the period between the 13th and the 15th
of March, 2001. Minority community is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the account belongs to a depositor from the minority
community. Above Insurance cover is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if his/her balance in the bank as on the event
date is above the deposit insurance coverage limit. Opening balance is the balance (amount in ten thousands of Rs.) in an account as on the event
date if the depositor is below the deposit insurance coverage limit. Loan linkage is dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a depositor if the
household (associated with the depositor) has/had a loan account with the bank as on event date. Account age is the log of the length of time, for
which the account has been open as on the event date. Days to maturity are the number of days left for maturity for the fixed deposit account.
No of transactions is the total number of transactions (deposits, withdrawals, and transfers) in hundreds associated with an account between the
1st of January 2000 and event date. Change in withdrawals is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March, 2001 and event date
if there is an outflow and is zero otherwise. Change in deposits is the percentage change in deposits between the 12th of March 2001 and event
date if there is an inflow and is zero otherwise. All dummy variables are 0 otherwise. Age is the age of the depositor. Wealth represents the
wealth of a depositor. Education levels are dummies for the level of education attained by a depositor. Neighborhood controls represents the
municipal ward where the depositor resides. White heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are reported in parentheses. The symbols ***,
**, * indicate significance levels of 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. The symbol &&& indicates perfect prediction of failure (not running). The
symbol $$$ indicates perfect prediction of success (running).


                                                                               Transaction a/c

  Minority community                    0.113**                    0.104*                 0.098*                 0.132
                                        (0.056)                    (0.056)                (0.056)                (0.094)
  Account age                           -0.082**                   -0.081**               -0.082**               -0.142***
                                        (0.035)                    (0.036)                (0.036)                (0.055)
  Above Insurance cover                 0.541***                   0.535***               0.475**                0.507**
                                        (0.162)                    (0.163)                (0.191)                (0.194)
  Opening balance                       0.149***                   0.143***               0.142***               0.166***
                                        (0.047)                    (0.047)                (0.045)                (0.049)
  loan linkage                          &&&                        &&&                    &&&                    &&&


  Change in deposits                    $$$                        $$$                    $$$                    $$$


  Change in withdrawals                 0.171                      0.208                  0.038                  -0.292
                                        (0.396)                    (0.393)                (0.420)                (0.619)
  Number of transactions                0.316                      0.297                  0.361                  0.347
                                        (0.262)                    (0.257)                (0.318)                (0.289)
  Age                                                              0.002                  0.022                  0.085
                                                                   (0.063)                (0.066)                (0.099)
  Wealth                                                                                  3.328                  4.887
                                                                                          (4.635)                (5.587)
  Education level dummies               yes                        yes                    yes                    yes
  Neighborhood controls                 no                         no                     no                     yes
  N                                     261                        246                    238                    195
  Pseudo R2                             0.364                      0.357                  0.357                  0.388




                                                                                                                                   46
