                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TRADE, TECHNOLOGY, AND THE ENVIRONMENT:
                  WHY HAVE POOR COUNTRIES REGULATED SOONER?

                                             Mary Lovely
                                             David Popp

                                        Working Paper 14286
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14286


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




We thank Neelakshi Medhi and Tara Holmes for excellent research assistance. Helpful comments
on earlier versions were received from Devashish Mitra, David Sonnenfeld and seminar participants
at Sustainable Resource Use and Economic Dynamics: SURED 2006, the International Monetary Fund,
the London School of Economics, the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management, the
ERB Institute at the University of Michigan, and Northwestern University’s Searle Center on Law,
Regulation, and Economic Growth. As usual, any remaining errors are the responsibility of the authors.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Mary Lovely and David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Trade, Technology, and the Environment: Why Have Poor Countries Regulated Sooner?
Mary Lovely and David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 14286
August 2008
JEL No. F18,O33,Q53,Q55,Q56,Q58

                                              ABSTRACT

Countries who adopted regulation of coal-fired power plants after 1980 generally did so at a much
lower level of per-capita income than did early adopters – poor countries regulated sooner. This phenomenon
suggests that pioneering adopters of environmental regulation provide an advantage to countries adopting
these regulations later, presumably through advances in technology made by these first adopters. Focusing
specifically on regulation of coal-fired power plants, we ask to what extent the availability of new
technology influences the adoption of new environmental regulation. We build a general equilibrium
model of an open economy to identify the political-economy determinants of the decision to regulate
emissions. Using a newly-created data set of SO2 and NOX regulations for coal-fired power plants
and a patent-based measure of the technology frontier, we test the model’s predictions using a hazard
regression of the diffusion of environmental regulation across countries. Our findings support the hypothesis
that international economic integration eases access to environmentally friendly technologies and leads
to earlier adoption, ceteris paribus, of regulation in developing countries. By limiting firms’ ability
to burden shift, however, openness may raise opposition to regulation. Our results suggest that domestic
trade protection allows costs to be shifted to domestic consumers while large countries can shift costs
to foreign consumers, raising the likelihood of adoption. Other political economy factors, such as the
quality of domestic coal and election years, are also important determinants.


Mary Lovely
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
110 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244
melovely@maxwell.syr.edu

David Popp
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
426 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1020
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
        With mounting environmental costs of economic growth, the world looks to technology

for an exit ramp from what seems to be a crash course to ecological disaster. Indeed, China, a

prominent example of break-neck growth amid rising domestic damage, recently held its first

national conference on technology and the environment, declaring scientific innovation the key

to “historic transformation of environmental protection” and “leap-frog development.”1,2 For

China and other rapidly growing countries, technology seems to offer a panacea for the

environmental problems accompanying their economic development.

        If technology is a panacea, it is not a costless one. Installation and use of pollution-

control technologies are costly and these technologies are rarely adopted without regulatory

stimulus.3 Thus, to understand the diffusion of costly pollution-control technologies, we need to

understand the diffusion of regulation. In this paper, we examine the diffusion across countries

of coal-fired power plant regulation.          Not only is the diffusion of power plant regulation

important in its own right, given the rapid construction of these plants across the developing

world, its study illuminates the determinants of regulation adoption and thus offers useful lessons

for promoting diffusion of other emission-control technologies.

        The research question is motivated by two observations. First, the diffusion of air

pollution-control technologies is strongly linked to changes in regulatory pressure. For example,

most power plants in China have controls for particulate matter (PM), while only the newest

plants control nitrogen oxides (NOX) and sulfur dioxide (SO2). This sequence reflects the earlier

appearance in China of PM regulations than of NOX and SO2 controls.4                        Second, despite



1
  For a description of the environmental costs of growth in China, see World Bank (2001).
2
  For a brief overview of the National Conference on Environmental Science and Technology, held August 18-19,
2006, see State Environmental Protection Agency (2007).
3
  Studies supporting the importance of regulation for diffusion of environmental technologies include Gray and
Shadbegian (1998), Kerr and Newell (2003), Snyder et al. (2003), and Popp (2006b).
4
  Data are taken from the CoalPower 4 database, the International Energy Agency (IEA) Coal Research Programme.
                                                                                                              2


predictions of the environmental Kuznets curve literature, which suggests an inverted-U

relationship between environmental performance and economic growth, countries who adopted

regulation of coal-fired power plants after 1980 generally did so at a much lower level of per-

capita income than did early adopters – poor countries regulated sooner. This phenomenon

suggests that early adopters of environmental regulation provide an advantage to countries

adopting these regulations later, presumably through advances in technology made by these

pioneering adopters.

        We attempt to understand why poorer countries adopt sooner, focusing on the link

between the global technological frontier and environmental regulation. Environmental controls

in advanced economies are likely to induce new innovations needed to comply with regulation.

However, for other countries, the technologies needed to comply with regulations are already in

use elsewhere in the world when the decision to regulate is made. Thus, in this paper, rather than

asking to what extent environmental regulation induces new environmental innovation, as in

previous studies of early adopters, we instead ask to what extent the availability of new

technology influences the adoption of environmental regulation by non-innovating countries.5

        Our approach considers carefully the role of international markets and trade policies in

transmitting both knowledge and cost shocks across economies. Previous studies suggest that

access to international markets influences firms’ ability to use new technology. Reppelin-Hill

(1999) finds that adoption of new technology in the steel industry is positively correlated with

trade openness.       Acharya and Keller (2007) estimate that the contribution of international

technology transfer to productivity growth exceeds that of domestic R&D and that imports are a

5
  In recent years, several papers have studied the potential for environmental policy to induce environmentally-
friendly innovation. Nearly all of these studies have focused on highly developed economies. This is not surprising,
as these countries were the first to enact environmental protections and most R&D expenditures occur in these
countries. In 2000, global R&D expenditures were at least $729 billion. 82 percent of this was done in the OECD
and half was performed by the United States and Japan alone (National Science Board, 2006).
                                                                                                3


major channel for these spillovers. Consequently, we investigate the possibility that low trade

barriers ease access to new technology, and thus increase the likelihood of domestic regulation.

       We acknowledge the double-edged nature of openness, however, in that the global

market constrains domestic firms’ ability to pass along higher abatement costs. To the extent

that local firms are protected from such competition through trade restrictions, their ability to

shift the regulatory burden to domestic consumers may be larger and their opposition to

regulation lessened. We also consider the size of the domestic economy relative to the world

market, reflecting the ability of local producers to pass costs through to foreign consumers.

       To focus directly on the decision to adopt pollution control regulations, we constructed a

data base of coal-fired power plant regulation for SO2 and NOX across 45 countries. For each

country, we identify the year in which these regulations were first enacted. Using the history of

these particular regulations allows us to focus on a specific set of explanatory variables important

to coal-fired plants and permits us to identify political economy concerns more precisely than if a

broad index of regulation were used. Narrowing our study to a specific set of regulations also

allows us to more precisely define the relevant technological frontier. We measure innovation

using patents on pollution control devices specific to the reduction of SO2 and NOX emissions.

       We begin with a general equilibrium model of an open economy and we analyze the

political economy decision to regulate emissions. From this, we develop several empirical

predictions that we examine using our panel of regulation data. Our findings support the

hypothesis that international economic integration eases access to environmentally friendly

technologies and leads to earlier adoption, ceteris paribus, of regulation in developing countries.

Our results are also consistent with the view that domestic trade protection allows costs to be

shifted to domestic consumers while large countries can shift costs to foreign consumers, raising
                                                                                                                4


the likelihood of adoption. Other political economy factors, such as the quality of domestic coal

and election years, are also important determinants.



I. Theoretical Framework

        To provide a framework for our empirical analysis, we consider a general equilibrium

model of an economy that uses electricity to produce a tradable good. Electricity is generated by

burning domestically mined coal. Domestic consumers benefit from consumption but experience

disutility from emissions generated by coal-fired power plants. The allowable level of such

emissions is endogenously determined by a government that maximizes a weighted sum of social

welfare and contributions from organized interest groups. The country does not engage in

pollution control R&D, instead purchasing abatement services from international suppliers.

        i. Production

        To capture the importance of coal to downstream sectors, we posit a model with four

production sectors: agriculture, which serves as numeraire, coal mining, electricity generation,

and manufacturing. Each sector uses intersectorally mobile labor as a factor of production while

coal, electricity, and manufacturing production also require the use of sector-specific capital.

The owners of these sector-specific factors engage in lobbying to influence the level of pollution

regulation chosen by the government.6

        The economy contains L workers, each of which inelastically supplies one unit of labor.

Agriculture serves as numeraire and is modeled as a tradable sector with a constant-returns

technology. We choose units so that one unit of output requires one unit of labor input, tying the



6
  Specific-factor models are used frequently in endogenous policy analyses. Because these models imply the
existence of factor rents, they provide a mechanism by which agents have resources to expend in an attempt to
influence government policy. Hillman (1989) provides a useful overview in the context of trade policy.
                                                                                                              5


wage at unity. We assume that aggregate labor supply, L , is large enough so that there is always

a positive supply of locally produced agricultural products.

        Electricity from coal-fired plants is produced with labor, sector-specific capital, and coal,

using the technology E = min ⎡⎣ f E ( K E , LE ) , CE ⎤⎦ . LE measures the labor used by power plants

and CE is the quantity of coal burned. The function f E ( K E , LE ) exhibits constant returns to

scale, but capital services of power facilities, K E , are in fixed supply. Electricity is not traded, so

its price is determined on the domestic market.

        Each unit of coal burned by electricity producers generates one unit of emissions and

plants may be required to abate these emissions. A regulatory standard requires electricity plants

to apply A units of abatement services per unit of coal burned, resulting in an A% reduction in

the volume of emissions. These services can be obtained only from the installation of imported

pollution abatement equipment. The domestic price of abatement services, which reflects the

lease price of imported abatement equipment, is PA (T ), where T indicates the level of technology

embodied in abatement devices. We posit that the price of abatement is driven by innovation

and that advances in the knowledge stock reduce the price of abatement: ∂PA / ∂T < 0.

        The return to owners of coal-fired power plants is

(1)                           π E = PE E − ( PC + PA A)CE − wLE = PEN E − wLE ,

where PE is the price of electricity and PC is the price of coal. To obtain the last term, note that

one unit of electricity requires one unit of coal and define the net price of electricity as

PEN = PE − PC − PA A . We assume that coal is not traded; its price is endogenously determined.7



7
 An alternative specification, allowing the price of coal to be exogenously determined, yields the same empirical
predictions, with the exception of the effect of larger coal reserves on the political equilibrium.
                                                                                                6

       Coal is mined by the application of labor to coal reserves. The technology for coal

production, C = fC ( K C , LC ), exhibits constant returns to scale. However, coal reserves, K C , are

in fixed supply. The return to owners of coal reserves is

(2)                                       π c = PC C − wLC .

       Manufactures are internationally traded and produced using sector-specific capital, K M ,

and labor, LM , in combination with electricity. The production technology for manufactures can

be expressed as M = min ⎡⎣ f M ( K M , LM ) , EM ⎤⎦ , where EM is the quantity of electricity used in

manufacturing. The function f M ( K M , LM ) exhibits constant returns to scale, but manufacturing

capital is in fixed supply. Letting PM denote the domestic price of manufactures, earnings of

manufacturing capital owners are

(3)                          π M = PM M − PE E − wLM = PMN M − wLM ,

where we use the requirement for one unit of electricity per unit of manufactures and define the

net price of manufactures as PMN = PM − PE .

       As detailed in Appendix A, equilibrium in the production sector is defined as a vector of

domestic product prices, factor rewards, and output levels for which the value marginal product

of labor is equal across all sectors, the domestic supply of electricity and coal equals the

domestic demand for electricity and coal, respectively, and labor demanded equals labor

supplied, given world prices and the emissions abatement level chosen by the government.

       ii. How are profits affected by a stricter abatement standard?

       Profits of specific factor owners are affected by the abatement level chosen by the

government. The extent to which profits fall when standards are tightened depends on the ability

of firms to pass these costs through to consumers. This pass-through ability is determined by
                                                                                                               7

both international and domestic market conditions. Consider first a country pursuing free trade.

Firms may pass through some cost increases to foreign consumers if local supply changes

influence the world price – that is, if the country is large enough to influence its terms of trade.

The ability of local producers to pass through regulatory costs depends on the elasticity of the

excess demand for manufactures facing the home country.                     If the country is small on world

markets, it faces an infinitely elastic excess demand curve and it has no pass-through ability.

         Even in small countries with no international market power, however, restrictive trade

policies may confer on producers an ability to pass through costs to consumers.8 A simple way

to see this is to consider a small economy that uses a binding import quota. Domestic demand

beyond the quota amount is met by domestic producers. The ability to pass regulatory costs to

consumers, therefore, depends on the local excess demand elasticity.                        This elasticity may

reasonably be considered a function of the quota level: the more restrictive the quota, the more

distorted is consumption compared to the free-trade level and the less elastic the demand curve.

If this relationship holds, producers in countries with more restrictive trade policies will be able

to pass through a larger share of the regulatory burden to consumers.

         We denote excess demand by X M ( PM ) and interpret this as excess world or excess (above

quota) domestic demand, depending on the case.                 In equilibrium, domestic supply must equal

excess demand, M = X M ( PM ) . Using this condition, changes in domestic supply affect price to

                                                                           dPM    1
the extent permitted by the slope of the excess demand curve:                  =         ≡ − χ MM .
                                                                           dM ∂X M / ∂PM

         Total profits for specific-capital owners are π M + π E + π C . Noting that the price of labor is

not affected by regulation and using (1) to (3), the change in profits from stricter regulation is:

8
 As in Damania et al. (2003), we take trade policy as independent of regulatory policy as the former is set through
multilateral negotiation.
                                                                                                         8


                          ∂π ∂π M ∂π E ∂π C
(4)                          =    +    +    = − [ PA E + M χ MM M A ] < 0.
                          ∂A   ∂A   ∂A   ∂A

The first term in brackets is the direct cost of the additional regulation. The second term is the

addition to profits from a higher equilibrium price when the local supply curve shifts. Appendix

A shows that in general equilibrium M A ≡ ∂M / ∂A < 0 and that ∂π / ∂A < 0.

        Result 1: Effect of a Stricter Abatement Standard on Profits. The incomes of specific-

factor owners are decreasing in the level of the abatement standard. Specific factor owners bear

a larger regulatory burden the more limited their ability to pass costs through to consumers.

        iii. How are consumers affected by a stricter abatement standard?

        We assume consumers care about the environment as well as consumption and have

quasi-linear preferences of the form9

(5)                                    U = DA + u ( DM ) − ϕ (1 − A) E ,

where DA is agricultural good consumption, and DM is manufactures consumption. Damage from

emissions is proportional to unabated coal burning by electricity generation, (1 − A) E . Marginal

damage, ϕ , is assumed to be a function of exogenous country characteristics, such as population

density. Consumers each supply one unit of labor and have an income of w.

        This utility function implies that the marginal utility of income is unity, given positive

consumption of the agricultural good.              Consequently, each consumer’s demand for the

manufactured good, denoted by DM ( PM ), is the inverse of ∂u ( DM ) / ∂DM . Consumer surplus is

given by S ( PM ) = u ( DM ( PM )) − PM DM ( PM ). Indirect utility, our measure of consumer welfare, is:

(6)                               V ( PM , A, E ) = w + S ( PM ) − ϕ (1 − A) E


9
 Quasi-linear preferences simplify treatment of the political equilibrium and are used by Grossman and Helpman
(1994) and Damania et al. (2003). Dixit, Grossman, and Helpman (1997) discuss the drawbacks of the method and
develop a model with general preferences and nontransferable utility.
                                                                                              9

The effect of a stricter standard on consumer welfare is

               dV ∂V ∂PM ∂V ∂V ∂E
(7)              =      +  +      = ϕ E − ϕ (1 − A) E A + DM ( PM ) χ MM M A .
               dA ∂PM ∂A ∂A ∂E ∂A

Appendix A shows that E A ≡ ∂E / ∂A < 0 . The environmental effect of regulation, the first two

terms on the right-side of (7), unambiguously raises consumers’ welfare, directly by reducing

emissions and indirectly by reducing electricity generation. The last term in (7) indicates that

consumers’ welfare is influenced by regulation’s impact on PM . Because a stricter abatement

standard leads to a backward shift in the local supply curve, PM rises and consumer surplus falls

if firms have any pass-through ability. In sum, a stricter abatement standard has benefits and

possible costs for consumers: it reduces emissions but it also may raise the price of consumption.

       Result 2: Effect of a Stricter Abatement Standard on Consumers. A stricter standard

increases consumers’ welfare by reducing damage from emissions. There is a consumer surplus

loss from stricter regulation, however, if it raises the relative price of manufactures. Consumer

surplus loss is larger the greater firms’ ability to pass through compliance costs to consumers.

       iv. Political Economy

       Because specific-factor owners bear some burden of regulation, they will expend real

resources lobbying the government to avoid it. We assume capital owners in the coal mining,

electricity, and manufacturing sectors solve the collective action problem and form an organized

“coal lobby,” which distributes the costs of organized action among its members. The abatement

standard is set by a government that values social welfare and contributions (or bribes) from this

coal lobby. It is the outcome of a non-cooperative, complete-information game played between

the government, which sets the standard, and the organized lobby, which offers a contribution to

the government to influence policy. In the first stage, the lobby chooses a contribution schedule,
                                                                                                                 10

B(A), that maximizes its members’ net welfare contingent on the abatement standard chosen by

the government. In the second stage of the game, the government chooses an abatement standard

to maximize a weighted sum of contributions and aggregate social welfare. Denoting social

welfare by W ( A) , the government’s objective function is

(8)                                       G ( A) = αW ( A) + (1 − α ) B ( A),

where α , 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, is the weight placed by the government on social welfare.

         An equilibrium of the game is a subgame-perfect Nash equilibrium in the contribution

schedule and the chosen abatement standard. We confine ourselves to equilibria in truthful

contribution schedules, which take the form:

(9)                                          B ( A) = max{π ( A) − b, 0},

where b is a constant. Bernheim and Whinston (1986) argue that a truthful Nash equilibrium is

among the equilibria of the game.10

         The coal lobby ignores consumer surplus and environmental damage and, thus, the

preferences of the lobby are given by π ( A) = π M ( A) + π E ( A) + π C ( A). Substituting (9) into the

government’s objective function and noting that social welfare gross-of-contributions is the sum

of profits, labor income, and consumer surplus, minus the damage from coal burning, yields:

(10)                        G ( A) = α [ w + S ( PM ( A)) − ϕ (1 − A) E ( A)] + π ( A) − b.

Using results 1 and 2, the first-order condition for maximizing the government’s objective,

allowing for complementary slackness, is:

(11)          α ⎡⎣ϕ E − ϕ (1 − A* ) E A + DM χ MM M A ⎤⎦ − [ PA E + M χ MM M A ] ≤ 0; if < 0, A* = 0.



10
  A locally truthful contribution schedule has the property that ∂B ( A) / ∂A = ∂π ( A) / ∂A at the equilibrium point.
Grossman and Helpman (1994) provide an application to trade policy, Damania et al. (2003) an application to
environmental policy and Fredriksson and Wollscheid (2008) an application to abatement technology investment.
                                                                                                             11

This expression characterizes the political-equilibrium abatement standard. The first term on the

left-hand side of (11) gives the (weighted) marginal benefit of regulation. This marginal benefit

is the sum of three impacts: the direct effect of on emissions, the indirect benefit from reduced

coal-fired electricity use, and the possible reduction in consumer surplus. The second term gives

the marginal cost for the government, in terms of reduced contributions from the coal lobby.

        When a non-negative standard is chosen, the marginal benefit of regulation to the

government equals its marginal cost. If firms have no ability to pass through cost increases, from

                                                                          E
(11) the political-equilibrium level of abatement is A* = 1 +                  ( P − αϕ ) . If the government
                                                                         αϕ E A A

chooses an abatement standard that does not require the complete abatement of emissions

( A* < 1), it must be that PA − αϕ > 0 . Thus, the politically chosen abatement standard is weaker

the larger the cost of abatement relative to the value of cleaner air to the government.11

        When firms do face an elastic excess demand curve, either because of international

market power or domestic trade protection, the politically optimal abatement level is

                             1
(12)            A* = 1 +         {( P − αϕ ) E + α ( M − DM ) χ MM M A + (1 − α ) M χ MM M A } .
                           αϕ E A A

The first term in brackets reflects the balance between direct regulatory costs and the value to

consumers of lower emissions. The second and third terms in brackets reflect the consequences

of firms’ ability to shift costs forward to consumers. As measured by the second term in

brackets, producer revenue gained through the price rise is offset by lost consumer surplus. If

the country is a net exporter of manufactures and can influence its terms of trade, the gain to

producers must exceed lost domestic consumer surplus as foreign consumers bear some of the


11
  The abatement rate that maximizes social welfare for a small country is given by (11) when α = 1 . It is readily
seen that the socially optimal level exceeds the politically optimal level when a non-zero standard is chosen.
                                                                                               12

burden.   If the country is a net importer but imports are relatively small, perhaps as a

consequence of trade restriction, this term will also be relatively small. The last term in brackets

gives the extra weight placed on producer revenue gains, indicating that a producer price

increase, whether from international or domestic market power, reduces the government’s

regulatory cost in terms of lost contributions and leads to adoption of a stricter standard.

       Finally, because we are looking at countries that have not regulated, we note that the

government may choose not to regulate. The government will not enact an abatement standard if

the benefits of abatement are not large enough to offset the cost of lost contributions, either

because the relative marginal disutility of emissions ( ϕ ) is small or the cost of abatement is high.



II. Empirical strategy

       Our empirical analysis examines when a country first adopts emissions regulations for

coal-fired power plants. In addition, to understand the determinants of stringent regulation, we

examine how long it takes to adopt regulations above a certain threshold. Thus, the dependent

variable is a binary variable indicating whether a country has enacted emission standards (for a

specific pollutant) as of year t. A country drops out of the sample the year after adoption. We

begin discussion of our empirical strategy by deriving predictions about the relationship between

adoption and the determinants identified by our theory. Next, we discuss construction of the

dependent variable, followed by a description of the construction of our key explanatory

variable, knowledge stocks. We end this section with depictions of trends in our data.

       i. Empirical Predictions

       In this section, we explore the effect on the politically determined abatement standard of

changes in our exogenous variables: the price of abatement services, the country’s pass-through
                                                                                                              13

ability, domestic coal reserves, the value consumers place on clean air, and the weight placed by

the government on social welfare. We consider a country for which the first-order condition (11)

and the second-order condition GAA < 0, hold at a non-negative level of A* .12

         Prediction 1: A reduction in the price of abatement services tightens the political

equilibrium abatement standard when there is no abatement.

Proof: Total differentiation of (11), evaluated at A* = 0 , yields

                                                  dA*   E
(13)                                                  =   < 0.
                                                  dPA GAA

The sign follows from that assumption that the second-order condition holds.

         Because most pollution control technologies are developed in just a few countries,

international trade increases access to new technologies, effectively reducing the user cost of

advanced abatement equipment and making adoption more likely.13 Therefore, in our hazard

analysis we interact the knowledge stock, representing the available new technologies, with

alternative measures of openness.              Equation (13) suggests that the sign of the estimated

coefficient for this interaction will reflect a higher adoption probability in more open economies

when the knowledge stock grows. Support for this form of “access effect” is consistent with

technology embodied in imported goods or imports-related learning.

         We employ two alternative measures of trade openness for our estimation. First is the

ratio of the total value of imports to GDP.14 This measure has been used in many prior studies

on technological diffusion and it has the distinct advantage of being available for all countries in

12
   We follow the literature and ignore effects that involve third derivatives of production functions as we have no
economic interpretation for these effects and because the specific factor model does not place restrictions on them.
13
   The producers of nearly all the SO2 scrubbers listed in the IEA’s CoalPower 4 database are headquartered in the
U.S., Japan, Germany, or Switzerland. All of the listed FGD units installed in China come from foreign suppliers.
14
   We use import share to measure openness because most countries in our sample are abatement equipment
importers. The most commonly used measure of openness is exports plus imports as a share of GDP. This
alternative measure is highly correlated with the imports-to-GDP ratio.
                                                                                                              14

our sample for most years. However, this ratio is also influenced by factors other than trade

policy, most notably country size, limiting our ability to isolate an “access effect” of openness

from the ability to pass-through regulatory costs to foreign consumers.15 Consequently, we

employ an alternative measure that controls for country characteristics, including the size of the

economy, the Hiscox-Kastner trade policy orientation index (TPOI). This index is constructed

from the residuals of a gravity model of bilateral trade flows, expressed relative to the sample

maximum intercept. The numbers represent the percentage reduction in imports in each year due

to deviations of trade policy from a free-trade benchmark. As such, higher values indicate more

“missing trade” and, thus, measure a country’s barriers to trade not accounted for by distance,

remoteness, and other controls used in the gravity estimation.16

         Prediction 2: In the political equilibrium, greater ability by producers to pass compliance

costs through to consumers leads to a stricter standard.

Proof: Totally differentiating (11) and rearranging yields:

                                     dA*     [α ( M − DM ) + (1 − α ) M ]
(14)                                       =                              M A.
                                    d χ MM             GAA

We consider the effect of international market power, conveyed by country size relative to the

world economy, separately from the market power conveyed on domestic producers from trade

restrictions. First, if the country has some ability to influence the international terms of trade and

it is a net exporter of manufactures, the term in brackets is positive and the total derivative is


15
   Using direct policy measures is also problematic. Average tariff rates underestimate the level of protection as the
weights used reflect distorted trade flows and do not measure non-tariff barriers. Non-tariff barrier measures are
available for only isolated years. Commonly used alternatives, such as tariff revenue as a share of total imports,
have disadvantages shared by average tariff rates.
16
   Hiscox and Kastner (2002) describe the gravity model used to estimate the residuals and the index as well as
provide a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of the index. The Hiscox-Kastner index is available for
most countries in our sample, with the exception of Eastern European countries and Zimbabwe, for all years in the
sample. We thank Scott Kastner for providing updated data. The correlation between the Hiscox-Kastner index and
import shares is -0.4383, suggesting that the two measures pick up different effects.
                                                                                                                 15

positive. In this case, greater pass-through of compliance costs unambiguously increases the

politically determined standard as the impact on producers’ contributions exceeds the weight

given to that on consumer surplus. Moreover, if the country is a net importer of manufactures

but these are relatively small, defined as ( DM − M ) / M < (1 − α ) / α , the term in brackets is

positive and the total derivative is positive. These considerations imply that our empirical

analysis of the adoption decision should control for the size of the domestic economy relative to

the world economy, which we measure as merchandise exports as a share of world merchandise

exports. Data for this measure is drawn from the World Development Indicators.

           Even in a country too small to influence its terms of trade, producers may be able to pass

regulatory costs along to consumers if trade policy is sufficiently restrictive. For this reason we

also include the direct effect of our two alternative openness measures defined above: the total

value of imports relative to GDP and the Hiscox-Kastner trade policy orientation index.

           Prediction 3: Holding the world price of manufactures and all other factor endowments

fixed, larger coal reserves weaken the political equilibrium abatement standard.

Proof: Totally differentiate (11) to obtain:

                                              dA* ( PA − αϕ ) ∂E
(15)                                               =              < 0.
                                              dK C    GAA    ∂K C

As shown in Appendix A, a larger coal sector reduces the domestic price of coal and increases

coal-fired electricity generation: ∂E / ∂K C > 0 . The term in brackets is positive is the government

chooses a standard that is less than full abatement, as discussed for the small-country case.17

           In our empirical work, we capture the size of specific investments in coal using coal

production per capita and the share of electricity produced with coal.18 We expect larger coal


17
     If we amend the model so that coal is freely traded, policy does not depend on the size of domestic coal reserves.
18
     Data on coal production comes from http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/international/coal.html.
                                                                                                16

production to be associated with a lower probability of regulating emissions from coal-fired

plants. We also control for lignite production per capita. Lignite coal is the lowest quality coal

and is dirtier than other types of coal. We expect countries with more lignite to be more likely to

adopt regulation, as the marginal benefit of abatement is higher.

       Prediction 4: An increase in the disutility consumers experience from coal burning leads

to a stricter abatement standard in the political equilibrium.

Proof: Totally differentiate (11) to obtain:

                                     dA* [(1 − A) E A − α E ]
(16)                                    =                     > 0.
                                     dϕ         GAA

The sign of the numerator is negative and, thus, the derivative is positive.

       In our hazard analysis, we include several measures that capture the marginal benefit of a

cleaner environment, ϕ . The first of these measures is GDP per capita. If environmental quality

is a normal good, richer consumers will place a higher weight on environmental quality relative

to consumption, and thus should regulate sooner. The second measure, population density, also

relates to the term ϕ in our theoretical model. We expect that more densely populated countries

will regulate sooner, all else equal, because of the proximity of residences to power plants.

       Prediction 5: An increase in the weight placed on social welfare relative to contributions

leads to a stricter political equilibrium abatement standard.

Proof: Totally differentiate (11) to obtain:

                            dA*    [ϕ E − ϕ (1 − A) E A + DM χ MM M A ]
(17)                            =−                                      > 0.
                            dα                     GAA

The sign of the term in brackets, which captures the marginal benefit to consumers of abatement,

must be positive if a non-negative level of abatement is chosen. The denominator is negative by

assumption, so the derivative is positive.
                                                                                                            17


        To capture the α term in the government’s objective function, we include measures of a

citizen’s ability to make his or her views known to the government. The first measure is the

Freedom House index of political rights, reasoning that more democratic governments place a

higher weight on social welfare. The second measure is whether or not it is an election year.

The government will place a higher weight on political contributions when an election is near.

We also include measures for the ideology of the ruling party, controlling for whether the

government is liberal or conservative, as opposed to centrist.19

        ii. Regulations

        No single source of information on coal-fired power plant regulations exists.                            By

consulting a series of publications by the International Energy Agency (IEA) Clean Coal Centre

(Vernon 1988, Soud 1991, McConville 1997, and Sloss 2003), we collected detailed information

on coal-fired power plant regulations in most developed countries, as well as some developing

countries, primarily in Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe. We supplemented this information

with country-specific sources where necessary.20 To narrow the task, we searched for additional

regulatory information only for countries that get at least 10 percent of their electric power from

coal.21 In some cases we were unable to identify when, or if, regulations were put in place,

leaving us with regulatory data for 45 of the 50 countries that get at least 10 percent of electricity

from coal.22 For each, we identify the year in which emissions restrictions on coal-fired power

plants were enacted for both SO2 and NOX. 23 Additionally, for NOX we identify both the initial


19
   If the country has a chief executive, the party of that person is used here. If not, the majority party in the
legislative branch is used.
20
   These sources are listed separately at the end of the references.
21
   These countries get at least 10 % of power from coal in at least one year between 1980 and 2001. We also include
Sweden, an environmental technology source, even though it does not generate much power from coal.
22
   The five missing countries are Luxembourg, Russia, North Korea, Dominican Republic, and Moldova.
23
   Our goal was to find regulations that provide incentives to install pollution control devices, such as flue gas
desulfurization (FGD) units to remove SO2 emissions. Thus, we sought the enactment of specific emissions
regulations for power plants, rather than general legislation on ambient air quality. One case, Israel, never adopts
                                                                                                               18

regulation and the adoption of rules stringent enough to necessitate the use of the more expensive

post-combustion abatement techniques described in the next section.24

         Looking at the adoption data supports the notion that adoption of regulation, rather than

adoption of the technology itself, is the first step in studying the diffusion of environmental

technologies.      Figure 1 shows, by year, the percentage of countries that have adopted a

regulation.25 Note the S-shaped pattern that is typical of traditional studies on adoption of

technology. Each regulation has a few early adopters, who are typically the technology leaders

(e.g. Japan and the U.S.). This is followed by a period of more rapid adoption which, for these

policies, occurs in the mid-1980s. A period of slower adoption among the remaining countries

follows. As plants will not typically adopt the control technologies used to reduce SO2 and NOX

without regulatory incentive, understanding the pattern of adoption of these regulations is the

first step towards understanding the international diffusion of these environmental technologies.

         iii. Knowledge stocks

         A key goal of this paper is to estimate the extent to which access to technological

advances increase the likelihood of adopting environmental regulation.                          For this, we use

pollution-control device patents as a measure of innovation. We accumulate these patents over

time in a knowledge stock designed to capture the level of technology in any given year. 26




specific regulations, using licenses negotiated with plants on an individual basis instead, and so we drop it from our
sample. In a second case, Mexico enacted an SO2 standard for power plants in 1993, but the allowable level of
emissions is so high that plants do not need to install FGD equipment (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, 1997).
24
   We define stringent regulations as those restricting NOX emissions to 410 mg/m3 or less, which is the regulation
introduced in Japan when they tightened NOX emission limits in 1986.
25
   The figure only includes the 39 countries that remain in our sample after merging with other data sources.
26
   Popp (2005) discusses the advantages and disadvantages of using patent data when studying environmental
technologies. Among the disadvantages, not all successful innovations are patented, as inventors may choose to
forgo patent protection to avoid disclosing proprietary information. Levin et al (1987) report significant differences
in the propensity to patent across industries. Fortunately, this is less problematic when studying the development of
a single technology than when using patents to study inventive activity across technologies.
                                                                                              19

       Patents are granted by national patent offices in individual countries and protection is

only valid in the country that grants the patent. An inventor must file for protection in each

nation in which protection is desired. Nearly all patent applications are first filed in the home

country of the inventor. The date of the initial application is referred to as the priority date. If

the patent is granted, protection begins from the priority date. If the inventor files abroad within

one year, the inventor will have priority over any patent applications received in those countries

since the priority date that describe similar inventions.

       These additional filings of the same patent application in different countries are known as

patent families. Because of the costs of filing abroad, along with the one-year waiting period

that gives inventors additional time to gauge their invention’s value, only the most valuable

inventions are filed in several countries. Moreover, filing a patent application is a signal that the

inventor expects the invention to be profitable in that country. Because of this, researchers such

as Lanjouw and Schankerman (2004) have used data on patent families as proxies for the quality

of individual patents. Lanjouw and Mody (1996) use such data to show that environmental

technologies patented by developed country firms are more general than similar inventions from

developing countries, as the developed country inventions have larger patent families.

       Because we use patents to identify the technological frontier, we take advantage of patent

families to find the most important ones. We begin by selecting all relevant patents granted in

the United States since 1969. Relevant technologies include those that reduce SO2 or NOX

emissions.   These include flue gas desulfurization (FGD) units to remove SO2 emissions,

combustion modification techniques, such as low NOX burners, designed to reduce the formation

of NOX in the combustion process, and equipment such as selective catalytic reduction (SCR)

units designed to remove NOX emissions from a plant’s exhaust (post-combustion treatment).
                                                                                                                 20

We choose the U.S. because it is a major supplier of pollution control equipment and, because of

the importance of the U.S. market, many foreign companies choose to patent in the U.S.27 We

keep only patents with at least one foreign patent family member.

         We use the European Classification System (ECLA) to identify relevant patents, as it

provides detail necessary to distinguish between the types of pollution controlled by various

technologies.28      Appendix B lists the relevant ECLA codes for these technologies. Using the

European Patent Office’s on-line database, esp@cenet, we downloaded a list of patent numbers

for documents published in the US.29,30 We obtained additional descriptive information on these

patents from Delphion, an on-line database of patents, including the application, priority, and

issue date, the home country of the inventor, and data on patent families, which we use to

identify patents with multiple family members.31 These patents were sorted by priority year, as

this date corresponds most closely with the actual inventive activity.32 Figure 2 shows the

number of U.S. patents with multiple family members for each of three technologies: SO2, NOX

combustion modification techniques, and NOX post- combustion treatment.

         We use these patents to construct a stock of knowledge for each year. Using β1, the rate

of decay, to capture the obsolescence of older patent and β2, the rate of diffusion, to capture

delays in the flow of knowledge, the stock of knowledge at time t for technology j is written as:

                                                  ∞
(18)                                   K j ,t = ∑ e− β1 ( s ) (1 − e − β2 ( s +1) ) PAT j ,t − s
                                                 s =0



27
   As a robustness check, we constructed a similar stock using patents granted in Germany. See appendix C.
28
   ECLA classifications are assigned by patent examiners at the European Patent Office. Traditional patent
classification systems, such as the International Patent Classification system and the US patent system, do not
provide enough detail to distinguish among technologies at the level needed for this paper.
29
   The database can be found at http://ep.espacenet.com/.
30
   These data are also used in Popp (2006a), and are described in more detail there.
31
   This database is available at http://www.delphion.com.
32
   In addition, using priority dates, rather than the date of grant, removes noise introduced by variations in length of
the patent application process. Because only granted patents were published in the US until 2001, the data only
includes patent applications that were subsequently granted.
                                                                                                             21

The rate of diffusion is multiplied by s+1 so that diffusion is not constrained to be zero in the

current period. The base results presented below use a decay rate of 0.1, and a rate of diffusion

of 0.25 for each stock calculation.33 Figure 3 illustrates these stocks, with the stock in 1980

normalized to 100 in each case. Note that the value of the stock for SO2 progresses rather

smoothly through time, whereas both NOX technologies experience periods of growth after major

environmental regulations.          For example, both Germany and Japan passed stringent NOX

regulations in the 1980s that led to the development of new SCR technologies (Popp 2006a).

         iv. Additional data and trends

         Table 1 describes the variables and their sources in greater detail. The final sample

includes data from 1980-2000 on 39 countries.34 Table 2 provides descriptive data for each of

these variables for the 39 countries used in the empirical analysis.

         Before proceeding with the empirical analysis, we take a first look at some correlations

between key explanatory variables and adoption. Figures 4-6 show per capita GDP, in 1995 US

dollars, in the year of adoption of regulations for SO2 and NOX. As mentioned earlier, stringent

NOX regulations refers to regulations strong enough that plants would likely use SCR technology

to reduce emissions. Along the x-axis, countries are sorted by the year in which they adopted.

Consider first Figure 4, which shows this relationship for SO2. The figure is divided into three

segments. The first segment includes 6 countries that adopt before 1980, the first year of data in

our regression. With the exception of the Philippines, each of these countries adopts at a per

33
   These rates are consistent with others used in the R&D literature. For example, discussing the literature on an
appropriate lag structure for R&D capital, Griliches (1995) notes that previous studies suggest a structure peaking
between 3 and 5 years. The rates of decay and diffusion used in this paper provide a lag peaking after 4 years.
Appendix D presents sensitivity analysis with respect to the rates of decay and diffusion.
34
   The countries with missing data are Vietnam (no data in WDI), Poland, Czech Republic (no data in WDI until
after the country adopts regulation), Hong Kong (no political data), and Ukraine (no data on merchandise exports).
In addition, we do not have trade data for Romania until 1990, and so delete Romanian observations earlier than
1990. This is consistent with our treatment of other Eastern European countries, where we only consider adoption
decisions made in the post-Communist era. This is due both to data availability and because under the Communist
regime, many of these countries had stringent environmental laws on the books that were not enforced.
                                                                                                             22

capita income roughly between $15,000 and $20,000.35 Of the countries that adopt between

1980 and 2000, we see a strong trend of adoption at lower income over time. Finally, the third

segment of Figure 4 includes countries that have yet to adopt SO2 regulations. In general, these

are all low income countries. The exceptions are Australia and New Zealand. The coal found in

these countries is generally low in sulfur (Soud 1991, McConville 1997). Similar trends hold for

NOX, as shown in Figure 5. In comparison, there are still many countries that have not adopted

stringent NOX regulations (Figure 6). Those that have adopted are generally high income

countries, with a major exception being Eastern European countries.



III. Regressions

         Following the approach used by economists studying technology adoption, we use a

duration model that captures both a baseline hazard and country-specific effects on the adoption

of environmental regulation.36           These models separate the hazard function into two parts,

allowing for a baseline hazard, h0(t), that does not vary by country. Letting Xt represent a vector

of explanatory variables, β represent the vector of parameters to be estimated, and t represent

time yields a hazard function to be estimated of the form:

(19)                       h(t,Xt,β) = h0(t)exp(Xt′β).

         To estimate equation (19), the baseline hazard h0 must be specified. We present results

using three specifications common to the adoption literature: the exponential, Weibull, and

Gompertz distributions. The exponential distribution assumes the baseline hazard is constant

over time, whereas the others assume that the baseline hazard is a function of time. As a further


35
   Early adoption of regulation in the Philippines is explained by close bilateral relations with the United States,
which includes aid for environmental protection.
36
   See, for example, Hannan and McDowell 1984, Rose and Joskow 1990, Karshenas and Stoneman 1993, Kerr and
Newell 2003, Snyder et al. 2003, and Popp 2006b.
                                                                                                              23

robustness check, we estimate a Cox (1972) proportional hazards model, which uses semi-

parametric estimation instead of specifying the baseline hazard. Once the baseline hazard is

specified, we estimate equation (19) using maximum likelihood estimation, calculating robust

standard errors because we have multiple observations per country.37 In the hazard model,

exp(β) gives the change in the probability of adoption for each variable. To aid interpretation, we

normalize all non-interacted continuous variables so that a one unit change in the normalized

variable is equivalent to a ten percent change from its mean value.38 We present results for the

adoption of SO2 regulation, of NOX regulation, and of stringent NOX regulations that require the

use of post-combustion control techniques.

         i. SO2 Results

         In the case of SO2, our data include six countries that adopt prior to 1980, which is the

first year in our data set. We drop these six countries from the regression analysis.39 Table 3

presents results using various measures of trade policy. In this table, all results are presented

using the Weibull baseline hazard. Our main interest is the interaction of knowledge and trade

policy. Column 1 uses import share as a measure of trade policy. Column 2 uses the Hiscox-

Kastner trade policy orientation index (TPOI). While TPOI is our preferred policy measure, as

import shares may be complicated by scale effects, TPOI is not available for the Eastern

European countries in our sample, nor for Zimbabwe. In both cases, note that the interaction

between policy and the knowledge stock has the correct sign, as both a larger import share and a

lower TPOI signify more open trade policies. While the interacted coefficients appear small,

37
   For an introduction to duration data see Cox and Oakes (1985), Kiefer (1988), and Lancaster (1990).
38
   The normalization first divides each continuous variable by its mean, multiplies by 10, and then takes deviations
from the mean by subtracting 10. This procedure is introduced in Kerr and Newell (2003), and results in normalized
variables that have a mean of 0. Table 1 indicates the variables that are normalized.
39
   An alternative is to add a term to the likelihood function to account for the six early adopters (see, for example,
Popp (2006b). One drawback of such an approach is that it assumes that early adopters are influenced by the same
forces as later adopters. This seems unlikely, as early adopters tend to be innovators of environmental technology.
                                                                                                               24

recall that the base level of knowledge is 100. Thus, for the base level of technology, a one

percent increase in openness increases the likelihood of adoption by 13 to 17 percent. In

addition, in each case the direct effect of our trade policy variable, which measures the ability of

producers to pass cost increases on to domestic consumers, reduces the probability of adopting a

regulation, with a one percent increase in openness reducing the likelihood of adoption by about

30 percent. Both the access effect and the domestic pass-through effect are significant at the 1

percent level using TPOI, but only at the 10 percent level using import shares.

         These results suggest two competing effects. First, greater openness provides easier

access to technology, making countries more willing and able to adopt environmental regulation.

At the same time, increased openness raises domestic firms’ need to compete with foreign firms,

making it harder to pass cost increases to consumers. In each case, the access effect dominates

when the knowledge stock is just over double its 1980 value.40 Further emphasizing the role of

openness, of the nine countries in our sample that never adopt SO2 regulations, the average level

of import shares for each of these countries across the 1980-2000 period is eight percentage

points below the average of the sample as a whole and the average TPOI index is 12 percentage

points less open than average. Of these nine countries, only New Zealand, Morocco, and Mexico

have above average levels of import shares by 2000, and only Australia, New Zealand, Chile,

and South Africa have a below average (e.g. more open) TPOI by 2001.41

         Our third trade-related measure, world export share, captures the ability of a country to

pass cost increases on to foreign consumers through a favorable terms-of-trade effect. This

40
   The access effect dominates when exp(βopen + βinteractK) > 1, so that βopen + βinteractK > 0. This holds when K > -
βopen/βinteract. This occurs for a value of K equal to 221 using import shares, and 203 using TPOI. Knowledge
surpasses these values in 1993 and 1990, respectively. Interestingly, it is after this date that the majority of low
income countries adopt SO2 regulations. In Figure 4, countries to the right of Korea adopted regulations after 1990
and those to the right of Romania adopted after 1993.
41
   Recall that New Zealand and Australia do not adopt SO2 regulations because domestic coal supplies are naturally
low in sulfur. Only 2 of the 7 remaining non-adopting countries are more open than average.
                                                                                                            25

effect is positive, suggesting that larger countries with greater market power are more likely to

regulate, as regulatory cost increases can be at least partially passed on to foreign consumers.

However, the effect is only significant using the TPOI. In this case, a one percentage point

increase in world export share increases the likelihood of adoption by 41 percent.

        The lower significance of the trade measures using import shares may come from

correlations between import shares and the world export share. To investigate this, columns 3

and 4 present results without world export share, and columns 5 and 6 present results without the

direct effect of import shares or TPOI.42 Note from column 3 that dropping world export share

does increase the significance of the import share variables. However, dropping the direct effect

of import shares or TPOI does not greatly improve the significance of world export share.

        Turning to other variables, we again note that there are no significant differences across

the various specifications. A ten percent increase in per capita income increases adoption rates

by about 36%, supporting other results finding that environmental quality is a normal good. As

expected, more densely populated countries adopt more quickly, as pollution problems are likely

be more severe when population is concentrated and more people are exposed to pollution.

However, this is only significant in the models without world export share.

        Our next set of variables describes the coal sector. As expected, regulation is less likely

when the coal sector is important. Coal production per capita has a negative, although not

always statistically significant, effect on adoption. When significant, a country producing 10

percent more coal per capita than average is about 15 percent less likely to adopt SO2 regulations

for coal-fired power plants. However, if a country has a greater share of dirty coal, they are

more likely to adopt, as the pollution problems will be greater. Countries producing 10 percent


42
  Another possibility is that the different results occur because of the smaller sample used with TPOI. However, the
results in column 1 hold when we omit Eastern Europe and Zimbabwe, as is the case for the regressions using TPOI.
                                                                                                               26

more lignite coal than average are 5 percent more likely to adopt. Note, however, that the net

effect of the two coal variables remains negative. While countries with dirtier coal are more

likely to adopt than a country producing a similar amount of cleaner coal, they remain less likely

to adopt than the typical country. Finally, we find that the percentage of electricity from coal is

insignificant. This result may be due to competing effects: Having more power come from coal

makes the need to regulate greater, but it also raises the cost of regulation.

         Our more general set of political variables yield mixed results, as most are insignificant.

One striking finding is the strong negative effect of an executive branch election year. No

country enacted SO2 regulations in an executive branch election year. Political rights, measured

using the Freedom House index, are insignificant, as are the effect of political parties. Although

this may be a surprise given that liberal governments are typically seen as environmentally

friendly, this is less likely the case in lower income countries, where liberal governments may

resist regulation in order to protect the interests of low-income consumers.43

         Finally, Table 4 presents sensitivity to our choice of the baseline hazard. The table

presents results for the model using TPOI for each specification of the baseline hazard, including

results both with and without the direct effect of knowledge.44,45 Note first that, except for the

direct effect of the knowledge stocks, there are no substantive differences across the various

specifications.     Of the three parameterized baseline hazards, Aikike’s information criterion

shows the Weibull to be the best fit. Notably, the Weibull results in column 1 are very similar to

the semi-parametric results obtained using the Cox model. However, the Weibull has two

43
   Dutt and Mitra (2005) find empirical support for the proposition that the ideology of the government in power
influences the restrictiveness of trade policy but that the direction of this effect depends on country GDP.
44
   We focus on results using TPOI, as that measure of trade policy is less confounded by country size. Results are
similar using import shares and are available from the authors upon requests. The only differences are consistent
with those found in Table 3: the knowledge stock/import share interaction is less significant and the effect of coal
production per capita is more significant.
45
   For the Cox model, we only include results without the direct effect of knowledge, as the Cox model cannot be
estimated when including the knowledge stocks, as this measure only varies across time.
                                                                                                                27

advantages over Cox. One is that it is more efficient (Cleves et al, 2004). In addition, because

no country adopts regulation in an election year, the Cox model is unable to estimate a

coefficient for the election year variable. A concern with parameterizing the baseline hazard is

that, if the parameterization is incorrect, the estimated coefficients will be biased. The similar

results between the Weibull and the Cox models show that this is not the case here. Given this,

we consider the Weibull results in column 1 our preferred specification.46,47

         ii. NOX regulation results

         Table 5 compares the results across pollutants, using the Weibull model.48 For NOX, we

distinguish between two classes of regulation. In most cases, initial regulation levels are weak

enough that pre-combustion modifications are sufficient to comply with the regulations. The

middle columns of Table 5 look at the adoption of these regulations. To consider stringency, we

also look at adoption of NOX regulations stringent enough to require post-combustion treatment

of the flue gas. Such treatment requires expensive capital equipment (typically a selective

catalytic reduction unit, or SCR), making such regulations less prevalent, particularly among

developing countries. As shown in Figure 6, most countries adopting stringent NOX regulations

are rich countries. Exceptions are Indonesia and several Eastern European countries. The last

two columns of Table 5 focus on the adoption of these more stringent regulations.

46
   As shown in Table 4, we are unable to obtain precise estimates of the direct effect of knowledge stocks because
they only vary by time, not by country. Thus, when we estimate a time-varying hazard, the effect of these stocks is
not uniquely identified. Fortunately, the estimates of other parameters do not change when knowledge is dropped.
The Weibull and Gompertz results are nearly identical both with and without it. In these models, the knowledge
stock essentially provides more detailed parameterization of the baseline hazard, rather than serving as a direct
estimate of the overall effect of knowledge. In the exponential model, leaving knowledge stock out of the model
results in misspecification, as it assumes that learning effects are insignificant and that all time-varying effects are
captured by the explanatory variables. Here, coefficients do change and the log-likelihood decreases when
knowledge stock is omitted. In this case, the knowledge stock acts as a proxy for the time-varying hazard, which the
other models show to be significant.
47
   Note that we cannot directly compare the log-likelihood from the Cox model and the parameterized models, as the
Cox model maximizes a partial log-likelihood function.
48
   As with SO2, results do not vary using baseline hazard parameterizations and the Weibull model provides the best
fit of the baseline hazard parameterizations. Other results are available from the authors by request. Also, as with
SO2, countries that adopt NOX regulations before 1980 are omitted from our sample.
                                                                                            28

       Looking first at the adoption of any NOX regulation, we see that the interaction between

knowledge and import shares is positive, but that the magnitude is smaller than before. This

smaller magnitude is partially offset by greater variation in the knowledge stock for NOX

technologies. Still, at the average value of knowledge, the effect of a one percent increase of

import shares is nearly one-third as great as for SO2. The direct effect of import shares is

negative, as expected, but also about one-third as great as for SO2. Finally, the ability to pass

costs on to foreign consumers, measured using world export shares, is insignificant. Because the

costs of boiler modifications necessary to meet weaker NOX regulations are lower than the costs

of SO2 controls, technological advances and the ability to pass along cost increases appear less

important here than for sulfur dioxide. Finally, note that while these trade policy effects are

insignificant using TPOI, this change occurs because of the smaller sample size. If the model

using import shares is re-run without observations from Eastern Europe and Zimbabwe, the

import share effects are also insignificant.

       As for other variables, the results are very similar to SO2. GDP and population density

increase adoption rates. The political influences of the coal industry are generally insignificant,

except for our measure of dirty coal, which increases the probability of adoption.

       Finally, the last two columns of Table 5 examine the adoption of stringent NOX

regulations. Unlike the initial adoption of SO2 or NOX regulations, availability of knowledge is

insignificant.   Because it is mainly leading economies that are adopting stringent NOX

regulations and making use of SCR technology, access to technology from abroad appears less

important – countries adopting stringent regulations are generally those capable of producing and

improving SCR technology on their own.
                                                                                                          29

        Among other variables, GDP is still important – richer countries are more likely to

increase the stringency of NOX regulations. Unlike previous results, political parties appear

more important, as middle of the road governments are more likely to tighten regulations than

either liberal or conservative governments. Finally, the most notable difference is that,

controlling for other country characteristics, the Eastern European countries are much more

likely to pass stringent NOX regulations than other countries.                   Here, the influence of the

European Union (EU) is important, as countries wishing to join the EU must comply with EU

environmental standards. Desire to join the EU pushes these Eastern European countries to enact

regulations more stringent than would otherwise be chosen for their level of development.49



IV. Conclusions

        In debates on the effect of globalization and the environment, commonly cited effects are

scale effects (more production leads to more pollution), composition effects (a change in the mix

of economic activity can improve or exacerbate emissions), and technique effects (cleaner

technologies are used as countries grow).50 One challenge in empirically studying these effects

is separately identifying the role of each. Using the adoption of environmental regulations,

rather than a generic measure of environmental quality, as our dependent variable, we provide

new evidence on the technique effect, showing that increased access to technology via trade

increases the likelihood that a country will adopt environmental regulation. While we do find

that richer countries adopt regulation first, developing countries adopt environmental regulation

at earlier stages of development than did developed countries, as they can take advantage of off-

the-shelf technologies to carry out emission reductions.

49
  See, for example, “Eastern Europe’s environment: Clean up or clear out,” The Economist, Dec. 11, 1999, p. 47.
50
  Esty (2001) provides a review of this literature. Copeland and Taylor (2003) provide a rigorous theoretical
analysis of these effects in the context of an open economy.
                                                                                                             30

         Our results provide new evidence on the role of economic openness in allowing these

spillovers to spread across country borders.               We posit that openness both eases access to

technology and limits domestic firms’ ability to pass regulatory costs to consumers.                            Our

findings support the view that small, open economies are least able to transfer these costs away

from firms and, thus, are less likely to regulate, ceteris paribus. They suggest that international

burden shifting is an important factor in the political economy of environmental regulation.

         In addition to the links between trade and technology, we find that other political

economy forces are important.             Factors affecting the value placed on abatement, such as

population density and income level, increase the likelihood of regulation. Moreover, regulations

that negatively affect the coal sector are less likely in countries with large coal reserves, but more

likely the larger are reserves of dirty coal. Finally, the politics of globalization appear important,

as Eastern European countries have passed more stringent regulations than other countries at

similar levels of development in their progress toward joining the EU.

         Studying the adoption of environmental regulation is an important step in understanding

the diffusion of environmental technologies. Regulation is particularly important for end-of-the-

pipe technologies like those studied in this paper, as these technologies impose costs on firms

while only providing the benefit of compliance.51 Our work suggests that free trade can enhance

the diffusion of these technologies, but that this diffusion comes indirectly, with the decision to

regulate preceding a plant’s decision to adopt clean technology. Given these links, it is worth

considering when other influences might encourage adoption, so that clean technologies can be

adopted in countries that do not yet regulate emissions.


51
  While some green technologies may diffuse without regulation, environmental policy will be needed to encourage
socially optimal adoption levels. For example, while technologies that increase fuel efficiency, potentially reducing
fossil fuel consumption and the associated carbon emissions, could diffuse without regulation, adopters will consider
the private gains from lower fuel costs, but not the social benefits of reduced emissions.
                                                                                       31


                                 References Cited in Paper

Acharya, Ram C. and Wolfgang Keller (2007), “Technology Transfer through Imports,” NBER
      Working Paper #13086.
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (1997), Study on Atmospheric Emissions Regulations in
       APEC Economies, APEC #97-RE-01.7
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Michael D. Whinston (1986), “Menu Auctions, Resource Allocation,
      and Economic Influence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101:1-31.
Cleves, Mario A., William W. Gould, and Roberto G. Gutierrez (2004), An Introduction to
       Survival Analysis Using Stata: Revised Edition, Stata Corporation, College Station, TX.
CoalPower4 (2001), CD-ROM database available from the International Energy Agency Clean
      Coal Centre.
Copeland, Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor (2003), Trade and the Environment: Theory and
      Evidence, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Cox, David R. (1972), “Regression Models and Life-tables (with discussion),” Journal of the
      Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 34:187-220.
Cox, David R. and David Oakes (1985), Analysis of Survival Data, Chapman and Hall, London.
Damania, Richard, Per G. Fredriksson, and John A. List (2003), “Trade Liberalization,
     Corruption, and Environmental Policy Formation: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
     Environmental Economics and Management 46:490-512.
Dixit, Avinash, Gene M. Grossman, and Elhanan Helpman (1997), “Common Agency and
       Coordination: General Theory and Application to Government Policy Making,” Journal
       of Political Economy 105:752-769.
Dutt, Pushan and Devashish Mitra (2005), “Political Ideology and Endogenous Trade Policy: An
       Empirical Investigation,” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(1), 59-72.
Esty, Daniel C. (2001), “Bridging the Trade-Environment Divide,” Journal of Economic
       Perspectives, 15(3), 113-130.
Gray, Wayne B. and Ronald J. Shadbegian (1998), “Environmental Regulation, Investment
      Timing, and Technology Choice,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 46(2), 235-256.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994), “Protection for Sale,” American Economic
      Review 84:833-850.
Hannan, Timothy H. and John M. McDowell (1984), “The Determinants of Technology
      Adoption: the Case of the Banking Firm,” RAND Journal of Economics, 15(3), 328-335.
Hillman, Arye L (1989), The Political Economy of Protectionism, Harwood Academic
      Publishers, Chur, London and New York.
Hiscox, Michael J. and Scott L. Kastner (2002), “A General Measure of Trade Policy
       Orientations: Gravity-Model-Based Estimates for 82 Nations, 1960-1992,” Harvard
       University, Department of Political Science, mimeo.
                                                                                         32

Karshenas, Massoud and Paul L. Stoneman (1993), “Rank, Stock, Order, and Epidemic Effects
      in the Diffusion of New Process Technologies: An Empirical Model,” RAND Journal of
      Economics, 24(4), 503-528.
Keefer, Philip (2005), “DPI2004 Database of Political Institutions: Changes and Variable
       Definitions,” Development Research Group, The World Bank.
Kerr, Suzi and Richard G. Newell (2003), “Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence
    from the U.S. Lead Phasedown,” Journal of Industrial Economics 51(3),317-343.
Kiefer, Nicholas (1988), “Economic Duration Data and Hazard Functions,” Journal of Economic
        Literature, 26, 646-679.
Lancaster, Tony (1990), The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data, Cambridge University
       Press, Cambridge, UK.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
      Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-71.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Mark Shankerman (2004), “The Quality of Ideas: Measuring Innovation
      with Multiple Indicators,” Economic Journal, 114(495), 441-465.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987),
       “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 783-820.
McConville, Alessandra (1997), Emission standards handbook, London: IEA Coal Research.
National Science Board (2006), Science and Engineering Indicators – 2006, National Science
       Foundation, Arlington, VA (NSB-06-01).
Popp, David (2006a), “International Innovation and Diffusion of Air Pollution Control
      Technologies: The Effects of NOX and SO2 Regulation in the U.S., Japan, and Germany,”
      Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 51(1), January 2006, 46-71.
Popp, David (2006b), “Exploring Links Between Innovation and Diffusion: Adoption of NOX
      Control Technologies at U.S. Coal-Fired Power Plants,” NBER Working Paper #12119.
Popp, David (2005), “Lessons From Patents: Using Patents to Measure Technological Change in
       Environmental Models,” Ecological Economics, 54(2-3), 209-226.
Reppelin-Hill, Valerie (1999), “Trade and the Environment: An Empirical Analysis of the
       Technology Effect in the Steel Industry,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management, 38, 283-301.
Rose, Nancy L. and Paul L. Joskow (1990), “The Diffusion of New Technologies: Evidence
      From the Electric Utility Industry,” RAND Journal of Economics, 21(3), 354-373.
SEPA, 2007. Report on the State of the Environment in China 2006. Beijing. State Council of the
      People’s Republic of China. www.english.sepa.gov.cn/standards_report/soe/SOE2006,
      downloaded February 2008.
Sloss, Lesley L. (2003), Trends in emission standards, London: IEA Coal Research.
Soud, Hermine N. (1991), Emission standards handbook: air pollutant standards for coal-fired
       power plants, London: IEA Coal Research.
                                                                                          33

Snyder, Lori D., Nolan H. Miller, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “The Effects of Environmental
       Regulation on Diffusion: The Case of Chlorine Manufacturing,” American Economic
       Review, 93(2), 431-435.
Vernon, Jan L. (1988), Emission standards for coal-fired plants: air pollutant control policies,
      London: IEA Coal Research.
World Bank, 2001. China: Air, Land, and Water, Washington, D.C.: World Bank.


                       List of other sources checked for regulation data

       These documents are not specifically referenced in the paper, but were used to obtain
additional information on environmental regulations for selected countries.

International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs, 1978-
       ). Reference File, 229: Selected Finnish Laws and Regulations. 157
http://www.agores.org/publications/eneriure/finland21.pdf.
International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
       1978). Reference File, 251: Selected Laws and Regulations (Ireland). 251:0301
International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
       1978). Reference File, 321: Reference File, 321,Vietnam Overview. 321:0101
International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
       1978). Reference File, 274, Mexico. 274:5057
Lundvqvist, Lennart. The Hare and the Tortoise: Clean Air Policies in the United States and
      Sweden. University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor. 1980.
Comparative Environmental Law Ukraine. p. 20; 96-1.
http://www.freshfields.com/practice/environment/publications/pdfs/2674.pdf
International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
       1978). Vol. 4, #6, p. 895.
International Environmental Reporter (Washington, D.C.: The Bureau of National Affairs,
       1978). Reference File, 221: Selected Laws and Regulations (Denmark) 221: 0301.
www.prosus.uio.no/susnord (Denmark, Finland, Sweden)
http://www.umweltbundesamt.at/fileadmin/site/umweltkontrolle/2001/E-02_luft.pdf
Austria’s Informative Inventory Report 2004: Submission under the UNECE Convention on
       Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution. Vienna, 2004.
http://unece.org/env/lrtap/status/94s_st.htm
http://unece.org/env/lrtap/status/88s_st.htm
The Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe: Sophia Initiative on Local
      Air Quality: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia.
      Reduction of SO2 and Particulate Emissions: Synthesis Report. May, 1998.
                                                                                          34

U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of General Council: Technology Administration National
       Technical Information Service. Bulgarian Law No. 81 on Standards for Atmospheric
       Emissions of 10/91. 1992.
International Energy Agency. Emission Controls: In Electricity Generation and Industry. 1984.
Ellison, William (1995), “ Limiting of SO2 and NOx Emissions in Worldwide Coal-Power
        Production,” Radiat. Phys. Chem. Vol. 45, No. 6, pp. 1003-1011.
National Environmental Protection Council Legal Panel. Philippine Environmental Law. 58th
       Conference of the International Law Association Manila, Philippines. 1978.
State of Israel Ministry of the Interior: Environmental Protection Service. The Environment in
        Israel. Jerusalem: 1979.
Scandinavian Plants with NOx Control Installations Report 4152: 1992.
Environmental Policies in Yugoslavia. OECD report, Paris: 1986.
The Social Learning Group. Learning to Manage Global Environmental Risks, Vols. 1 & 2.
      MIT Press, Cambridge, MA: 2001.
Proceedings of the Energy and Environment: Transitions in Eastern Europe Conference. Vol. 1
      & 2. Energy and Environment Research Center (EERC), University of North Dakota.
Economic Commission for Europe: Committee on Environmental Policy. Environmental
      Performance Reviews: Yugoslavia. Series No. 15. United Nations: 2003.
International Energy Agency. Energy Policies in South Africa. OECD Report: 1996.
Underdal, A. & Kenneth, H. International Environmental Agreements and Domestic Politics:
      The Case of Acid Rain. Ashgate Publication, Great Britain: 2000.
IUCN East European Programme. Environmental Status Reports: 1990. Vol. 2. Information
     Press, Oxford: 1991.
New Zealand Board of Health Report. Series 15, Air Pollution. 1970.
Environmental Policies in New Zealand. OECD Report, Paris: 1981.
Glaeser, E. & Meyer, J. 2002. Chile: Political Economy of Urban Development. John F.
       Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University Press.
Fischer, F. & Black, M. 1995. Greening Environmental Policy: The Politics of a Sustainable
       Future. St. Martin’s Press, New York.
McGranahan, G. & Murray, F. 2003. Air Pollution and Health in Rapidly Developing Countries.
     Earthscan Publications, Inc., London.
Turpin, L. 1979. State of Israel Ministry of the Interior. The Environment in Israel.
       Environmental Protection Service.
                                                                                                 35


Table 1 – Data Definitions and Sources



variable                   description                                                        source
Openness
Trade Policy               Index created by fixed country-year effects in a gravity model of
     Orientation Index         bilateral trade                                                  HK
Import Share               (Imports)/GDP                                                        WDI
International Market Position
World Export Share         Merchandise exports as share of world merchandise exports            WDI
Political Economy – Marginal Benefit of Abatement
GDP Per Capita*            Per capita GDP in constant 1995 US $                                 WDI
Population Density*        People per square km                                                 WDI
Political Economy --Importance of Coal
% Electricity from Coal* % of electricity production from coal sources                          WDI
Coal Production Per
     Capita*               Total coal production, in quadrillion BTU, per person              EIA/WDI
Lignite Production Per
    Capita*                Production of lignite coal, in million short tons, per person     EIA/WDI
Political Economy -- Other
Election Year              Dummy = 1 if executive branch election held that year                DPI
Political Rights           Index of political rights, ranging from 1 (free) to 7 (not free)     FH
Liberal                    Dummy = 1 if country led by a liberal party                          DPI
Conservative               Dummy = 1 if country led by a conservative party                     DPI
* -- These variables are scaled in the regression so that a one-unit change represents a 10% deviation
     from the mean.

Sources:
WDI: World Development Indicators
EIA/WDI: Coal data from Energy Information Administration International Energy Annual 2003,
          available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/iea. Population data from WDI.
FH: Index produced by Freedom House (http://www.freedomhouse.org)
DPI: Database of Political Institutions (Keefer 2005)
HK: Hiscox and Kastner (2002)
                                                                                      36


Table 2 – Descriptive Data



variable                          N      mean         sd        min       p50        max
Knowledge Stock: SO2             21     190.300    46.381    100.000    207.422    239.876
Knowledge Stock: NOXPre          21     251.636    131.207   100.000    202.893    453.873
Knowledge Stock: NOXPost         21     209.733    81.366    100.000   225.402    301.700
Import shares                    771    30.574     14.410      6.855     27.873     84.398
Trade Policy Orientation Index   672     31.454     14.861     1.970     27.471     77.978
World Export Share               771     2.120      2.890      0.030     0.924      12.775
GDP Per Capita                   771   13724.48   12146.67    166.75   11179.19   46815.50
Population Density               771    123.121    114.878     1.912     93.345    476.127
% Electricity from Coal          771     33.354    25.811        0      27.263     99.474
Coal Production Per Capita       771   2.17E-08   4.47E-08       0     5.19E-09   3.47E-07
Lignite Production Per Capita    771     0.001      0.001        0     5.55E-08     0.007
Election Year                    771     0.057       0.232       0         0          1
Political Rights                 771      2.258      1.784       1         1          7
Liberal                          771     0.379      0.485        0         0          1
Conservative                     771     0.431       0.495       0         0          1
Eastern Europe dummy             771     0.101      0.302        0         0          1
                                                                                                   37


Table 3 – Regression Results: Adoption of SO2 Regulations

     Variable                        (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
     Knowledge Stock              -0.0893    -0.0018    -0.0970    -0.0107    -0.0403    -0.0456
                                  (-2.499)   (-0.064)   (-3.053)   (-0.406)   (-1.665)   (-1.840)
     Knowledge x Import Share      0.0016                0.0019               -0.0001
                                   (1.849)               (2.497)              (-0.975)
     Import Share                 -0.3554               -0.4233
                                  (-1.885)              (-2.507)
     Knowledge x Trade Policy                -0.0012               -0.0009               0.0001
        Orientation Index                    (-3.009)              (-2.439)              (0.389)
     Trade Policy Orientation                 0.2608                0.1817
        Index                                 (3.361)               (2.750)
     World Export Share            0.1618     0.3452                           0.3307     0.2363
                                   (0.927)    (2.193)                          (1.926)    (1.574)
     GDP Per Capita                0.3094     0.3144     0.3260     0.2836     0.2525     0.2431
                                   (3.827)    (4.408)    (3.935)    (5.325)    (3.102)    (4.421)
     Population Density            0.0534     0.0345     0.0766     0.0658     0.0096     0.0152
                                   (1.365)    (1.052)    (2.783)    (2.724)    (0.303)    (0.461)
     % Electricity from Coal       0.0447     0.0579     0.0375     0.0477     0.0496     0.0385
                                   (1.123)    (1.700)    (0.993)    (1.653)    (1.258)    (1.271)
     Coal Production Per Capita   -0.1545    -0.1165    -0.1259    -0.0608    -0.1549    -0.1050
                                  (-1.913)   (-1.531)   (-1.859)   (-3.994)   (-1.787)   (-1.386)
     Lignite Production Per        0.0529     0.0450     0.0535     0.0452     0.0476     0.0402
        Capita                     (2.303)    (2.312)    (2.655)    (5.156)    (1.804)    (1.881)
     Election Year                -17.080    -15.554    -18.569    -15.952    -17.614    -16.679
                                  (-23.91)   (-21.74)   (-22.60)   (-20.58)   (-29.23)   (-25.19)
     Political Rights              0.0959     0.2396     0.1140     0.2277    -0.0684     0.1184
                                   (0.375)    (1.136)    (0.423)    (0.939)   (-0.298)    (0.505)
     Liberal                      -0.6475    -0.4549    -0.9328    -0.8488    -0.4823    -0.5328
                                  (-0.898)   (-0.589)   (-1.616)   (-1.135)   (-0.724)   (-0.703)
     Conservative                 -0.5445    -0.6872    -0.7546    -1.2109    -0.7124    -0.6425
                                  (-0.840)   (-0.798)   (-1.188)   (-1.468)   (-1.098)   (-0.783)
     Eastern Europe                 1.607                 1.437                  1.915
                                   (2.141)               (2.110)               (2.255)
     Constant                       1.302    -16.901      4.108    -11.905      -9.070     -7.348
                                   (0.209)   (-3.495)    (0.979)   (-3.663)   (-2.169)   (-2.456)
     Duration dependence           1.8982     1.8204     1.8661     1.7151     1.8955     1.8067
                                   (9.062)    (7.731)    (8.689)    (7.087)    (9.204)    (8.291)
     N                               390        327        390        327         390        327
     log-likelihood                -3.408     -5.817     -3.807     -7.396     -5.327     -7.464
     chi2                         1360.76    1291.35    1169.34     943.91    1434.90    1399.00
     aic                            38.82      41.63      37.61      42.79       40.65      42.93

    The table presents regression results the Weibull baseline hazard; t-stats in parentheses.
                                                                                              38


Table 4 – SO2 Regression Results: Sensitivity to Alternative Specifications

Variable                     Weibull               Exponential              Gompertz            Cox
Knowledge Stock        -0.0018                  0.0795                 0.0882
                       (-0.064)                 (4.623)                (4.870)
Knowledge x TPOI       -0.0012 -0.0012         -0.0013   0.0007       -0.0013    0.0001       -0.0009
                       (-3.009) (-3.725)       (-3.901) (2.961)       (-3.964) (0.276)        (-2.254)
TPOI                    0.2608   0.2648         0.2646   -0.1219       0.2587    0.0156        0.1834
                        (3.361)  (3.541)        (4.281) (-1.943)       (4.168)  (0.300)        (2.054)
World Export Share      0.3452   0.3465         0.3075    0.1901       0.2888    0.2642        0.2071
                        (2.193)  (2.193)        (2.024)  (1.053)       (1.969)  (1.388)        (2.168)
GDP Per Capita          0.3144   0.3160         0.2920    0.1697       0.2901    0.1947        0.2873
                        (4.408)  (4.423)        (5.496)  (4.932)       (5.632)  (4.637)        (4.334)
Population Density      0.0345   0.0349         0.0333   -0.0091       0.0320    0.0045        0.0299
                        (1.052)  (1.085)        (1.019) (-0.271)       (1.019)  (0.130)        (1.016)
% Electricity from      0.0579   0.0585         0.0654    0.0314       0.0640    0.0376        0.0365
    Coal                (1.700)  (1.870)        (2.260)  (1.484)       (2.306)  (1.626)        (1.353)
Coal Production Per    -0.1165 -0.1168         -0.1187 -0.1043        -0.1095 -0.1168         -0.0616
    Capita             (-1.531) (-1.518)       (-1.506) (-1.408)      (-1.474) (-1.358)       (-3.271)
Lignite Production      0.0450   0.0452         0.0435    0.0314       0.0421    0.0332        0.0394
    Per Capita          (2.312)  (2.281)        (2.329)  (1.380)       (2.478)  (1.180)        (3.296)
Election Year          -15.554 -16.377         -14.515 -16.135        -15.334 -15.371
                       (-21.74) (-26.06)       (-23.24) (-36.93)      (-23.82) (-30.74)
Political Rights        0.2396   0.2439         0.2726    0.0228       0.2916    0.0247        0.4029
                        (1.136)  (1.143)        (1.460)  (0.114)       (1.598)  (0.112)        (2.236)
Liberal                -0.4549 -0.4479         -0.2432 -0.6749        -0.2418 -0.6583         -0.1128
                       (-0.589) (-0.609)       (-0.342) (-0.961)      (-0.350) (-0.927)       (-0.186)
Conservative           -0.6872 -0.6831         -0.3090    0.0358      -0.2837 -0.2184         -0.3213
                       (-0.798) (-0.799)       (-0.349) (0.048)       (-0.323) (-0.289)       (-0.382)
Constant               -16.901 -17.129         -19.118    -3.597      -19.830    -5.660
                       (-3.495) (-4.382)       (-4.828) (-2.316)      (-5.489) (-3.061)
Duration                1.8204   1.8117                               -0.0842    0.1938
     dependence         (7.731)  (9.948)                              (-0.710) (3.084)
N                         327       327          327       327            327      327          327
log-likelihood          -5.817    -5.818       -10.092   -16.806        -9.973  -15.273       -34.044
chi2                   1291.35 1420.39         1583.92   1775.60      1747.71 1313.06          84.00
aic                      41.63     39.64        48.18     59.61          49.95    58.55        90.09

The table presents regression results using alternative baseline hazards; t-stats in parentheses.
                                                                                        39


Table 5 – Regression Results: Weibull Results for Alternative Technologies


Variable                             SO2             NOX: Any Reg         NOX: Stringent
Knowledge Stock              -0.0893 -0.0018      -0.0258 -0.0253      -0.0044 -0.0139
                             (-2.499) (-0.064)    (-2.455) (-2.028)    (-0.477) (-0.997)
Knowledge x Import Share      0.0016               0.0004              -0.0002
                              (1.849)              (2.198)             (-0.708)
Import Share                 -0.3554              -0.1095               0.0163
                             (-1.885)             (-2.043)              (0.249)
Knowledge x Trade Policy               -0.0012               0.0002                0.0000
    Orientation Index                  (-3.009)              (0.451)              (-0.164)
Trade Policy Orientation                0.2608              -0.0613                0.0485
    Index                               (3.361)             (-0.695)               (0.815)
World Export Share            0.1618    0.3452     0.0709   -0.0095    -0.0022     0.0894
                              (0.927)   (2.193)    (0.398) (-0.055)    (-0.017) (1.237)
GDP Per Capita                0.3094    0.3144     0.2104    0.2090     0.2935     0.3399
                              (3.827)   (4.408)    (2.497)  (2.783)     (3.880)    (5.571)
Population Density            0.0534    0.0345     0.0806    0.0563     0.0545     0.0538
                              (1.365)   (1.052)    (2.747)  (1.828)     (1.659)    (1.606)
% Electricity from Coal       0.0447    0.0579     0.0385    0.0333    -0.0313 -0.0293
                              (1.123)   (1.700)    (0.650)  (0.595)    (-1.041) (-1.088)
Coal Production Per Capita   -0.1545 -0.1165      -0.0561 -0.0120      -0.0146 -0.0123
                             (-1.913) (-1.531)    (-1.091) (-0.285)    (-1.269) (-1.246)
Lignite Production Per        0.0529    0.0450     0.0452    0.0404     0.0241     0.0374
    Capita                    (2.303)   (2.312)    (3.619)  (3.882)     (1.011)    (2.494)
Election Year                -17.080 -15.554      -18.879 -17.135      -16.144 -15.255
                             (-23.90) (-21.74)    (-28.34) (-31.77)    (-20.93) (-24.97)
Political Rights              0.0959    0.2396     0.0990    0.4292    -0.0265     0.6692
                              (0.375)   (1.136)    (0.535)  (1.916)    (-0.087) (1.354)
Liberal                      -0.6475 -0.4549      -0.7493 -0.9087      -2.2733 -2.0885
                             (-0.898) (-0.589)    (-1.423) (-1.633)    (-2.789) (-1.905)
Conservative                 -0.5445 -0.6872      -0.6917 -1.1804      -2.0196 -1.9066
                             (-0.840) (-0.798)    (-0.969) (-1.309)    (-2.735) (-2.057)
Eastern Europe               (1.607)               (0.275)              (4.422)
                              (2.141)              (0.336)              (2.902)
Constant                       1.301   -16.901      -9.627  -10.509      -8.608   -10.420
                              (0.209) (-3.495)    (-2.737) (-3.003)    (-3.118) (-4.428)
Duration dependence           1.8982    1.8204     1.8407    1.9109     1.2745     1.3287
                              (9.062)   (7.731)    (6.897)  (8.716)     (5.141)    (4.178)
N                               390       327         380      317         618       542
log-likelihood                -3.408    -5.817     -3.067    -2.935    -12.337     -9.867
chi2                         1360.76 1291.35      3898.39 5266.31       741.31 1372.90
aic                            38.82     41.63       38.13    35.87       56.67     49.73

The table presents regression results for alternative regulations, using the Weibull baseline
hazard; t-stats in parentheses.
                                                                                                                   40


Figure 1 – Adoption of Environmental Regulations over Time

A. Sulfur Dioxide


                                     0.9

                                     0.8
        % of nations with SO2 regs




                                     0.7

                                     0.6

                                     0.5

                                     0.4

                                     0.3

                                     0.2

                                     0.1

                                      0
                                      1970   1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988   1991   1994   1997   2000
                                                                         year

B. Nitrogen Dioxide




                                     0.9

                                     0.8
        % of nations with NOX regs




                                     0.7

                                     0.6

                                     0.5

                                     0.4

                                     0.3

                                     0.2

                                     0.1

                                      0
                                      1970   1973   1976   1979   1982   1985   1988   1991   1994   1997   2000
                                                                         year
                                                                                                     41

C. Stringent NOX Regulations


                                                0.5
        % of nations with stringent NOX regs


                                               0.45

                                                0.4

                                               0.35

                                                0.3

                                               0.25

                                                0.2

                                               0.15

                                                0.1

                                               0.05

                                                 0
                                                 1980   1983   1986   1989      1992   1995   1998
                                                                         year

The figures show the cumulative percentage of countries that have adopted each regulation by
the year on the x-axis. In each case, note the S-shaped diffusion pattern that is typical for studies
of technology adoption. Note also that adoption of stringent NOX regulations has, to date,
leveled off with fewer countries adopting than for the other regulations.
                                                                                                                42


Figure 2 – U.S. Pollution Control Patents

 100


  90


  80


  70


  60


  50


  40


  30


  20


  10


   0
   1970   1972   1974   1976   1978   1980   1982   1984    1986      1988   1990   1992   1994   1996   1998   2000
                                                    Priority year

                           SO2        NOX Post Combustion           NOX Combustion Modification


The figure shows patents granted in the U.S. with at least one foreign patent family member for
each of three pollution control technologies.
                                                                                                        43


Figure 3 – Knowledge Stocks


                   500

                   450

                   400

                   350
 Knowledge Stock




                   300

                   250

                   200

                   150

                   100

                   50

                    0
                    1980     1982    1984    1986        1988    1990    1992    1994    1996   1998    2000
                                                                  year

                           NOX Combustion Modification          NOX Post-Combustion Treatment     SO2


The figure shows the value of the knowledge stocks constructed for this paper for each of the
three technologies. Note that the value of the stock for SO2 progresses rather smoothly through
time, whereas both NOX technologies experience periods of growth after major environmental
regulations.
                                                                                          44


Figure 4 – Per Capita GDP in the Year of Adoption: SO2




                                    45
 Per Capita GDP (1,000 1995 US $)




                                    40
                                       Adopt before                             Never adopt
                                                      Adopt 1980-2000
                                    35    1980

                                    30
                                    25
                                    20
                                    15
                                    10
                                     5




The figure shows the per capita GDP (in constant 1995 U.S. dollars) of each country in the year
in which it adopts SO2 regulations for coal-fired power plants. Countries are sorted from left to
right along the x-axis by the order in which regulations were enacted. The first two countries,
Japan and the U.S., enacted regulations in 1970. Three groups are presented. The first six
countries adopted regulations before 1980, and are thus not included in the regressions that
follow. The last eight countries never adopt regulation. With the exception of Australia and
New Zealand, who have stocks of relatively clean coal, these are all low income countries. The
remaining countries adopt during the time frame used in the regression for SO2 (1980-2000).
                                                                                          45


Figure 5 – Per Capita GDP in the Year of Adoption: NOX




                                    45
 Per Capita GDP (1,000 1995 US $)




                                    40 Adopt before
                                                       Adopt 1980-2000            Never adopt
                                           1980
                                    35
                                    30
                                    25
                                    20
                                    15
                                    10
                                     5




The figure shows the per capita GDP (in constant 1995 U.S. dollars) of each country in the year
in which it adopts NOX regulations for coal-fired power plants. Countries are sorted from left to
right along the x-axis by the order in which regulations were enacted. The first two countries,
Japan and the U.S., enacted regulations in 1970. Three groups are presented. The first six
countries adopted regulations before 1980, and are thus not included in the regressions that
follow. The last six countries never adopt regulation. With the exception of New Zealand, who
has a stock of relatively clean coal, these are all low income countries. The remaining countries
adopt during the time frame used in the regression for NOX (1980-2000).
                                                                                         46


Figure 6 – Per Capita GDP in the Year of Adoption: Stringent NOX Regulations




                                    45
                                         Adopt 1980-2000       Never adopt
 Per Capita GDP (1,000 1995 US $)




                                    40
                                    35
                                    30
                                    25
                                    20
                                    15
                                    10
                                     5




The figure shows the per capita GDP (in constant 1995 U.S. dollars) of each country in the year
in which it adopts stringent NOX regulations for coal-fired power plants. Countries are sorted
from left to right along the x-axis by the order in which regulations were enacted. Two groups
are presented. Those on the left are countries that adopt stringent NOX regulations between 1980
and 2000. Germany, the first country to adopt stringent NOX regulations, did so in 1983. Those
countries on the right have not adopted stringent NOX regulations as of 2000.
                                                                                              A1


                                Appendix A – Theoretical Model and Solutions

         The model we use to understand the effect of emissions regulations is a version of the

Ricardo-Viner (RV) model. The RV model posits perfect intersectoral mobility of labor but

sector-specific capital. In this way, it captures the short-run interests of capital owners who

expend a portion of their production surplus to influence economic policy.

         i. Equilibrium Conditions

         We consider an economy with four production sectors with technology described in the

text: agriculture (A), Manufacturing (M), Electricity Generation (E), and Coal Mining (C).

Agricultural and manufacturing goods are traded internationally. Equilibrium in the labor

market requires that labor supply equal the sum of labor demand: L = LA + LM + LE + LC .

Agriculture serves as numeraire and labor productivity is unity, tying the wage at unity. Profit

maximization requires that the value marginal product of labor equal the wage in each sector:

PC fC′ ( LC ) = 1; PEN f E′ ( LE ) = 1; PMN f M′ ( LM ) = 1.

         Net prices to manufacturing and electricity producers, PjN , differ from market prices, Pj ,

because of intermediate inputs, as defined in the text. The manufacturing sector uses one unit of

electricity for each unit produced, implying that in equilibrium, E = M . Electricity production

requires one unit of coal for each unit of energy generated, implying that emissions are

proportional to electricity generation. Power plants must abate A percent of emissions, with

these services purchased internationally at the fixed price, PA .

         Firms’ ability to raise prices is limited by the elasticity of demand. If the country pursues

free trade or uses a tariff only, the relevant elasticity reflects the slope of the world excess

demand curve, while if the country is small and uses a binding quota, the relevant elasticity

reflects the slope of the domestic excess demand curve.             We denote excess demand by
                                                                                                     A2


X M ( PM ) and interpret this as excess world or excess domestic demand, depending on the case.

In equilibrium, domestic supply must equal excess demand, M = X M ( PM ) . Denoting the price

elasticity of excess demand by ε M = −(∂X M / ∂PM )( PM / X M ) ≥ 0, and using the equilibrium

condition, Mˆ = −ε M PˆM .

        ii. Comparative-Statics Solutions

        We use comparative statics to show how changes in exogenous variables affect

equilibrium prices, outputs and profits. We totally differentiate the equilibrium conditions of the

model and express the effects on endogenous variables as a percentage change.

        Stricter Abatement Standard

        The percentage change in the share of emissions that must be abated is Â . We define the

elasticity of output with respect to labor in sector j as η j , the (negative of the) elasticity of the

marginal product of labor with respect to labor in sector j as σ j .               Input cost shares are

θ MM = PM / PMN , θ EE = PE / PEN , θ AE = PA A / PEN , θ EM = PE / PMN , θCE = PC / PEN . Finally, we define

                              (                 )
the parameterψ = ηCη Eθ EE σ E + ε M−1η M θ MM + η M θ EM (σ EηC + σ Cη EθCE ) > 0 .    This parameter is

larger the more inelastic is excess demand. Using these terms, we can express the effect of a

higher abatement standard as:

                                     PˆMN       ⎛σ η η θ θ ⎞
                                            = − ⎜ M E C AE EM ⎟ < 0;
                                       ˆA       ⎝     ψ       ⎠
                                     PˆE N
                                                ⎛σ η η θ θ ⎞
(A.1)                                       = − ⎜ E M C AE EM ⎟ < 0;
                                       Aˆ       ⎝     ψ       ⎠
                                     PˆC       ⎛σ η η θ θ ⎞
                                           = − ⎜ C E M AE EM ⎟ < 0.
                                      ˆA       ⎝     ψ       ⎠
                                                                                            A3

Thus, tightening the standard lowers net producer prices. The extent to which total profits for the

coal lobby fall depend on how far net producer prices fall:

                              πˆ       PMN M PˆMN PEN E PˆEN PC C PˆC
(A.2)                              =              +         +         < 0,
                              Aˆ         π     Aˆ   π Aˆ      π Aˆ

where we have used (A.1) to sign the derivative. Regardless of the extent to which producers

are able to pass through regulatory compliance costs to consumers, profits cannot rise when the

standard is tightened.

        The effect of increased abatement on pollution depends on how electricity generation

responds. We find that a stricter mandate reduces manufacturing and electricity generation:
                                        )
                                       M ˆ        ⎛η η θ θ       ⎞
(A.3)                                     = E = − ⎜ M E AE EM    ⎟ < 0.
                                       Aˆ         ⎝    ψ         ⎠

If domestic producers have any ability to pass through costs, the consumer price of manufactured

goods rises:

                                   PˆM              ⎛η η θ θ ⎞
(A.4)                                  = −ε M−1Mˆ = ⎜ M E AE EM ⎟ ≥ 0.
                                    ˆA              ⎝   ε Mψ    ⎠

The price increase is larger the more inelastic is excess demand. It can be shown that PˆM < Aˆ .

        Larger Coal Reserves

        In the text we note that larger coal reserves imply a larger manufacturing sector and

higher emissions, ceteris paribus. Here we provide the proof of this assertion for the case of

non-traded coal. Totally differentiating our model and solving yields:

                             ⎛              σ Cη Eη M θCEθ EM              ⎞ ˆ
(A.5)              Mˆ = Eˆ = ⎜                                             ⎟ν C K C > 0,
                             ⎝ (σ Cη EθCE + σ EηC )η M θ EM + σ Mη EηCθ EE ⎠

where ν C > 0 is the marginal physical product of capital in the coal sector.
                                                                                        B1

       Appendix B – European Classifications (ECLA) for Pollution Control Patents

I. Nitrogen Dioxide pollution control
        Combustion Modification
        F23C 6/04B       MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                         WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
                         characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
                         chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
                         enclosure]
        F23C 6/04B1      MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                         WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus
                         characterised by the combination of two or more combustion
                         chambers/in series connection/[N: with staged combustion in a single
                         enclosure]/ [N: with fuel supply in stages]
        F23C 9           MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                         WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                         APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/Combustion apparatus with
                         arrangements for recycling or recirculating combustion products or
                         flue gases

       Post-Combustion
       B01D 53/56      PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                       CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                       SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                       of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                       waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                       aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                       components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen oxides
       B01D 53/56D     PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                       CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                       SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                       of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                       waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                       aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                       components of defined structure/Nitrogen compounds/Nitrogen
                       oxides/[N: by treating the gases with solids]
                                                                              B2

B01D 53/60    PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
              CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
              SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
              of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
              waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
              aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
              components of defined structure/Simultaneously removing sulfur
              oxides and nitrogen oxides
B01D 53/86F2  PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
              CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
              SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
              of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
              waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
              aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
              processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
              specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
              compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/
B01D 53/86F2C PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
              CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
              SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
              of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
              waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
              aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
              processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
              specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
              compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides]/[N: Processes characterised by a
              specific catalyst]
B01D 53/86F2D PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
              CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
              SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
              of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
              waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
              aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
              processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
              specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ N: Removing nitrogen
              compounds]/[N: Nitrogen oxides [N: Processes characterised by a
              specific device]
B01D 53/86G   PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
              CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
              SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
              of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
              waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
              aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
              processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
              specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ [N: Simultaneously
              removing sulfur oxides and nitrogen oxides]
                                                                                            B3

       B01J 29/06D2E      PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                          CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                          CHEMICAL OR PHYSICAL PROCESSES, e.g. CATALYSIS,
                          COLLOID CHEMISTRY; THEIR RELEVANT APPARATUS/
                          Catalysts comprising molecular sieves/ having base-exchange
                          properties, e.g. crystalline zeolites/ Crystalline aluminosilicate
                          zeolites; Isomorphous compounds thereof/ [N: containing metallic
                          elements added to the zeolite]/ [N: containing iron group metals, noble
                          metals or copper]/ [N: Iron group metals or copper]

II. Sulfur Dioxide pollution control
        Sulfur dioxide pollution control techniques
        B01D 53/14H8 PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                           CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                           SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                           of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                           waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                           aerosols/ by absorption/ [N: Gases containing acid components]/ [N:
                           containing only sulfur dioxide or sulfur trioxide]
        B01D 53/50         PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                           CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                           SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                           of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                           waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                           aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/Removing
                           components of defined structure/Sulfur compounds/Sulfur oxides
                           Includes 50B, 50B2, 50B4, 50B6, 50C, 50D
        B01D 53/86B4 PERFORMING OPERATIONS; TRANSPORTING/ PHYSICAL OR
                           CHEMICAL PROCESSES OR APPARATUS IN GENERAL/
                           SEPARATION/ Separation of gases or vapours; Recovering vapours
                           of volatile solvents from gases; Chemical or biological purification of
                           waste gases, e.g. engine exhaust gases, smoke, fumes, flue gases,
                           aerosols/Chemical or biological purification of waste gases/General
                           processes for purification of waste gases; Apparatus or devices
                           specially adapted therefore/Catalytic processes/ [N: Removing sulfur
                           compounds]/ [N: Sulfur oxides]

       Fluidized bed combustion
       F23C 10          MECHANICAL ENGINEERING; LIGHTING; HEATING;
                        WEAPONS; BLASTING ENGINES OR PUMPS/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS; COMBUSTION PROCESSES/COMBUSTION
                        APPARATUS USING FLUENT FUEL/ Fluidised bed combustion
                        apparatus
                                                                                             C2

                      Appendix C – U.S. vs. German Knowledge Stocks

       In this appendix, we examine the sensitivity of the results to the source of our patent data.

Given that the U.S. was an early adopter of most regulations and that U.S. firms are a major

source of abatement technology, our base specification uses patents granted in the U.S.

Moreover, since we are focusing on patents with multiple family members, the U.S. is a logical

choice in that its large market makes it a destination for many foreign patents.

       Nonetheless, in this appendix we present results using an alternative knowledge stock, on

based on patents granted in Germany. Again, we construct the stock using only those patents

filed in multiple countries. As shown in table C1, there are few changes. Results for most

explanatory variables are nearly identical when using the German knowledge stocks. One

notable exception is the interaction between knowledge and import shares for SO2.              This

interaction is nearly zero when using the German stocks. Unlike the U.S., Germany was not an

early adopter of SO2 regulations, waiting until 1983 to first enact SO2 restrictions for coal-fired

power plants. Thus, as shown in Popp (2006a), Germany was not a major destination for SO2

patents until the mid-1980s.

       Interestingly, while we might expect a similar effect for stringent NOX regulations, that

does not appear to be the case. In 1983, Germany was also the first country to pass stringent

NOX regulations. However, using the German knowledge stocks for stringent NOX regulations

does not change the effect of knowledge. The key difference is that, even though the U.S. did

not have stringent NOX regulations at the time, many foreign firms chose to file relevant patents

in the U.S. as well. This can be seen in Figure 2 of the text, where NOX post-combustion patents

increase dramatically in 1984. Thus, the importance of the U.S. as a destination for foreign

patents supports using U.S. patents as the basis for our knowledge stocks.
                                                                                                                                                                           C2

                                            Table C1 – Sensitivity to Alternative Country for Patent Stocks
Variable                                                SO2                                           NOX: Any Reg                                   NOX: Stringent
                                            US                    Germany                    US                     Germany                    US                    Germany
Knowledge Stock                  -0.0893         -0.0018     0.0073     0.0634    -0.0258         -0.0253    -0.0418     -0.0432    -0.0044      -0.0139       0.0067      0.0107
                                 (-2.499)        (-0.064)    (0.297)    (4.567)   (-2.455)        (-2.028)   (-2.369)    (-2.703)   (-0.477)     (-0.997)      (0.491)     (0.895)
Knowledge x Import Share          0.0016                     0.0002                0.0004                     0.0006                -0.0002                  -0.00003
                                  (1.849)                    (0.214)               (2.198)                    (2.180)               (-0.708)                  (-0.089)
Import Share                     -0.3554                    -0.0676               -0.1095                    -0.1633                 0.0163                   -0.0231
                                 (-1.885)                   (-0.332)              (-2.043)                   (-2.076)                (0.249)                  (-0.243)
Knowledge x Trade Policy                         -0.0012               -0.0014                     0.0002                 0.0001                -0.00005                  0.00002
Orientation Index                                (-3.009)              (-3.745)                    (0.451)                (0.363)                (-0.164)                  (0.072)
Trade Policy Orientation Index                    0.2608                0.3407                    -0.0613                -0.0548                  0.0485                   0.0575
                                                  (3.361)               (3.947)                   (-0.695)               (-0.503)                 (0.815)                  (0.984)
World Export Share                0.1618          0.3452     0.3083     0.3055     0.0709         -0.0095     0.0696      0.0417    -0.0022       0.0894      -0.0045      0.1305
                                  (0.927)         (2.193)    (1.598)    (2.647)   (0.398)         (-0.055)    (0.384)     (0.227)   (-0.017)      (1.237)     (-0.038)     (2.157)
GDP Per Capita                    0.3094          0.3144     0.3297     0.3799     0.2104          0.2090     0.2237      0.2227     0.2935       0.3399       0.3071      0.3896
                                  (3.827)         (4.408)    (3.805)    (5.085)   (2.497)          (2.783)    (2.466)    (2.818)     (3.880)      (5.571)      (4.190)     (5.135)
Population Density                0.0534          0.0345     0.0197     0.0241     0.0806          0.0563     0.0801      0.0491     0.0545       0.0538       0.0610      0.0664
                                  (1.365)         (1.052)    (0.567)    (0.808)   (2.747)          (1.828)    (2.397)    (1.442)     (1.659)      (1.606)      (1.652)     (2.176)
% Electricity from Coal           0.0447          0.0579     0.0587     0.0488     0.0385          0.0333     0.0446      0.0387    -0.0313      -0.0293      -0.0342     -0.0484
                                  (1.123)         (1.700)    (1.500)    (1.376)   (0.650)          (0.595)    (0.769)    (0.686)    (-1.041)     (-1.088)     (-1.085)    (-1.543)
Coal Production Per Capita       -0.1545         -0.1165    -0.1561    -0.0864    -0.0561         -0.0120    -0.0550     -0.0144    -0.0146      -0.0123      -0.0147     -0.0144
                                 (-1.913)        (-1.531)   (-1.838)   (-2.239)   (-1.091)        (-0.285)   (-1.170)    (-0.359)   (-1.269)     (-1.246)     (-1.324)    (-1.364)
Lignite Production Per Capita     0.0529          0.0450     0.0531     0.0491     0.0452          0.0404     0.0428      0.0392     0.0241       0.0374       0.0267      0.0448
                                  (2.303)         (2.312)    (2.501)    (4.590)   (3.619)          (3.882)    (3.809)    (3.850)     (1.011)      (2.494)      (1.273)     (2.796)
Election Year                    -17.080         -15.554    -16.444    -16.065    -18.879         -17.135    -18.470     -17.755    -16.144      -15.255      -18.853     -15.900
                                 (-23.90)        (-21.74)   (-18.32)   (-22.23)   (-28.34)        (-31.77)   (-31.85)    (-30.61)   (-20.93)     (-24.97)     (-22.69)    (-31.40)
Political Rights                  0.0959          0.2396     0.1237     0.4245     0.0990          0.4292     0.1051      0.4373    -0.0265       0.6692       0.1017      0.7731
                                  (0.375)         (1.136)    (0.734)    (2.207)   (0.535)          (1.916)    (0.512)    (1.864)    (-0.087)      (1.354)      (0.389)     (1.665)
Liberal                          -0.6475         -0.4549    -0.2850    -0.3420    -0.7493         -0.9087    -0.7319     -0.9653    -2.2733      -2.0885      -2.1842     -2.6443
                                 (-0.898)        (-0.589)   (-0.511)   (-0.522)   (-1.423)        (-1.633)   (-1.365)    (-1.755)   (-2.789)     (-1.905)     (-3.055)    (-2.338)
Conservative                     -0.5445         -0.6872    -0.2935    -0.2211    -0.6917         -1.1804    -0.6640     -1.1846    -2.0196      -1.9066      -1.9978     -2.2110
                                 (-0.840)        (-0.798)   (-0.492)   (-0.246)   (-0.969)        (-1.309)   (-0.899)    (-1.269)   (-2.735)     (-2.057)     (-3.202)    (-2.372)
Eastern Europe                    (1.607)                    (1.448)               (0.275)                    (0.597)                (4.422)                   (4.067)
                                  (2.141)                    (1.766)               (0.336)                    (0.713)                (2.902)                   (2.831)
Constant                           1.301         -16.901    -12.609    -23.972      -9.627        -10.509      -8.731    -12.169      -8.608     -10.420        -7.349    -10.505
                                  (0.209)        (-3.495)   (-1.525)   (-4.727)   (-2.737)        (-3.003)   (-2.475)    (-2.644)   (-3.118)     (-4.428)     (-2.061)    (-4.227)
Duration dependence               1.8982          1.8204     1.4390     1.1326     1.8407          1.9109     2.0724      2.2521     1.2745       1.3287       0.7484      0.3843
                                  (9.062)         (7.731)    (4.883)    (3.450)   (6.897)          (8.716)    (6.926)    (9.432)     (5.141)      (4.178)      (3.030)     (0.851)
N                                   390             327        390        327        380              317        380         317       618           542          618        542
log-likelihood                    -3.408          -5.817      -5.721     -4.820     -3.067          -2.935     -2.337      -1.857   -12.337        -9.867     -12.768     -10.134
chi2                             1360.76         1291.35     815.21    1891.36    3898.39         5266.31    4694.45     4330.89     741.31     1372.90        828.50     3351.72
aic                                38.82           41.63      43.44      39.64      38.13            35.87      36.67       33.71     56.67         49.73        57.54      50.27


T-stats below estimates
                                                                                                                D1

                             Appendix D – Knowledge Stock Sensitivity Analysis

            We examine the sensitivity of the regression results to changes in the rates of decay and

 diffusion used to calculate the knowledge stock. In addition to the base rates of decay = 0.1 and

 diffusion = 0.25, we consider three alternative sets of rates. To aid in interpreting these rates, we

 note the number of years it takes for a patent to have its maximum effect under each assumption

 set. For comparison, patents have their maximum effect after 4 years using the base rates.

                  •   decay = 0.25, diffuse = 0.5 (peak = 1 year)
                  •   decay = 0.05, diffuse = 0.5 (peak = 4 years)
                  •   decay = 0.05, diffuse = 0.1 (peak = 10 years)

            Tables D1 – D3 present regression results for each decay/diffusion combination for each

of the three baseline hazards, using the Trade Policy Orientation Index. Results are similar using

import shares as our measure of trade policy, and are available from the authors upon request.

Table D1 presents these results for adoption of SO2 regulation. Table D2 presents results for NOX

regulation, and table D3 for stringent NOX regulation. As discussed in the text, estimation of the

direct effect of knowledge is difficult, as it cannot be separately identified from any baseline

hazard effects. Thus, estimates of the direct effect vary across specification. However, estimation

of the interaction effect of knowledge and the openness variables is consistent both across

decay/diffusion rate combinations and across baseline hazard specifications. The one exception is

for SO2 adoption with slow decay in the Weibull model (decay = 0.05). Here, the interacted effect

of knowledge and TPOI is insignificant52.                    However, the effect of knowledge with this

specification occurs more slowly than is usually assumed in the technological change literature.

Looking at other variables and at the NOX technologies, we also see few changes in the main

results, suggesting our results are robust to the choice of decay and diffusion.


 52
      Alternatively, when using import shares, the interaction becomes positive and significant using a slow decay rate.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D2

Table D1 – Adoption of SO2 Regulations: Sensitivity to Decay Rates
                                                           Exponential                                        Weibull                                         Gompertz                                           Cox
                                       Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05    Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05    Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05   Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05
Variable                               Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5    Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5    Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5   Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5     Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1
Knowledge Stock                           0.0795       0.1254       0.0570    0.0290      -0.0018       0.0925      -0.1345   -0.1434       0.0882       0.1235      0.0650  -0.0179
                                          (4.623)     (5.768)      (4.463)   (4.260)      (-0.064)     (3.247)      (-2.861)  (-3.660)      (4.870)     (4.868)     (4.172)  (-1.084)
Knowledge x Trade Policy Orientation     -0.0013      -0.0014      -0.0009   -0.0005      -0.0012      -0.0017      -0.0004    0.0003      -0.0013      -0.0019     -0.0009  -0.0005      -0.0009      -0.0011     -0.0007     -0.0004
Index                                    (-3.901)     (-2.397)     (-3.696)  (-3.255)     (-3.009)     (-2.178)     (-1.003)  (0.371)      (-3.964)     (-2.472)    (-3.740) (-2.855)     (-2.254)     (-1.235)    (-1.792)    (-1.458)
Trade Policy Orientation Index            0.2646       0.2148       0.2095    0.1386       0.2608       0.2763       0.1285   -0.0549       0.2587       0.2993      0.2084   0.1327       0.1834       0.1715      0.1492      0.1118
                                          (4.281)     (2.369)      (4.150)   (3.727)       (3.361)      (2.216)      (1.354)  (-0.256)      (4.168)     (2.599)     (4.113)   (3.493)      (2.054)      (1.184)    (1.652)     (1.345)
World Export Share                        0.3075       0.1962       0.3100    0.3017       0.3452       0.2516       0.3209    0.3734       0.2888       0.2383      0.2974   0.3376       0.2071       0.1768      0.2045      0.2044
                                          (2.024)     (1.906)      (1.966)   (1.865)       (2.193)     (2.195)       (2.351)  (1.456)       (1.969)      (2.128)    (1.895)   (1.902)      (2.168)     (1.785)     (2.157)     (2.185)
GDP Per Capita                            0.2920       0.2694       0.2621    0.2190       0.3144       0.3315       0.2978    0.3819       0.2901       0.3060      0.2631   0.2046       0.2873       0.2707      0.2833      0.2813
                                          (5.496)     (5.803)      (5.280)   (5.076)       (4.408)     (5.025)       (3.925)  (4.112)       (5.632)      (5.329)    (5.513)   (4.457)      (4.334)     (4.289)     (4.342)     (4.338)
Population Density                        0.0333       0.0033       0.0329    0.0305       0.0345       0.0138       0.0251   -0.0320       0.0320       0.0098      0.0326   0.0256       0.0299       0.0203      0.0297      0.0304
                                          (1.019)     (0.118)      (0.989)   (0.910)       (1.052)     (0.455)       (0.743)  (-0.627)      (1.019)     (0.332)     (1.001)   (0.711)      (1.016)     (0.683)     (1.014)     (1.037)
% Electricity from Coal                   0.0654       0.0479       0.0648    0.0616       0.0579       0.0459       0.0419    0.0275       0.0640       0.0506      0.0646   0.0584       0.0365       0.0291      0.0362      0.0363
                                          (2.260)     (1.890)      (2.459)   (2.743)       (1.700)     (1.395)       (1.376)  (0.543)       (2.306)      (1.683)    (2.499)   (2.458)      (1.353)     (1.083)     (1.351)     (1.363)
Coal Production Per Capita               -0.1187      -0.0657      -0.1260   -0.1272      -0.1165      -0.0828      -0.0832   -0.0627      -0.1095      -0.0800     -0.1200  -0.1373      -0.0616      -0.0586     -0.0614     -0.0616
                                         (-1.506)     (-3.011)     (-1.496)  (-1.468)     (-1.531)     (-2.177)     (-1.898)  (-2.568)     (-1.474)     (-2.372)    (-1.442) (-1.452)     (-3.271)     (-3.294)    (-3.256)    (-3.228)
Lignite Production Per Capita             0.0435       0.0339       0.0413    0.0365       0.0450       0.0441       0.0395    0.0479       0.0421       0.0403      0.0406   0.0351       0.0394       0.0387      0.0390      0.0387
                                          (2.329)     (5.934)      (1.880)   (1.435)       (2.312)     (4.356)       (3.551)  (5.100)       (2.478)      (4.762)    (1.984)   (1.126)      (3.296)     (3.337)     (3.287)     (3.263)
Election Year                            -14.515      -15.204      -15.721   -15.200      -15.554      -15.772      -17.838   -14.111      -15.334      -16.841     -14.813  -15.093
                                         -23.239      -21.713      -27.771   -28.598      -21.738      -22.164      -21.753   -16.587      -23.815      -23.935     -23.941  -22.448
Political Rights                          0.2726       0.3433       0.2089    0.1384       0.2396       0.3041       0.2013    0.5986       0.2916       0.2954      0.2251   0.0617       0.4029       0.3530      0.3949      0.3922
                                          (1.460)     (1.884)      (1.091)   (0.707)       (1.136)     (1.598)       (0.870)  (2.020)       (1.598)      (1.561)    (1.219)   (0.265)      (2.236)     (2.034)     (2.169)     (2.115)
Liberal                                   -0.243       -0.547       -0.338    -0.481       -0.455       -0.399        -0.885   -0.927       -0.242       -0.428      -0.320    -0.623      -0.113       -0.222      -0.120      -0.121
                                         (-0.342)     (-1.016)     (-0.470)  (-0.682)     (-0.589)     (-0.596)     (-1.041)  (-1.208)     (-0.350)     (-0.664)    (-0.459) (-0.824)     (-0.186)     (-0.361)    (-0.198)    (-0.200)
Conservative                             -0.3090      -0.2463      -0.3922   -0.4608      -0.6872      -0.2229      -1.0525   -0.1291      -0.2837      -0.1671     -0.3719  -0.5576      -0.3213      -0.2884     -0.3388     -0.3586
                                         (-0.349)     (-0.333)     (-0.460)  (-0.564)     (-0.798)     (-0.262)     (-1.036)  (-0.114)     (-0.323)     (-0.206)    (-0.437) (-0.692)     (-0.382)     (-0.345)    (-0.406)    (-0.433)
Constant                                -19.1180     -21.9469     -15.4686  -10.8258     -16.9006     -23.5840     -11.1304  -23.0969     -19.8302     -23.5336    -16.2342  -6.1782
                                         (-4.828)     (-5.571)     (-4.665)  (-4.556)     (-3.495)     (-4.450)     (-2.592)  (-2.516)     (-5.489)     (-4.892)    (-5.401) (-2.685)
Duration dependence                                                                        1.8204       1.1655       2.7502    3.1984      -0.0842       0.1489     -0.0804   0.7050
                                                                                           (7.731)      (4.112)    (11.665)  (13.707)      (-0.710)     (1.627)     (-0.629)  (2.816)
N                                         327          327         327         327           327          327          327       327          327          327         327      327         327          327         327         327
log-likelihood                          -10.092       -8.001     -11.834     -14.247       -5.817       -5.654        0.576    7.600        -9.973       -7.047     -11.764  -12.639      -34.044      -34.444     -34.134     -34.166
chi2                                   1583.915      1867.539   1710.736    1478.017    1291.352      1777.513     1194.520  1159.447    1747.707      2040.908    1507.989  970.675      84.002        77.320      86.470      88.989
aic                                     48.184        44.001      51.669      56.493       41.634       41.308       28.849    14.799       49.946       44.094      53.527   55.278      90.088        90.888      90.269      90.331
t-statistics below estimates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D3

                                                         Table D2 – Adoption of NOX Regulations: Sensitivity to Decay Rates
                                                           Exponential                                        Weibull                                         Gompertz                                           Cox
                                       Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05    Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05    Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05   Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05
Variable                               Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5    Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5    Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5   Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5     Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.1
Knowledge Stock                           0.0136       0.0207       0.0128    0.0100      -0.0253      -0.0140      -0.0236   -0.0235      -0.0711      -0.0060     -0.0701   -0.0790
                                          (2.393)     (2.907)      (2.521)   (2.531)      (-2.028)     (-1.073)     (-2.042)  (-2.102)     (-2.781)     (-0.564)    (-2.791)  (-2.522)
Knowledge x Trade Policy Orientation     -0.0002      -0.0003      -0.0002   -0.0002       0.0002       0.0000       0.0001    0.0001       0.0003      -0.0002      0.0003    0.0004     -0.0003      -0.0004     -0.0003     -0.0002
Index                                    (-1.327)     (-1.790)     (-1.422)  (-1.437)      (0.451)      (0.002)      (0.425)   (0.476)      (0.742)     (-0.747)    (0.740)   (0.857)     (-0.781)     (-1.278)    (-0.854)    (-0.786)
Trade Policy Orientation Index            0.0570       0.0769       0.0580    0.0528      -0.0613      -0.0084      -0.0593   -0.0695      -0.1058       0.0455     -0.1084   -0.1500      0.0156       0.0331      0.0189      0.0153
                                          (1.559)     (2.160)      (1.640)   (1.565)      (-0.695)     (-0.120)     (-0.679)  (-0.716)     (-0.883)     (0.955)     (-0.885)  (-0.964)     (0.202)     (0.532)     (0.252)     (0.199)
World Export Share                        0.2330       0.2648       0.2344    0.2248      -0.0095       0.0327      -0.0081   -0.0072      -0.0712       0.1576     -0.0751   -0.0715      0.0199       0.0378      0.0224      0.0185
                                          (2.202)     (2.202)      (2.227)   (2.238)      (-0.055)      (0.256)     (-0.046)  (-0.039)     (-0.418)      (1.584)    (-0.425)  (-0.359)     (0.170)     (0.333)     (0.193)     (0.159)
GDP Per Capita                            0.1441       0.1616       0.1465    0.1427       0.2090       0.2210       0.2095    0.2053       0.2110       0.1813      0.2132    0.2039      0.1836       0.1909      0.1847      0.1834
                                          (3.649)     (4.232)      (3.705)   (3.615)       (2.783)      (3.486)      (2.762)  (2.649)       (3.014)      (4.576)    (2.952)   (2.629)      (3.661)     (3.729)     (3.675)     (3.669)
Population Density                        0.0286       0.0379       0.0300    0.0288       0.0563       0.0584       0.0564    0.0552       0.0601       0.0420      0.0607    0.0600      0.0726       0.0780      0.0735      0.0725
                                          (1.069)     (1.338)      (1.122)   (1.110)       (1.828)      (1.931)      (1.822)  (1.776)       (2.052)      (1.490)    (2.055)   (2.132)      (2.280)     (2.426)     (2.310)     (2.291)
% Electricity from Coal                   0.0470       0.0496       0.0474    0.0476       0.0333       0.0337       0.0339    0.0338       0.0278       0.0351      0.0281    0.0283      0.0454       0.0512      0.0463      0.0452
                                          (2.374)     (2.215)      (2.365)   (2.468)       (0.595)      (0.729)      (0.600)  (0.580)       (0.494)      (1.183)    (0.485)   (0.423)      (1.533)     (1.773)     (1.569)     (1.526)
Coal Production Per Capita               -0.1079      -0.1265      -0.1092   -0.1050      -0.0120      -0.0292      -0.0117   -0.0117      -0.0091      -0.0872     -0.0076   -0.0120     -0.0323      -0.0358     -0.0328     -0.0319
                                         (-1.420)     (-1.267)     (-1.412)  (-1.472)     (-0.285)     (-0.700)     (-0.278)  (-0.273)     (-0.205)     (-1.210)    (-0.170)  (-0.268)    (-0.782)     (-0.841)    (-0.792)    (-0.780)
Lignite Production Per Capita             0.0292       0.0348       0.0299    0.0289       0.0404       0.0397       0.0403    0.0407       0.0417       0.0369      0.0422    0.0455      0.0377       0.0379      0.0378      0.0378
                                          (1.198)     (1.090)      (1.203)   (1.262)       (3.882)      (3.932)      (3.864)  (3.791)       (3.774)      (1.707)    (3.733)   (3.291)      (2.796)     (2.750)     (2.797)     (2.811)
Election Year                           -15.0823     -14.4341     -15.0764  -15.0990     -17.1346     -17.7591     -16.8702  -17.6926     -18.3086     -16.1965    -19.4010  -16.8282
                                        (-29.416)    (-26.351)    (-29.503) (-29.838)    (-31.771)    (-35.503)    (-31.164) (-32.186)    (-33.244)    (-33.858)   (-34.936) (-28.887)
Political Rights                          0.0964       0.1111       0.0996    0.1037       0.4292       0.3594       0.4316    0.4236       0.5000       0.1814      0.5115    0.4624      0.3357       0.3584      0.3390      0.3352
                                          (0.538)     (0.597)      (0.553)   (0.584)       (1.916)      (1.675)      (1.912)  (1.856)       (2.103)      (0.893)    (2.105)   (1.949)      (1.732)     (1.822)     (1.748)     (1.738)
Liberal                                   -0.737       -0.621       -0.732    -0.753       -0.909       -0.877        -0.920    -0.886      -0.969       -0.715      -1.007    -0.871      -0.158       -0.090      -0.150      -0.166
                                         (-1.078)     (-0.897)     (-1.074)  (-1.106)     (-1.633)     (-1.402)     (-1.645)  (-1.622)     (-1.563)     (-1.046)    (-1.592)  (-1.423)    (-0.295)     (-0.170)    (-0.280)    (-0.310)
Conservative                             -0.6401      -0.5830      -0.6483   -0.6674      -1.1804      -1.1891      -1.1922   -1.1452      -1.2399      -0.8048     -1.2765   -1.0643     -1.0445      -1.0608     -1.0481     -1.0455
                                         (-0.879)     (-0.793)     (-0.889)  (-0.919)     (-1.309)     (-1.367)     (-1.313)  (-1.262)     (-1.267)     (-1.021)    (-1.280)  (-1.118)    (-1.422)     (-1.432)    (-1.427)    (-1.428)
Constant                                 -6.2063      -7.5837      -6.2449   -5.8621     -10.5093     -10.3516     -10.9468  -11.2173      -0.2848      -5.6261     -0.6283    0.3106
                                         (-4.083)     (-3.944)     (-4.136)  (-4.227)     (-3.003)     (-4.376)     (-3.082)  (-2.871)     (-0.073)     (-3.004)    (-0.159)  (0.064)
Duration dependence                                                                        1.9109       1.6724       1.9397    2.0028       1.4319       0.3910      1.5630    1.9369
                                                                                           (8.716)      (9.230)      (8.728)  (8.718)       (4.465)      (3.450)    (4.410)   (3.687)
N                                         317           317        317         317           317          317          317       317          317          317         317       317        317          317         317         317
log-likelihood                          -18.698       -16.884    -18.442     -18.690       -2.935       -5.996        -2.784    -1.975      -0.502      -12.319       0.276     3.270     -39.754      -39.451     -39.711     -39.756
chi2                                   1470.263      1392.189   1492.206    1494.090    5266.314      6079.087     5085.732  5425.181    6290.330      2671.893    6956.901  5785.787     76.050        78.289      76.746      76.480
aic                                     65.396        61.768      64.884      65.381       35.870       41.992       35.567    33.949       31.004       54.639      29.448    23.460     101.508      100.902     101.422     101.511
t-statistics below estimates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D4

Table D3 – Adoption of Stringent NOX Regulations: Sensitivity to Decay Rates
                                       Exponential                                    Weibull                                       Gompertz                                           Cox
                                       Decay=0.1 Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05   Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05   Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05   Decay=0.1    Decay=0.25 Decay=0.05 Decay=0.05
Variable                                Diff.=0.25 Diff.=0.5 Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.1   Diff.=0.25    Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.5  Diff.=0.1
Knowledge Stock                           0.0117     0.0190    0.0098     0.0071      -0.0139       0.0089    -0.0255    -0.0354       0.0131       0.0191     0.0070    -0.0636
                                          (2.135)   (2.344)   (1.975)    (1.599)      (-0.997)      (0.481)   (-1.529)   (-1.919)      (1.147)     (1.866)    (0.604)    (-2.295)
Knowledge x Trade Policy Orientation     -0.0001     0.0001   -0.0001    -0.0001       0.0000       0.0003   -0.00004    -0.0001      -0.0001       0.0001    -0.0001    -0.0002    0.000003       0.0007    -0.00002    -0.0001
Index                                    (-0.892)    (0.228)  (-0.880)   (-0.965)     (-0.164)      (0.412)   (-0.136)   (-0.317)     (-0.935)      (0.201)   (-0.835)   (-0.400)     (0.007)      (0.808)    (-0.049)   (-0.334)
Trade Policy Orientation Index            0.0915     0.0569    0.0906     0.0943       0.0485      -0.0047     0.0383     0.0523       0.0926       0.0575     0.0887     0.0615      0.1107      -0.0514      0.1157     0.1355
                                          (2.033)   (0.955)   (1.991)    (1.924)       (0.815)     (-0.028)   (0.556)     (0.498)      (1.998)      (0.953)   (1.920)    (0.695)      (1.208)     (-0.283)    (1.279)    (1.618)
World Export Share                        0.1469     0.1542    0.1448     0.1439       0.0894       0.1314     0.0751     0.0586       0.1488       0.1543     0.1412     0.0971      0.2348       0.2200      0.2357     0.2400
                                          (2.729)   (2.900)   (2.717)    (2.689)       (1.237)      (2.062)   (0.896)     (0.459)      (2.573)      (2.965)   (2.488)    (1.184)      (2.525)     (2.270)     (2.536)    (2.571)
GDP Per Capita                            0.3278     0.4348    0.3203     0.3006       0.3399       0.4440     0.3550     0.5140       0.3297       0.4346     0.3167     0.3157      0.7267       0.7597      0.7254     0.7199
                                          (5.786)   (4.572)   (5.976)    (6.251)       (5.571)      (4.468)   (4.912)     (3.035)      (5.541)      (4.585)   (5.898)    (4.632)      (1.792)     (1.672)     (1.803)    (1.851)
Population Density                        0.0565     0.0790    0.0550     0.0507       0.0538       0.0768     0.0534     0.0830       0.0569       0.0791     0.0541     0.0415      0.1413       0.1423      0.1415     0.1426
                                          (1.766)   (2.709)   (1.709)    (1.554)       (1.606)      (2.557)   (1.528)     (1.831)      (1.790)      (2.693)   (1.686)    (1.105)      (1.919)     (1.767)     (1.932)    (1.983)
% Electricity from Coal                  -0.0247    -0.0643   -0.0219    -0.0124      -0.0293      -0.0685    -0.0293    -0.0480      -0.0252      -0.0642    -0.0208    -0.0162     -0.1187      -0.1293     -0.1182    -0.1161
                                         (-0.947)   (-1.875)  (-0.867)   (-0.521)     (-1.088)     (-1.899)   (-1.022)   (-1.304)     (-0.934)     (-1.869)   (-0.807)   (-0.552)    (-1.201)     (-1.145)    (-1.207)   (-1.231)
Coal Production Per Capita               -0.0189    -0.0119   -0.0189    -0.0198      -0.0123      -0.0113    -0.0104    -0.0035      -0.0190      -0.0118    -0.0186    -0.0121     -0.0123      -0.0088     -0.0124    -0.0131
                                         (-1.452)   (-1.068)  (-1.473)   (-1.479)     (-1.246)     (-1.094)   (-1.022)   (-0.285)     (-1.423)     (-1.046)   (-1.487)   (-1.088)    (-0.614)     (-0.480)    (-0.618)   (-0.644)
Lignite Production Per Capita             0.0345     0.0526    0.0333     0.0298       0.0374       0.0535     0.0405     0.0658       0.0348       0.0526     0.0327     0.0359      0.0911       0.0936      0.0910     0.0905
                                          (2.706)   (2.787)   (2.704)    (2.661)       (2.494)      (2.780)   (2.285)     (2.179)      (2.698)      (2.790)   (2.690)    (2.053)      (1.565)     (1.468)     (1.575)    (1.615)
Election Year                           -14.9902   -15.7237  -15.2255   -14.5779     -15.2547     -16.5188   -16.0579   -15.1527     -16.4804     -16.5448   -15.8176   -15.6594
                                        (-28.785)  (-30.328) (-28.898)  (-26.905)    (-24.973)    (-31.592)  (-24.264)  (-17.469)    (-33.165)    (-31.202)  (-30.814)  (-23.207)
Political Rights                          0.4780     0.8923    0.4495     0.3517       0.6692       0.9576     0.7721     1.4017       0.4811       0.8914     0.4436     0.6608      1.8426       1.9809     1.8340      1.7934
                                          (0.959)   (1.823)   (0.891)    (0.658)       (1.354)      (2.043)   (1.375)     (1.654)      (0.966)      (1.855)   (0.888)    (1.037)      (1.239)     (1.232)    (1.241)     (1.249)
Liberal                                   -2.402     -3.171    -2.339     -2.233       -2.089       -3.007     -2.127      -2.989      -2.435       -3.174     -2.280     -1.881      -4.629       -4.776     -4.621      -4.585
                                         (-2.259)   (-3.047)  (-2.209)   (-2.137)     (-1.905)     (-2.672)   (-1.906)   (-2.528)     (-2.182)     (-3.030)   (-2.058)   (-1.577)    (-1.988)     (-1.824)   (-1.999)    (-2.040)
Conservative                             -1.9210    -2.8491   -1.8640    -1.8029      -1.9066      -2.7095    -2.1587    -3.6638      -1.9593      -2.8542    -1.7992    -1.8815     -4.2242      -4.3725    -4.2211     -4.2131
                                         (-2.306)   (-3.278)  (-2.228)   (-2.102)     (-2.057)     (-2.800)   (-2.034)   (-2.236)     (-2.116)     (-3.217)   (-1.944)   (-1.553)    (-2.249)     (-2.117)   (-2.260)    (-2.307)
Constant                                 -8.7548   -10.8984   -8.4417    -7.7553     -10.4197     -10.6116   -12.1625   -20.3600      -8.8779     -10.9064    -8.1972    -4.0325
                                         (-4.484)   (-3.854)  (-4.526)   (-4.403)     (-4.428)     (-2.879)   (-4.696)   (-2.970)     (-4.144)     (-3.839)   (-4.041)   (-1.081)
Duration dependence                                                                    1.3287       0.4738     1.7494     2.3373      -0.0169      -0.0019     0.0401     1.4694
                                                                                       (4.178)      (1.225)   (5.408)     (6.238)     (-0.127)     (-0.027)   (0.243)    (2.903)
N                                          542       542         542        542          542          542        542        542          542          542        542        542        542          542        542         542
log-likelihood                           -12.239    -9.368     -12.457    -13.107      -9.867       -8.903     -8.714      -4.509     -12.234       -9.368    -12.439     -7.511     -20.563      -20.361    -20.563     -20.547
chi2                                    1403.420   2480.548   1374.423   1147.671   1372.902      3216.914   1522.633   1372.034    2243.544      2895.016   1754.371   1548.240     82.794        70.432     83.343      85.827
aic                                      52.477     46.736      52.914     54.215      49.734       47.806     47.428     39.019       54.467       48.736     54.879     45.022     63.127        62.722     63.126      63.095
t-statistics below estimates
