NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF LOW-SKILLED IMMIGRATION ON U.S. NATIVES:
EVIDENCE FROM HURRICANE MITCH
Adriana Kugler
Mutlu Yuksel
Working Paper 14293
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14293

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We are especially grateful to Joe Altonji, Josh Angrist, David Autor, Frank Bean, George Borjas, Richard
Freeman, Dan Hamermesh, Jenny Hunt, Chinhui Juhn, Larry Katz, Kevin Lang, Ethan Lewis, Peter
Mieszkowski, and David Neumark as well as seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute,
the Society of Labor Economists Meetings, and UC Irvine for useful comments. Adriana Kugler thanks
the Baker Institute for financial support through a grant from the Houston Endowment. E-mail for
correspondence: adkugler@uh.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Adriana Kugler and Mutlu Yuksel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Effects of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Natives: Evidence from Hurricane Mitch
Adriana Kugler and Mutlu Yuksel
NBER Working Paper No. 14293
August 2008
JEL No. J11,J21,J31,J61
ABSTRACT
In the 1980s the composition of immigrants to the U.S. shifted towards less-skilled workers. Around
this time, real wages and employment of younger and less-educated U.S. workers fell. Some blame
recent immigration shifts for the misfortunes of unskilled workers in the U.S. OLS estimates using
Census data show instead that native wages are positively related to the recent influx of Latin Americans.
However, these estimates are biased if demand shocks are positively related to immigration. An IV
strategy, which deals with the endogeneity of immigration by exploiting a large influx of Central American
immigrants towards U.S. Southern ports of entry after Hurricane Mitch, also generates positive wage
effects but only for more educated native men. Yet, ignoring the flows of native and earlier immigrants
in response to this exogeneous immigration is likely to generate upward biases in these estimates too.
Native wage effects disappear and less-skilled employment of previous Latin American immigrants
falls when controlling for out-migration. This highlights the importance of controlling for out-migration
not only of natives but also of previous immigrants in regional studies of immigration.

Adriana Kugler
University of Houston
Department of Economics
204 McElhinney Hall
Houston, TX 77204-5019
and NBER
adkugler@uh.edu
Mutlu Yuksel
IZA - Institute for the Study of Labor
Schaumburg-Lippe-Str. 5-9
53113 Bonn
Germany
yuksel@iza.org

1

Introduction

Since the 1980s the composition of immigrants to the U.S. has shifted towards less skilled
workers. This is partly the result of the sharp increase in Latin American immigration in the
past few decades, which is less skilled than previous waves of immigration. The percentage of
Latin Americans among all immigrants increased from 18% in 1970 to 48% in the year 2000.
Many believe this flow of unskilled immigrants has had a negative eﬀect on the fortunes of
unskilled natives in the labor market. However, previous work on the impact of immigration
in the U.S. has generally found little evidence of earnings and employment eﬀects on natives
(e.g., Friedberg and Hunt, 1995). A crucial problem in assessing the impact of immigration
is that immigrants may move precisely to areas where, or during times when, there is high
demand for their skills. This makes it diﬃcult to detect the eﬀects of immigration on native
labor market outcomes, since natives may also benefit from positive demand shocks. To
address this issue, a number of studies have used exogenous sources of immigration (e.g.,
Card (1990, 2001) for the U.S., Hunt (1992) for France, Carrington and deLima (1996) for
Portugal, Friedberg (2001) for Israel and Angrist and Kugler (2003) for Europe). However,
even these studies for the U.S. find modest or little impact of immigration on the wages and
employment of less-skilled natives.
Given the scant evidence focusing on exogenously-driven immigration into the U.S., in
this paper we revisit the question of the impact of immigration by exploiting the influx
of Central American immigrants towards U.S. border states following Hurricane Mitch in
October 1998. Like, the Mariel Boatlift studied by Card (1990), this natural experiment
allows us to concentrate on exogenous immigration to the U.S. both in terms of timing and
location. In addition, given the composition of Latin American immigrants towards younger
and less educated workers, this quasi-experiment allows us to focus on the impact of unskilled
immigrants who are perceived as the biggest threat in terms of worsening the labor market
prospects for the majority of natives. Moreover, we control for state-specific trends to further
address the concern that ongoing positive demand shocks in a state may be both attracting
immigrants as well as improving labor market conditions for natives and all other workers
in the state.
Using Census data for 1980, 1990, and 2000 and a “2005” cross-section generated using
the American Community Surveys (ACS), we examine whether the influx of young and
less educated immigrants who exogenously migrated from Latin America in the late 1990s
aﬀected the earnings and employment of natives and earlier Latin American immigrants from
various skill groups. OLS results suggest Latin American immigration is positively related to

2

native hourly wages but negatively related to native employment. Yet, as pointed out above,
these estimates are likely to be biased if immigrants migrate towards states where, or during
times when, there is high demand for their skills. IV estimates, relying on the influx of Latin
American immigrants following Hurricane Mitch towards U.S. Southern ports of entry, show
positive eﬀects on the wages of college and high school educated native men and earlier Latin
American high school women, after controlling for state-specific trends, but show no eﬀects
on employment. These results would suggest that unskilled immigrants complement skilled
native workers.
However, recent analyses (e.g., Borjas et al. (1996,1997), Borjas (2003)) have argued
that area studies, which mostly exploit regional variation in immigration, may be unreliable
because they fail to account for two potentially countervailing responses to immigration.
First, trade may counteract the eﬀects of immigration on natives and, second, out-migration
of natives may undo the eﬀects of immigrants. The counteracting eﬀects of inter-state trade
are, however, likely to be a longer-run phenomenon, while in this paper we are analyzing
short-run eﬀects. Since inter-state trade is unlikely to be a major concern in our context, we
focus here on possible biases introduced due to internal migration responses to immigration.1
While a number of previous studies have found little migration response of natives and
earlier immigrants to recent immigration (Card and DiNardo (2000), and Card (2001)), a
recent study by Borjas (2005) finds that immigration is associated with lower in-migration,
higher out-migration and lower population growth of natives. Here we examine whether the
native population responded to the flow of immigrants following Hurricane Mitch and find
no evidence that the native population or earlier Latin American or African immigrants adjusted in response to this recent wave of exogenous immigration. On the other hand, we find
that earlier Asian and earlier European and Australian immigrants appear to have moved
away from Southern states in response to the recent wave of Latin American immigration,
so we control for possible out-migration by these groups. Our results controlling for internal
migration by earlier immigrants show very diﬀerent results: recent Latin American immigrants have no eﬀects on native wages and employment but reduce the employment of earlier
Latin American immigrants.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 documents Hurricane Mitch and its
consequences in terms of migration towards U.S. Southern ports of entry. Section 3 describes
1

As an alternative to the use of regional variation as in area studies, other studies (e.g., Borjas et al.
(1996, 1997, 2008) and Borjas (2003)) exploit variation in the share of immigrants in diﬀerent skill groups
at the national-level, thus assuming that those in the same skill-group compete in a national labor market.
Given that these studies are not subject to biases due to internal migration, these studies tend the find larger
eﬀects than the ones in area studies.

3

our identification strategy, which exploits the exogenous influx of Central Americans to nearby U.S. states after Mitch. Section 4 describes the Census and American Community Survey
data used in the analysis. Section 5 presents estimates of immigration eﬀects on native and
earlier immigrant wages and employment. Section 6 concludes.

2

Consequences of Hurricane Mitch for Migration

Similarly to a handful of other papers (e.g., Card (1991), Hunt (1992), Carrington and
DeLima (1996), Friedberg (2001), and Angrist and Kugler (2003)), in this paper we study
the eﬀects of an unexpected wave of immigrants on the labor market outcomes of natives
and earlier immigrants. In particular, we exploit the immigration from Central America to
the U.S. generated by a natural disaster, Hurricane Mitch. Other than Card (1991) ours
is the only study for the U.S. based on a natural experiment as other studies of this sort
exploit natural experiments in Europe. Like Card (1991), we are able to concentrate on
unskilled immigrants, who are thought to contribute less to the host country and most likely
to generate negative political reactions to immigration.2 In addition, since we use data for
all of the U.S., we can control for ongoing trends in receiving states.
An important diﬀerence between our study and Card’s study of the Mariel boatlift is that,
as described below, our study considers an influx of immigrants who quickly became legalized.
By contrast, the Marielitos, unlike previous Cubans, were not given automatic refugee status
and roughly half of them were initially sent to alien camps in Georgia and other states outside
of Florida (Aguirre et. al. (1997)). While the Marielitos arrived to the U.S. between April
and September of 1980, it was only until December 1984 that INS regulations were changed to
allow Marielitos to register for permanent resident status. Moreover, both the wave of Cuban
immigrants in 1980 and the wave of Central Americans after Mitch were composed mainly of
less educated workers but the Mariel exodus included social ‘undesirables’, including some
who had been in prison and others suﬀering from mental illnesses. While it is estimated that
at most 7% of the 125,000 Cubans who arrived from the port of Mariel had been inmates in
Cuba, this wave of Cuban immigrants received very negative media coverage and many of
them were subsequently institutionalized in the U.S. (Aguirre et. al. (1997)). In fact, public
opinion polls from 1980 showed that 75% of respondents nationwide believed the Marielitos
should had never been allowed into the U.S. and about 60% thought they should be sent back
to Cuba (ABC News-Harris Survey (1980)). The perception of the Marielitos as undesirable,
2

See Borjas (1995) for a general discussion of these issues and Mayda (2005) for an analysis of the
determinants of attitudes towards immigration.

4

and possibly unemployable, contrasts with the image of Mitch refugees by the U.S. public
as survivors and hard-working. The legal status of Mitch refugees together with the positive
perception of the refugees means that Mitch immigrants were probably more likely to be
hired and, thus, were more likely to compete with natives and earlier immigrants than the
Marielitos.
Hurricane Mitch hit Central America during the last week of October 1998. Honduras
and Nicaragua were particularly hard hit, but Guatemala and El Salvador (and to a much
lesser extent Belize) were also aﬀected by the Hurricane (see the map in Figure 1). Hurricane
Mitch became the fourth strongest Atlantic Hurricane on record together with Hurricanes
Camille (1969), Allen (1980), and Gilbert (1988). It reached category 5 on the Saﬃr-Simpson
scale with winds peaking at 180 miles per hour. Although Mitch was one of the strongest
Atlantic hurricanes on record, the winds slowed down considerably as the storm moved
inland. However, it was precisely the large amounts of rainfall that accumulated due to the
slow moving storm that caused most of the damage. In fact, Mitch is the second deadliest
hurricane to have hit the Atlantic after the Great Hurricane of 1780 (U.S. National Weather
Service and U.K. National Meteorological Service).
Hurricane Mitch is estimated to have generated a very high human and material cost.
Mitch is estimated to have caused 20,000 deaths and 13,000 injuries; to have left 1.5 million
homeless, and to have aﬀected another 2 million in other ways (FAO, 2001). The hurricane
also destroyed a large part of these countries’ road networks and social infrastructure, including hospitals and schools. Overall, FAO (2001) estimates that about 28,000 kilometers
of roads and 160 bridges were destroyed. According to U.S. Aid, 60% of the paved roads
in El Salvador were damaged, and 300 schools and 22 health centers were also destroyed
or damaged by the hurricane in this country (US Aid, 2004). In addition, Mitch largely
destroyed crops and flooded agricultural land in the all the aﬀected countries, reducing production in the agricultural sector. The share of agriculture in the region’s GDP dropped
from 21.2% before the hurricane to 17.8% after Mitch (FAO, 2001). The direct estimated
damage to the farming sector inflicted by Mitch was of $960.6 million in Honduras, $264.1
million in Guatemala, $129.8 million in Nicaragua and $60.3 million in El Salvador. Two
of the crops most aﬀected were bananas and coﬀee, on which these countries’ export sector
heavily depends on. According to ECLAC, the estimated damage totalled $6,18 billion or
about 12% of the Regional GDP, 42% of exports, 67% of gross fixed investment, and 34% of
the external debt of these countries. Even before the hurricane hit, the four Central American countries most aﬀected by the hurricane were already among the poorest countries in
all of Latin America. For example, the percent of households living below the poverty line
5

reached 73.8%, 65.1%, 53.5% and 48% in Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador
the year before the hurricane hit (ECLAC, 2001). Moreover, the hurricane hit the hardest
in rural areas and, thus, is likely to have aﬀected mainly individuals already living under or
close to the poverty line.
According to the World Bank, the main way in which Central American men responded
to the disaster was by migrating North (World Bank, 2001).3 Information from Migration
Departments in these countries shows that external migration from Honduras almost tripled
and external migration from Nicaragua increased by about 40% (FAO, 2001). In January
1999, New York Times headlines announced “Desperate Hurricane Survivors Push[ing] North
to [the] U.S. Border.” In January 1999, Honduran immigration director reported that about
300 Hondurans a day were leaving for the U.S. and visa requests for the U.S. were up 40%
from the previous year. According to journalistic accounts many Central Americans crossed
through Mexico to get to the U.S., which is reflected by the big rise in the “other than
Mexican” apprehensions in the U.S.-Mexico border, which were close to 4,000 in January
1999 (i.e., a record high for a single month). Oﬃcials at the border in Brownsville, Texas
area reported a 61% increase in the number of Hondurans apprehended after illegally crossing
the border during the last three months of 1998. Likewise, in the Laredo, Texas area 583
“other than Mexican” foreigners were apprehended in December 1998 compared to 123 in
December 1997.
As a formal response to the migration generated by Hurricane Mitch, on December 30,
1998, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) announced in a news release the
designation of Temporary Protected Status (TPS) for Honduras and Nicaragua for a period
of 18 months (i.e., through July 5, 2000), which was later extended.4 During the following
18th month period, Hondurans and Nicaraguans who had entered the country before this
date would not be subject to removal and would be eligible for permission to work in the
U.S. It is estimated that by 2003, close to 150,000 Hondurans and Nicaraguans had been
granted Temporary Protected Status (TPS) to allow them to stay and work in the U.S. At
the same time, there were many Hondurans and Nicaraguans who came during that time but
were not granted TPS, so the number of Central Americans who came from these countries
was probably higher than this oﬃcial number. In addition, in the same news report, the INS
announced that it would suspend deportations of Guatemalans and Salvadorans for 60 days
(or until March 1999).
3

By contrast, according to the study, women responded by increasing their labor force participation and
mobilizing social networks.
4
Up until that point, TPS had normally been granted to refugees from countries suﬀering from war or
civil unrest, including: Bosnia, Burundi, Kosovo, Liberia, Monserrat, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Sudan.

6

Figure 2 shows the percentage of Central Americans out of all immigrants coming in a
given year for the 20 percentile of states closest and farthest from Central America. The
figure shows that the share of Central Americans was low in all states over the 1990s, but
higher in states closer to Central America than in those farther away. In nearby states
the share of Central Americans declined since 1993 until the influx of Mitch refugees came
in 1998, when the share of Central Americans jumped. By contrast, the share of Central
Americans in far-away states declined slightly from 1992 to 1995 and increased steadily
in 1996 and 1997 but declined in 1998, the year the Mitch generated the large migration
North. The migration of Hondurans, Nicaraguans, Salvadoreans, and Guatemalans after
1998 observed in Figure 2 was highly concentrated in close-by states. Data from the 2000
US Census shows that 23.6% of all Central Americans who came to the U.S. after 1998 went
to California, 11.6% went to Florida and 9.7% went to Texas. The rest were dispersed in
other Southern states including the states of North Carolina, Virginia, and Georgia.5
In the following section, we describe how we exploit the increased immigration after 1998
towards U.S. states close to Central America following Hurricane Mitch to study the labor
market eﬀects of immigration on natives and earlier immigrants.

3

Identification Strategy

The goal of this paper is to identify the impact of less-skilled immigration on the wages and
employment of natives and earlier immigrants. To do so, we begin with the following simple
model:
0

yijt = μj + τ t + Xijt β + γ LA SLAjt + εijt ,

(1)

where the dependent variable, yijt , is either the log of the hourly wage or the employment
status for individual i in state j at time t. The model includes state and year eﬀects, μj and
0

τ t . Xijt is a vector of individual characteristics of individual i in state j at time t, which
includes education, experience, marital status, and race.6 The regressor SLAjt is the share of
Latin American-born individuals who immigrated to state j in the past five years out of the
5

Other states with a percentage of Central Americans above 3% included Maryland, New Jersey, and
New York. By contrast, among the states receiving very few immigrants from Central America, with several
states receiving none or close to zero, were Alaska, Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Montana, North and South Dakota,
Oregon, Vermont, and Washington, all of which are distant from Central America.
6
By controlling for these variables in the regression, we are able to control for potential changes in
composition aﬀecting the wages and employment of natives and earlier immigrants. Our controls are the
same as those included by Card (2001), except that we exclude occupation and industry controls which are
potentially endogeneous.

7

population in that state.7 This specification is estimated for male and female workers in three
education groups (high school dropouts, high school graduates, and college educated). In
addition, we estimate this same specification for earlier Latin-American immigrants, where
we classify earlier immigrants as foreign-born who arrived more than 10 years ago. The
idea of estimating this specification separately by education group is that some groups of
workers may be more substitutable with recent Latin American immigrants than others and
probably with earlier Latin Americans than with natives.
A basic problem with this simple OLS regression is that the error term, εijt , may be
capturing a positive demand shock to state j at time t, which could be driving the decisions
of recent immigrants to move to that state at that point in time and which could also be
aﬀecting the wages and employment of natives and earlier immigrants. Overall positive
demand shocks correlated with immigration will bias upwards the impact of immigration
and may not allow us to detect any eﬀects even if immigrants indeed reduce the wages
and employment of natives and earlier immigrants. On the other hand, positive demand
shocks to unskilled relative to skilled workers, which attract unskilled immigrants will bias
upwards the eﬀects of immigration on unskilled natives and earlier immigrants but will bias
downwards the eﬀects on skilled workers.
We address the potential endogeneity of immigration by using an IV strategy which relies
on the large influx of Central American immigrants towards close-by U.S. states following
Hurricane Mitch. The first-stage equation for the IV estimates is:

SLAjt = λj + κt + δPost t × Distance j + ν ijt ,

(2)

where λj and κt are state and year eﬀects. Post t is a dummy that takes the value of 1 if
the immigrants arrived after Hurricane Mitch and zero otherwise. Distance j is a variable
which measures the average of the straight-line distance in miles from all Central American
capitals to the Southern-most city of each state j.8 The choice of instrument as the interaction
between a post-Mitch dummy and distance from Central America to various states in the U.S.
is motivated by the discussion in the previous section which documents the large migration
North from Central America towards near-by U.S. states right after Hurricane Mitch. Given
7

We also tried using alternative regressors, including the shares of recent unskilled immigrants from Latin
America and from all destinations. Using the share of unskilled immigrants instead of the share of Latin
American immigrants yields similar but bigger eﬀects. We prefer to focus on the Latin American share since
our Mitch instrument produces a stronger first-stage for this group.
8
See Table A1 in the Data Appendix for more details on the distance measure. This table also shows the
distance from each of the capital cities of the aﬀected Central American countries and the average distance
from all four capital cities. Our results are robust to the use of distance to Tegucigalpa, the capital of
Honduras, which was the country hardest hit by the Hurricane.

8

that the Post t dummy takes the value of 1 if the person is observed in the 2000 Census or the
2005 ACS cross-section and zero otherwise and that the left-hand side variable includes Latin
American immigrants who came in the past five years, our instrument captures those Latin
Americans who came between 1995 and 2005 to states close-by to the Central American
capital cities.9
We do a number of specification checks since the share of other Latin Americans, and especially the share of Mexicans, increased starting in the 1970s (see Borjas and Katz (2007)).10
First, we control for the pre-existing increasing trend of other Latin Americans by including
the share of Latin Americans if the immigrants from each country had located exactly as
previous immigrants from those same countries did 10 years ago (i.e., this is the Card instrument from Card (2001)). Second, we include the lagged share of Mexicans in those states to
control for the possibility that this trend is driving the higher shares of Latin Americans in
close-by states after Mitch. Third, we do a falsification test similar to that done by Angrist
and Krueger (1999) of the Mariel Boatlift. In particular, we run a regression of the share
of Latin Americans on the interaction of the distance measure with a post-1990 dummy
(instead of a post-Mitch dummy) using only the 1980 and 1990 Censuses to check again
that we are not simply capturing an on-going trend. Finally, we estimate equivalent first
stages for the share of earlier African, European and Australian, and Asian immigrants to
check that the correlation between the share of Latin Americans and the instrument is not
simply spurious. The idea is that by estimating the first stage for other source regions, we
can check whether we are likely to be capturing Latin American immigration to the border
states driven by Mitch or simply a generalized immigration pattern to border states in recent
years from all areas of the world.
In all specifications we also include state-specific trends to control for pre-existing demand
shocks at the state-level. The specifications with trends replace λj with λ0j + λ1j t in the
first-stage and μj with μ0j + μ1j t in the second-stage.
Another important problem that arises, even when instrumenting the immigrant share,
is that natives or earlier immigrants may move in response to exogenous immigration and
9

We also tried using the share who came in the last three years, which can only be identified in the 1990
and 2000 Censuses and in the “2005” ACS cross-section, so that our instrument would be capturing Latin
Americans who came between 1997 and 2005 in states close-by to the Central American capital cities. The
results using the shares of those who came in the past three years provide an even stronger first stage, but
we would loose information from the 1980 Census. The 1980 Census asks the question of when the person
came to live in the U.S. in 5-year intervals (e.g., 1965 to 1970, 1975 to 1980, etc.). By contrast, the 1990
Census asks the same question in three-year intervals (e.g., 1987 to 1990, etc), while the 2000 Census and
ACS ask the exact year when the person came to live in the U.S.
10
It is noteworthy, however, that the share of Mexicans started to increase earlier in most border states
aﬀected by the Mitch immigration and even declined in Texas.

9

bias the IV estimates. This is equivalent to failing to control for the share of other groups
in the regression, so that the error term will be εijt = γ OT HER SOT HERjt + ξ ijt and the bias
will be,
Bias =

γ OT HER × Cov(Post t × Distance j , SOT HERjt )
.
Cov(Post t × Distance j , SLAjt )

The direction of the bias, thus depends on whether the impact of other groups on native
wages is positive or negative (i.e., on whether they are complements, γ OT HER > 0, or substitutes, γ OT HER < 0), and on whether the other groups flee to far away states as Central American immigrants come due to Mitch, in which case Cov(Post t ×Distance j , SOT HERjt ) > 0. If

there is no out-migration by other groups in response to the immigration due to Mitch, then
there is no bias. However, if there is out-migration and other groups are substitutes with
natives then the bias in the IV estimates will be positive. If they are complements then the
bias will be negative.
We deal with the possible concern that natives and earlier immigrants may be counteracting the impact of recent immigrants by re-estimating the IV results with trends, but
adding the shares for native or immigrant groups of concern as follows:

0

yijt = μ0j + μ1j t + τ t + Xijt β + γ LA SLAjt + γ OT HER SOT HERjt + ξ ijt

(3)

where SOT HERjt is the share of other groups in the total population, and where we instrument
the share of earlier immigrants with a Card-type instrument.11 The first-stage is thus,

SOT HERjt = ψ j + π t + ρP SOT HERjt + ζ jt ,

(4)

where P SOT HERjt is the predicted share of immigrants from the same country based on
previous migration from those countries to the state in the previous decade,

11

¡ Mcjt−1 ¢

P

C∈OT HER Mct−1 × Mct
¡ Mcjt−1 ¢
¢
],
C∈OT HER Mct−1 × Mct + Njt−1

P SOT HERjt = [ ¡P

Another way to deal with this concern is to exploit variation in skill groups and over time at the nationallevel as Borjas et. al (1996,1997, 2008), Borjas (2003) and Ottaviano and Peri (2006, 2008). By exploiting
this source of variation, these analyses assume national labor market for every skill group, which may hold for
some groups but less for others. In addition, like analysis exploiting regional variation, these analysis are also
subject to endogeneity in terms of the timing of immigration. Borjas (2003) includes interactions between
schooling and experience groups and time to control for changes in the eﬀects of schooling and experience
on wages over time, so this helps to alleviate the concern with the endogeneous timing of immigration.

10

and where Mct and Mct−1 are the number of immigrants from country c who came to all U.S.
states more than 5 years ago and more than 15 years ago, respectively; Mcjt−1 is the number
of immigrants from country c in state j who came more than 15 years ago; and Njt−1 is the
native population in state j more than 15 years ago.12 Like in Card (2001), the use of this
instrument is motivated by the fact that immigrants may prefer to locate in the same places
as those from their same countries, since they may provide them access to social networks
and facilitate entry into labor and housing markets.

4

Data Description

Our data come from two sources. First, we use data from the U.S. Census PUMS files for
the years 1980, 1990, and 2000. Second, we pooled data from the 2003, 2004, and 2005
American Community Surveys (ACS) to create what we will refer to as the “2005” crosssection. We rely on this “2005” ACS cross-section to make sure we cover a longer period
after the immigration North due to Hurricane Mitch.
Census data has information on demographic characteristics including age, marital status, race, and education. We use the information on education and graduation to separate
the sample into three groups of individuals: high school dropouts, high school graduates,
and college educated.13 More importantly for our study, the Census has precise information
on country of birth which allows us to identify natives and foreign-born individuals or immigrants. In addition, the data allows us to distinguish immigrants from diﬀerent origins. We
can also identify recent and earlier immigrants by using information on year since immigration to the U.S., where we define recent immigrants as those who arrived less than five years
ago. We restrict our sample to individuals between 21 and 65 years of age. In addition, we
exclude individuals working in the public sector.
The data also include information on labor market outcomes for the year just prior to
the Census year.14 We use information on total hourly earnings together with information
on weeks worked and hours per week to construct an hourly wage measure. These hourly
12

Card (2001) assigns the location of those from the same countries one decade before. Since we are
instrumenting for earlier immigrants, i.e., those who came more than 5 years ago, this means that for those
who came in 2000 we assign the 1995 location for those from the same countries; for those who came in 1995
we assign the 1985 location for those from the same countries; for those who came in 1990 we assign the
1985 location for those from the same countries, and so forth. Then, for those who came before 1960 we
simply assign their actual location.
13
See Data Appendix for greater detail on how we divided individuals into these three education groups.
14
Note that given that the influx of Central Americans following Mitch occurred in late 1998 and early
1999, using data on labor market outcomes from the 2000 Census would imply we would only capture the
eﬀects of immigration in the earnings and employment of natives just one year after the arrival of Mitch
refugees. This is why we also rely on the “2005” ACS cross-section.

11

wages are then deflated using a yearly CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.15 We also
construct an employment status indicator which takes the value of 1 if the person is employed
and zero otherwise. Since information on labor market experience and tenure is not asked in
the Census, we construct a measure of potential experience as age minus years of education
minus 6.
The ACS was introduced to replace the decennial Census long-form. Thus, the ACS
includes all detailed demographic, socio-economic and housing characteristics which were
traditionally collected on the long-form until the 2000 Census. The ACS uses the same
questionnaire as the 2000 Census. This means that we are able to construct exactly the
same variables as with the Census data. Nationally representative ACS data have been
available each year since 2000. We use the 2003, 2004, and 2005 ACS. We pull these three
years to have a similar sample size for the “2005” cross-section as for the 1% Census samples.
While geographic identifiers at a finer geographic level than the state are restricted due to
confidentiality, this does not present a problem for our analysis which relies on state-level
immigrant shares.16 As for the Census data, we deflate the hourly wages by the national
CPI.
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics using our combined data from the 1980, 1990, and
2000 Censuses and the “2005” ACS cross-section for natives by education group (high school
dropouts, high school graduates, and college educated) and sex. The table shows higher
hourly wages and employment for more highly educated groups and for men than for women.
The table also shows that individuals with more education are older; more likely to be
married; and less likely to be in blue-collar occupations, and in the agricultural, construction
and manufacturing sectors. Finally, the table shows that dropouts are disproportionately
Black and Hispanic.
Table 2 presents descriptive statistics for recent (i.e., those who arrived less than five years
ago) and veteran or earlier (those who arrived more than five years ago) Latin American immigrants as well as for recent and veteran or earlier non-Latin American veteran immigrants.
Immigrants from non-Latin American countries have on average completed high school, i.e.,
recent and earlier non-Latin American immigrants have completed 12.9 and 12.77 years of
schooling on average. By contrast, Latin American immigrants are closer in educational attainment to native dropouts. Recent Latin American immigrants have on average 9.4 years
of schooling and earlier Latin American immigrants have on average close to 10 years of
schooling, compared with close to 9 years for native dropouts. Also like native dropouts,
15
16

See the Data Appendix for more details on the construction of the hourly wage.
See Data Appendix for more details on the ACS.

12

Latin American immigrants and, in particular, recent Latin American immigrants are more
likely to work in blue-collar occupations and in agriculture, construction and manufacturing
than more educated natives. This descriptive statistics show the change in composition towards less-educated workers, not only because the share of Latin American immigrants who
are less-educated than other immigrants has been growing over the past decades,17 but also
because among Latin American immigrants the more recent ones are less educated.18

5

Estimates of Immigration Eﬀects

5.1

OLS Estimates

Table 3 presents OLS estimates of the eﬀect of Latin American immigration on natives, i.e.,
γ LA in equation (1). The dependent variables are the log of the hourly wage and an indicator
of whether the person is employed or not. The controls are state and year eﬀects; years of
education; potential experience and potential experience squared; a marriage dummy; and
Black, Asian, and Hispanic dummies. The reported standard errors allow for clustering
at the state-level, allowing for correlations of individuals within states and for correlations
within states over time.
Panel A of Table 3 shows the eﬀects of immigration on the hourly wages of male and
female natives in diﬀerent education groups.19 The results show positive eﬀects of immigration on the hourly wages of men at all education levels with and without state-specific
trends. However, one may be suspicious of these results, since dropouts and immigrants
seem to have about the same skill level and thus likely to be substitutes. The results also
show positive eﬀects on the hourly wages of high school and college educated women when
controlling for state-specific trends. On the other hand, the results in Panel B show negative
eﬀects on male and female employment of dropouts and high school graduates.
Table 4 shows similar eﬀects of recent immigrants on earlier Latin American immigrants.
The results in Panel A again suggest positive eﬀects on the hourly wages of earlier Latin
17

In 1970, the percent of Latin Americans was 18%, in 1980 it was 31%, in 1990 it was 38% and by 2000
it had reached 48%.
18
While this change in the composition of immigration may in the first intance aﬀect the labor market, in
the longer-run it may also have an eﬀect on the demand for services and products and also on prices (see
Cortes (2008) for an analysis of the eﬀect of immigration on the CPI and see Bodvardsson et al. (2008) for
an analysis of the impact of the Mariel Boatlift on product and labor demand) and it may induce employers
to shift towards less-skilled intensive technologies (see Lewis (2005) for an analysis of this issue).
19
The native group pools white, African-American, Hispanics, Asian-Americans and Native-Americans.
While some studies focus solely on African-Americans (e.g., Bean and Hamermesh (1998) and Borjas et al.
(2006)), we do not find significantly diﬀerent eﬀects for African-Americans from other groups so we decide
to pool them for our analysis.

13

American immigrants when not including trends. However, when we include state-specific
trends to help control for ongoing demand shocks, the results become insignificant. By
contrast, the results without trends in Panel B suggest that employment decreased for earlier Latin American men with high school or college degrees in immigrant-receiving states.
However, once we control for state-specific trends the results on employment also disappear.
Given the potential response of immigration to positive regional demand shocks, which
would also increase wages and employment for natives and earlier immigrants, it is diﬃcult
to give a causal interpretation to the OLS estimates. As discussed above, endogenous immigration in response to omitted regional demand shocks would introduce positive biases in
OLS estimates and may hide the true eﬀects of immigration. On the other hand, endogenous
immigration in response to demand shocks for unskilled relative to skilled workers may introduce negative biases in the OLS estimates for skilled workers. The following IV estimates
based on exogenous immigration from Central America after Hurricane Mitch attempt to
eliminate such biases.

5.2

IV Estimates

This Section presents estimates of immigration eﬀects which rely on an IV strategy. The
IV strategy is motivated by the large influx of Central American immigrants into close-by
U.S. states in the late 1990s documented in Section 2. The accounts about the response to
the Hurricane and data from the 2000 Census indicate that many immigrants were locating
in states close to the border, suggesting that distance from the countries hard-hit by the
Hurricane should be a good predictor of the state share of Latin American immigrants after
1998. The first-stage equation for the IV estimates is given by equation (2). The essence of
this IV strategy is to look for a break after Hurricane Mitch in hourly wages and employment
in states close-by to Central America.
Table 5 presents results of the first-stage regression, i.e., equation (2). Results without
trends in Panel A indicate that states closer to Tegucigalpa experienced an increase in the
share of Latin American immigrants after Hurricane Mitch. In Panel B, we include statespecific trends to check whether the increase in the share of Latin American immigrants
in close-by states simply reflects an ongoing trend or whether there is indeed a discernible
break after Mitch. The results with trends show an even bigger increase in the share of
Latin American immigrants after Mitch. For example, the results with trends in Column (1)
of Panel B suggest that moving closer to Central America, say from Washington State to
Texas, increases the share of immigrants coming from Latin America after Mitch by a third

14

of a percentage point.20
Since, as documented above, the share of Latin American immigrants has been increasing
over the last few decades, we include the previous shares of Latin Americans, and in particular
Mexicans, to assure that we are not simply capturing this ongoing trend. First, in Column
(2), we include in the first-stage regression the share of Latin Americans as they would
have located if they had lived in the same states as those from the same Latin American
countries in the previous decade. This is the instrument that Card (2001), and many others
after him, have used. The idea of this instrument is that networks play an important role in
determining location and that people go to where others from their same countries have gone
in the past. This variable is indeed significant, but our interaction between distance and the
post-Mitch dummy also remains highly significant and its magnitude hardly changes.21 In
addition, since Borjas and Katz (2007) document an increase in the share of Mexicans, we
explicitly control for the share of Mexicans in Column (3). Surprisingly, once we control for
state-specific trends, the results show that a higher share of Mexicans in the past reduces
the share of current Latin Americans. More importantly, the coeﬃcient on the interaction
between distance and post-Mitch remains very similar and highly significant.
As another check on the possibility that we are simply capturing some pre-existing trend,
Column (4) reports the results of a regression of the share of Latin Americans on an interaction of distance and a post-1990 dummy using only data for the 1980 and 1990 Censuses.
This is a falsification test a-la Angrist and Krueger (1999), who look at the impact of a false
Mariel Boatlift in 1994 (an announcement by then-President Clinton to let Cuban Refugees
into the U.S. but which never materialized) on the Miami labor market. While Angrist and
Krueger (1999) found a similar result using the 1994 announcement as with the actual Mariel
boatlift, here we find no eﬀect of the fake natural experiment after 1990 while the Hurricane
does show the expected increase in the share of Latin Americans.
To test whether the increase in the share of Latin American immigrants after the Hurricane simply reflected a general increase in immigration towards Southern states towards the
late 1990s not driven by the natural disaster, in Columns (5), (6) and (7) we also estimate
20

We also tried estimating first-stage regressions of the share of unskilled immigrants from all destinations
and the share of unskilled immigrants from Latin America and the first-stage results are slightly smaller but
significant, i.e., -0.0016 (0.00076) and -0.001 (0.00046), respectively. By contrast, the second-stage results
are similar but larger in magnitude.
21
We do a Hausmann-Wu test comparing the IV estimates using our instrument and the IV estimates
using Card’s estimates under the null that the IV estimator using the interaction between distance and
post-Mitch is consistent. A concern wtih Card’s instrument is that if demand shocks are autocorrelated,
then past immigration to a state is also likely to be correlated to past and current demand shocks. We find
that the Mitch IV estimates and the Card IV estimates are significantly diﬀerent from each other, so we
decide to use only the distance post-Mitch interaction to instrument the Latin American share.

15

the equivalent first-stage regression for the shares of recent immigrants coming from Africa,
Europe and Australia, and Asia. Unlike the share of recent Latin American immigrants,
the shares of recent immigrants from other destinations towards Southern states did not
increase after Hurricane Mitch. The results with and without trends in Panels A and B
show no eﬀects on the immigration shares of other ethnic groups.
Table 6 reports results of equation (1) estimated for natives, but where the Latin American share is instrumented with the interaction between the post-Mitch dummy and distance.
Panel A shows results for hourly wages and Panel B shows results for employment. As before the results show no eﬀect on employment. On the other hand, the IV results without
trends continue to show an increase in the hourly wages for high school dropouts and college
educated men. However, IV results controlling for state-specific trends show positive eﬀects
on the wages of men who graduated from high school and college. In particular, these results
for men suggest that an increase of 10% in the share of Latin Americans increases the hourly
wage of educated native men by between 0.8% and 1.25%. On the other hand, unlike the
OLS results, the IV results suggest no eﬀect on the hourly wage of male dropouts who are
more likely to be substitutes with immigrants.22 These results suggest that less educated
Latin American immigrants complement high-skilled native men.23 The results for women,
with or without trends, show no eﬀects on hourly wages or employment.
Table 7 presents equivalent results to those in Table 6, but for earlier Latin American
immigrants. Like the OLS results the IV results without trends continue to show positive
eﬀects on the hourly wages of both men and women of all education groups. However, the
results disappear when including state-specific trends, with the exception of a positive eﬀect
on women with a high school degree. The results imply that an increase of 10% in the Latin
American immigrant share would increase hourly wages of women with a high school degree
by 1.4%. Results without trends only show a negative eﬀect on the employment of earlier
Latin American immigrant men with a high school degree. However, this sign reverses when
including trends, suggesting no clear employment eﬀect.
Contrary to the OLS results in Table 3, the IV results with trends in Table 6 only show
22

The positive eﬀects on high school and college graduates are significantly diﬀerent from the zero eﬀect
on high school dropouts.
23
Ottaviano and Peri (2006, 2008) use variation in the share of immigrants for diﬀerent skill groups and
find evidence of positive eﬀects of immigration on native wages, driven mostly by the more educated, but
negative eﬀects on previous immigrants. However, Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) show that the ealier
results in Ottaviano and Peri (2006) were not robust to the exclusion of young people still in school from the
sample. The latter study only finds positive eﬀects of immigration on wages in the medium-run. Card (2007)
Ottaviano and Peri (2007) also find a positive association between the share of immigrants and native wages.
However, while both studies instrument the share of immigrants and control for native out-migration, they
fail to control for out-migration by previous immigrants in the way we do in the next section.

16

positive eﬀects of Latin American immigration on the hourly wages of more educated native
men and no eﬀects on employment. Thus, the generalized positive eﬀects on wages, even
on high school dropouts, observed in the OLS results seemed to have been largely driven by
positive demand shocks which both attracted low-skilled immigrants to these states as well
as increased the earnings of high school dropouts.

5.3

Controlling for Migration Responses by Natives and Earlier
Immigrants

Aside from the problem of endogeneity which is addressed in the previous results by instrumenting the immigrant share, there are two additional potential biases in the results
presented above. First, inter-state trade in response to lower wages from migration may
dissipate the eﬀects of immigration in the long-run. Second, out-migration by natives or
earlier immigrants may undo the eﬀects of recent immigration. As the first eﬀect is likely to
be a long-run eﬀect and, in this paper, we are studying short-run eﬀects of immigration, we
are mainly concerned here with the second potential problem.
Previous studies which examine the migration response of natives and earlier immigrants
to recent immigration provide mixed evidence. For instance, Card (2001) estimates the eﬀect
of recent immigrants on net population growth, the outflow rate and the inflow rate of natives
and earlier immigrants. On net, Card (2001) finds that immigration is associated with an
increase in population growth for natives and a decrease for earlier immigrants, though the
latter depends on whether weights are used or not for the analysis. The net eﬀects are the
result of eﬀects on outflows and inflows of natives and earlier immigrants. In particular,
recent immigration is associated with an increase in the outflow rate of natives and earlier
immigrants, though the eﬀect is small in magnitude especially for natives. At the same time,
Card’s study finds that recent immigration is associated with an increase in the inflow rate
of natives and earlier immigrants, with the exception of the unweighted results for earlier
immigrants. Card (2001) thus concludes that recent immigrant inflows may be correlated
with positive demand shocks, which cause an increase in the net population of both natives
and earlier immigrants.
By contrast, a recent study by Borjas (2005) uses data from the 1960-2000 decennial
censuses and finds that immigration is associated with a decline in the population growth
rate of natives, which may mitigate the eﬀects of immigration. This eﬀect on net migration
arises both because of higher out-migration and lower in-migration into high immigration
states. He also finds that these associations become smaller as the geographic area that
defines the labor market becomes larger. For example, moving from the metropolitan area
17

level to the state level reduces the extent of these correlations.24 Borjas (2005), however,
does not look at the association between recent immigration and migration patterns of earlier
immigrants.
In Table 8 we explore whether net migration responded to exogenously driven Latin
American immigration. In particular, Table 8 reports results of equations like equation
(2), but where the dependent variable is the share of natives and earlier immigrants in
the states’ population. If natives and earlier immigrants respond to recent immigration by
moving away from or slowing down migration towards states close to Central America, then
we should expect a positive coeﬃcient in the interaction term. By contrast, if native and
earlier immigrant migration do not respond to the exogenously-generated Latin American
immigration, then we should expect this coeﬃcient to be insignificant. The results show
no eﬀect on natives or earlier Latin American or African immigrants. On the other hand,
there is a positive and significant eﬀect on the share of earlier Asian immigrants with or
without state-specific trends, and a positive and significant eﬀect on the share of European
and Australian immigrants when trends are included. These results, thus, suggest that these
veteran Asian and European and Australian immigrants may had responded by moving away
from border states after Hurricane Mitch.
To reduce the biases due to the omission of these groups we do two things. First, following
Borjas (2005), we re-estimate the regressions in Tables 6 and 7 using the regional shares of
Latin Americans instead of the state-level shares.25 The idea is that by moving up to the
regional level, we eliminate the inter-state migration within regions and may reduce the
bias due out-migration. We estimate the shares for the standard 9-regions as defined in the
Census: the New England Division, Middle Atlantic Division, East North Central Division,
West North Central Division, South Atlantic Division, East South Central Division, West
South Central Division, Mountain Division, and Pacific Division. We, then, construct the
instrument as the interaction between the post-Mitch dummy and the average distance from
the Central American capitals to all states within these regions. As with the state-level
shares, the only significant eﬀects on wages for natives are on high-school and college men.
As expect, however, these wage eﬀects are smaller and less precise than when we use the
state-level variation. The high-school eﬀect is 0.098 with a se of 0.05 and the college eﬀect is
0.065 with a se of 0.023, which are significantly smaller than the results in Table 6 for natives.
24

Thus, to the extent that we use state-level rather than metropolitan-level immigration, internal migration
in response to immigration should be less of a concern in our study.
25
Borjas (2005) re-estimates the labor market eﬀects of immigration moving from the metropolitan-level, to
the state-level, to the regional-level and finds that the eﬀect of immigration on native labor market outcomes
becomes increasingly more negative as the level of geographical aggregation increases.

18

For Veteran Latin American, the only significant wage eﬀect is for high school women. The
coeﬃcient is larger in this case, but the eﬀect is only marginally significant while it was
significant at the 1% level when using the state-level shares. Thus, using regional shares
seems to reduce the upward biases due to out-migration.26
Second, given that out-migration can be viewed as introducing omitted variable biases,
we add the shares of earlier Asians and Europeans and Australians in the population as in
equation (3).27 Aside from the interaction between distance and the post-Mitch dummy,
we use two other instruments for the shares of immigrants: the share of Asians and the
share of Europeans/Australians had they located in the same states as those from their
same countries did a decade before, as described in equation (4).28 Tables 9 and 10 report
results for hourly wages and employment of natives and earlier Latin American immigrants,
respectively, which also add the Asian and European-Australian shares. In contrast to the
IV results without controls for out-migration, the results in Table 9 now show no wage or
employment eﬀects of Latin American immigration on native men or women. Comparing
these results with the IV results that do not control for out-migration indicates that failing
to control for out-migration generates positive biases.
The results in Table 10 show no wage eﬀects of recent Latin American immigration on
earlier Latin Americans either. However, these results show negative employment eﬀects on
earlier educated Latin Americans when controlling for internal migration responses by other
ethnic groups. Thus, the results controlling for potential out-migration by other groups
suggest displacement of earlier Latin Americans by recent Latin American immigrants. In
particular, an increase of 0.1 in the share of Latin Americans reduces the probability of
employment of earlier Latin Americans by close to 0.01.29 Similarly, the results show that
previous Asian immigrants displace veteran Latin Americans. On the other hand, former
European and Australian immigrants have a positive eﬀect on Veteran Latin Americans
suggesting complemenatarities between these two groups. These results highlight the importance of controlling for out-migration not only of natives but also of previous immigrants
when exploiting geographical variation to estimate immigration eﬀects. Previous regional
studies which find positive eﬀects of immigration only control for native out-migration but
fail to control for out-migration by previous immigrants.30
26

We do not report complete tables for this exercises, but results are available upon request.
We do not have to worry about including shares for other groups, because the correlation between natives
and earlier Latin Americans and Africans and the instrument is zero.
28
The first-stage R20 s for earlier Asians is 0.97 and for earlier Europeans and Australians is 0.98.
29
The magnitude of this eﬀect is similar to the employment eﬀect found in Card (2001).
30
Card (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2007) take account of potential migration responses of natives but
not of previous immigrants.
27

19

6

Conclusion

This paper presents new evidence on the impact of less-skilled Latin American immigration
on the wages and employment of natives and earlier immigrants in the U.S. using data
from the 1980, 1990 and 2000 Census as well as a “2005” cross-section from the American
Community Surveys. OLS estimates show positive wage and employment eﬀects of Latin
American immigration on both natives and earlier immigrants. However, since these OLS
results are likely to be biased due to endogenous immigration, we exploit immigration from
Central America to close-by U.S. states following Hurricane Mitch. Aside from the Mariel
boatlift, this is the only other study on immigration based on a natural experiment for
the U.S. Yet, unlike the Marielitos, who were not legalized until half a decade later and
stigmatized as criminals or mentally ill, Mitch refugees were quickly allowed to legally work
and viewed as driven individuals, so they were more likely to compete in the labor market
with natives and previous immigrants. In contrast to the OLS results, the IV results suggest
that less-skilled immigration only increases the wages of skilled natives but have no eﬀect
on employment.
Even IV estimates that eliminate biases due to endogeneity may be biased due to outmigration by natives or earlier immigrants. While we do not find out-migration by natives
or earlier Latin Americans or Africans due to the arrival of immigrants after Mitch, earlier Asian and European and Australian immigrants do move further away from Central
America after Mitch. When we control for internal migration responses by earlier Asian and
European and Australian immigrants, we no longer find wage eﬀects. More importantly,
the results that control for out-migration now show negative employment eﬀects on earlier
Latin American immigrants. The results show that earlier Latin Americans are displaced by
recent immigrants from this region who can easily substitute them.
The results highlight the importance of properly controlling for the potential biases that
arise in area studies of immigration. In particular, it is not only crucial to control for
the endogeneity of immigration, but also to deal with potential out-migration or reduced
migration not only by natives but also by previous immigrants. Few immigration studies
deal with the potential out-migration response by previous immigrants, but our study shows
that failing to do so generates misleading results.

20

Data Appendix
Census Data
We use the 1% publicly available random samples of the U.S. Censuses for the years 1980,
1990, and 2000. We do not use 1960 because in this year, the Census did not ask year since
arrival to the U.S., so that we are unable to separate recent from earlier immigrants. We do
not use the 1970 either because the number of weeks and hours worked was reported in a
diﬀerent way this year compared to the 1980-2000 Censuses.
Hourly Wages
To construct our hourly wage measure, we divide the yearly earnings by average weeks
worked per year and average hours worked per week. Since the information on annual
earnings is top-coded using diﬀerent amounts for every year, we instead use a uniform criteria
and we top code at the 99th percentile for all years and eliminate those observations whose
yearly earnings are above the 99th percentile for each year. Also, while for 1980, 1990, and
2000 we have information on the exact average number of weeks and hours worked per week,
the 1970 Census provides instead six 13-week intervals (e.g., 1-13, 14-26, etc.) and eight
14-hour intervals (e.g., 1-14, 15-29, etc.) for the average number of weeks and hours worked,
respectively.
Education Groups
Individuals were divided into three education groups: high school dropouts, high school
graduates and college educated. We constructed these groups using information on years
of education as well as information on whether individuals earned a degree. The year of
education variable puts the person into one of 9 categories: no school or preschool; grades
1-4; grade 5-8; grade 9, grade 10, grade 11, grade 12; 1-3 years of college, more than 4 years
of college. For the first three groups we assign 0, 3, and 7 years of schooling, while for the last
two categories we assign 14 and 16 years of schooling. To distinguish high school dropouts
from high school graduates we use information on whether the individual earned a degree.
Thus, a person with 12 years of schooling but who has not earned a degree is classified as a
dropout, while those with 12 years of schooling and who have earned a degree are classified
as high school graduates.

American Community Survey (ACS) Data
The ACS are monthly rolling samples of household that were designed to replace the
Census long form. The ACS sample design approximates the Census 2000 long form sample
design. It over-samples areas with smaller populations. Each month a systematic sample is
drawn to represent each U.S. county and this selected monthly sample is mailed the survey.
Non-respondents are contacted by phone using a computed assisted telephone interview
21

(CATI) system a month later. Then, a third of the non-respondents to both the mail and
telephone interviews are contacted in person using a computed assisted personal interview
(CAPI) system. The weights included with the ACS for the household and person-level
data adjust for the mixed geographic sampling rates, non-response, and individual sampling
probabilities.
Nationally representative ACS data have been available every year since 2000. We use the
2003, 2004, and 2005 American Community Surveys. The 2003 ACS is a 1-in-236 national
random sample of the population; the 2004 ACS is a 1-in-239 national random sample of
the population; and the 2005 ACS is a 1-in-100 national random sample of the population.
The sampling unit of the ACS is the household and all persons residing in the household.
The data do not include persons in group quarters. In 2003 the sample consisted of 482,000
households and 1,194,000 person records. In 2004, the sample consisted of 514,830 households
and 1,194,354 person records. In 2005, the sample was larger with 1,159,000 households and
2,878,000 person records. However, the public use samples of the ACS are smaller as they
are sub-samples from the Census Bureau’s larger internal files.
Due to confidentiality, the smallest geographic unit identifiable in 2003 and 2004 was
the state and in 2005 the PUMA, which is a geographic unit containing at least 100,000
individuals.

CPI Data
The consumer price index (CPI) comes from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The base
period for the index is 1982-1984=100. The average CPI is 82.4 for 1980; 130.7 for 1990;
172.2 for 2000; 184 for 2003; 188.9 for 2004; and 195.3 for 2005.

Distance Information
Our distance variable measures average straight-line miles from all the capital cities
of Central America (Tegucigalpa, Managua, Guatemala City, and San Salvador) to the
Southernmost city in each state. Appendix Table A.1 reports the distance from each of the
capital cities and the average from all four capital cities to each states’ Southern-most city.

22

References
[1] Aguirre, B., Rogelio Saenz, and Brian Sinclair James. 1997. “Marielitos Ten Years Later:
The Scarface Legacy,” Social Science Quarterly, 78(2): 487-507.
[2] Altonji, Joseph and David Card. 1991. “The Eﬀects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives,” in John Abowd and Richard Freeman, eds.,
Immigration, Trade and Labor. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
[3] Angrist, Joshua and Alan Krueger. 1999. “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,”
in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol.3A.
Amsterdam, New York and Oxford: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
[4] Angrist, Joshua and Adriana Kugler. 2003. “Protective or Counter-Productive? Labour
Market Institutions and the Eﬀect of Immigration on EU Natives,” Economic Journal,
113: F302-F331.
[5] Bean, Frank and Daniel Hamermesh. 1998. Help or Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration for African-Americans. New York: Russell Sage Foundation
[6] Borjas, George, Jeﬀrey Grogger and Gordon Hanson. 2008. “Imperfect Substitution
Between Immigrants and Natives: A Reappraisal,” NBER Working paper No. 13887.
[7] Borjas, George, Jeﬀrey Grogger and Gordon Hanson. 2006. “Immigration and AfricanAmerican Employment Opportunities: the Response of Wages, Employment and Incarceration to Labor Supply Shocks,” NBER Working paper No. 12518.
[8] Borjas, George and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “The Evolution of the Mexican-born Workforce in the United States,” in George Borjas, Ed., Mexican Immigration in the U.S.,
University of Chicago Press.
[9] Borjas, George. 2005. “Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration,” NBER Working Paper No. 11610.
[10] Borjas, George. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining
the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4): 1335-1374.
[11] Borjas, George. 2002. “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of
Immigrants,” in Klaus Zimmerman and T. Bauer, eds., The Economics of Migration:
Assimilation of Migrants. Sheltenham , U.K. and Northampton, Mass.: Elgar.
23

[12] Borjas, George, Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz. 1997. “How Much Do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect Labor Market Outcomes?,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 0(1): 1-67.
[13] Borjas, George, Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz. 1996. “Searching for the Eﬀect
of Immigration on the Labor Market,” American Economic Review, 246-251.
[14] Bovardsson, Orn, Hendrik Van den Berg and Joshua Lewer. 2008. “Measuring the Eﬀects
on Labor Demand: A Reexamination of the Mariel Boatlift,” forthcoming in Labour
Economics.
[15] Card, David. 2007. “How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities,” CReAM Discussion Paper
Series No. 11/07.
[16] Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Flows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market
Impacts of Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1): 22-64.
[17] Card, David. 1990. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43: 245-257.
[18] Card, David and John DiNardo. 2000. “Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows?,” American Economic Review, 90(2): 360-367.
[19] Carrington, William and DeLima, Pedro. 1996. “The Impact of 1970s Repatriates from
Africa on the Portuguese Labor Market,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 49:
330-347.
[20] Cortes, Patricia. 2008. “The Eﬀects of Low-Skilled Immigration on US Prices: Evidence
from CPI Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 116(3): 381-422.
[21] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 2001. Analysis of the
Medium-term Eﬀects of Hurricane Mitch on Food Security in Central America. Rome:
FAO.
[22] Friedberg, Rachel. 2001. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4): 1373-1408.
[23] Friedberg, Rachel and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. “The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country
Wages, Employment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9: 23-44.

24

[24] Hunt, Jennifer. 1992. “The Impact of the 1962 Repratriates from Algeria on the French
Labor Market,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45: 556-572.
[25] LaLonde, Robert and Robert Topel. 1991. “Labor Market Adjustments to Increased
Immigration,” in John Abowd and Richard Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade and
Labor. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
[26] Lewis, Ethan. 2005. “Immigration, Skill Mix and the Choice of Technique,” Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 05-08.
[27] Mayda, Anna Maria. 2005. “Who Is Against Immigration? A Cross-country Investigation of Individual Attitudes Towards Immigrants,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
88(3): 510-530.
[28] Migration

News.

1999.

Hurricane

Mitch.

UC

Davis.

(http://migration.ucdavis.edu/mn/more.php?id=1721 0 2 0).
[29] Morris, Saul, Oscar Neidcker-Gonzales, Calogero Carletto, Marcial Munguia and
Quentin Wodon. 2000. “Hurricane Mitch and the Livelihood of the Rural Poor in Honduras,” World Bank, Mimeo.
[30] Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri. 2008. “Immigration and National Wages:
Clarifying the Theory and the Empirics,” NBER Working Paper No. 14188.
[31] Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri. 2007. “The Eﬀects of Immigration U.S. Wages
and Rents: A General Equilibrium Approach,” Mimeo.
[32] Ottaviano, Gianmarco and Giovanni Peri. 2006. “Rethinking the Eﬀects of Immigration
on Wages,” NBER Working Paper No. 12497.
[33] Schoeni, Robert. 1996. “The Eﬀect of Immigrants on the Employment and Wages of
Native Workers: Evidence from the 1970s and 1980s,” Mimeo, Rand.
[34] Tobar, Hector. 1999. “Painful Exodus Follows Hurricane’s Havoc Immigration:
Hordes Fleeing Mitch’s Devastation Set Sights on Rio Grande,” Los Angeles Time.
(http://www.uwsa.com/pipermail/uwsa/1999q1/017734.html).
[35] Turk, Michele. 1999. After Hurricane Mitch, Hondurans’ Hopes for Future Tied to U.S.
(http://www.distaterrelief.org/Disasters/990128Mitch/index txt.html).

25

[36] U.K.

National

Meteorological

Oﬃce.

2004.

Hurricane

Mitch

Fact

Sheet.

(http://www.metoﬃce.com/sec2/sec2cyclone/tcbulletins/mitch.html).
[37] U.N. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. 2001.
Social Panorama of Latin America 2000-2001.

Santiago,

Chile:

ECLAC.

(http://www.eclac.cl/publicaciones/DesarrolloSocial/8/:CG2138PI/PSI2001 chap1.pdf).
[38] USAID. 2004. Hurricane Mitch: Program Overview. El Salvador: USAID.
[39] U.S. Department of Justice. 1998. News Release:

Honduras, Nicaragua Desig-

nated for Temporary Protected Status Following Devastation from Hurricane Mitch.
(http://www.rapidimmigration.com/www/news/news 295.html).
[40] U.S. National Weather Service. 1999. Preliminary Report:

Hurricane Mitch.

(http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/1998mitch.html).
[41] World Bank. 2001. Hurricane Mitch: The Gender Eﬀects of Coping with Crisis. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

26

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Natives
Men
Variable

Women

Dropouts

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

Hourly wage

12.69
(37.82)

15.51
(36.73)

22.19
(69.49)

9.05
(26.24)

10.91
(31.94)

16.03
(63.75)

Weeks worked

38.37
(16.97)

45.70
(12.14)

46.87
(11.12)

34.53
(17.94)

42.52
(14.63)

43.59
(13.36)

Hours Worked week

37.05
(13.49)

42.06
(10.26)

43.16
(10.83)

31.42
(13.21)

35.68
(10.70)

36.71
(11.45)

Education

8.97
(2.30)

12.00
(0.00)

14.91
(1.00)

9.14
(2.19)

12.00
(0.00)

14.82
(0.98)

Age

35.22
(17.01)

38.15
(13.40)

39.80
(12.17)

36.56
(17.24)

39.77
(13.66)

38.90
(12.03)

Married

43.52

59.23

65.26

42.99

63.53

62.15

Employed

53.65

78.05

85.66

36.90

59.71

73.08

Agriculture

6.54
6.54

5.44
5.44

3.27
3.27

1.47
1.47

1.26
1.26

1.00
1.00

Construction

12.33

14.75

7.93

0.69

1.43

1.33

Manufacturing

17.75

24.91

18.77

11.44

13.25

7.25

Services

48.31

49.63

67.27

64.53

71.37

83.06

White-collar

13.67

23.07

60.17

22.31

43.72

67.83

Blue-collar

77.29

73.23

37.80

66.28

49.16

27.37

Black

15.97

10.85

6.4

17.12

11.20

8.77

Asian

0.59

0.55

0.97

0.57

0.50

0.93

Hispanic

7.87

4.55

3.17

8.40

4.31

3.39

2,505,605

3,923,211

5,060,916

2,386,168

4,393,438

5,386,362

N

Note: The table includes means and standard deviations for native men and women between the ages of 21 and 65 using
the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses and a "2005" cross-section from the American Community Survey. Hourly wages are
deflated using the consumer price index.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Recent and Veteran Immigrants
Latin American
Immigrants

Non-Latin American
Immigrants

Variable

Recent

Veteran

Recent

Veteran

Hourly wage

10.46
(32.55)

14.55
(58.50)

15.98
(53.56)

18.79
(50.32)

Weeks worked

39.77
(15.45)

44.20
(13.03)

40.00
(15.66)

45.21
(12.59)

Hours worked week

39.85
(10.97)

40.13
(10.75)

38.62
(12.78)

39.51
(11.58)

Education

9.41
(4.18)

10.13
(4.30)

12.90
(3.55)

12.77
(3.36)

Age

29.17
(10.42)

39.81
(11.81)

32.85
(11.28)

43.09
(12.55)

Married

48.54

65.24

59.48

68.46

Employed

58.92

64.36

55.72

68.94

Agriculture

6.64

4.69

1.2

1.11

Construction

10.24

7.5

2.94

4.08

Manufacturing

15.99

16.87

13.66

15.54

Services

49.41

57.84

63.66

67.63

White-collar

21.91

31.88

42.61

48.34

Blue-collar

66.44

58.18

46.39

44.05

Black

7.63

10.37

5.34

3.09

Asian

0.8

0.85

48.6

32.21

310,848

815,585

331,179

1,126,626

N

Note: The table includes means and standard deviations for native men and women between
the ages of 21 and 65 using the 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses and a "2005" cross-section
from the American Community Survey. Hourly wages are deflated using the consumer price
index.

Table 3: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Recent Immigration on Native Wages and
Employment
StateSpecific
Trends

Men
Dropouts

Women

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

0.020
(0.009)

*

0.008
(0.007)

*

0.021
(0.004)

A. Hourly Wages
No
Yes
N

0.051
(0.019)
0.016
(0.007)

*

0.029
(0.013)

0.021
** (0.009)

*

0.022
(0.006)

0.019
(0.005)

1,488,556

*

3,005,740

*

0.018
(0.011)

*

0.007
(0.006)

0.023
(0.004)

1,067,844

2,825,261

4,038,731

-0.012
(0.014)

-0.013
(0.010)

0.004
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.001)

3,977,530

†

*

B. Employment
No
Yes
N

-0.008
(0.011)

-0.010
(0.004)

-0.011
(0.004)

-0.024
(0.003)

2,505,103

*

3,922,551

*

0.005
(0.003)

*

0.000
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.003)

-0.017
(0.002)

5,060,436

2,385,715

4,392,780

†

*

5,385,840

Notes: The table reports OLS estimates of Latin American shares of every state on the native's hourly wages and
employment. Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis. Regressions control for years of education;
potential experience and its square; a marriage dummy; black, Asian, Hispanic dummies; and year fixed effects. We
report results with and without state-specific trends. *1%, ** 5%, † 10% significance level.

†

Table 4: OLS Estimates of the Effects of Recent Immigration on Veteran Latin American
Immigrants Wages and Employment
StateSpecific
Trends

Men
Dropouts

Women

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

A. Hourly Wages
No

0.039
(0.014)

*

0.032
(0.009)

*

0.023
(0.009)

*

0.038
(0.007)

*

0.023
0.026
(0.010) ** (0.009)

Yes

0.016
(0.013)

0.019
(0.027)

0.017
(0.019)

0.010
(0.015)

0.017
(0.028)

0.019
(0.021)

N

153,760

86,320

85,006

87,083

68,259

85,272

-0.001
(0.010)

0.006
(0.006)

0.002
(0.004)

*

B. Employment
-0.006
(0.006)

-0.017
(0.004)

Yes

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.017
(0.012)

-0.011
(0.007)

0.008
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.009)

0.001
(0.006)

N

200,130

108,081

106,613

177,555

109,364

113,722

No

*

-0.010
(0.004)

*

Notes: The table reports OLS estimates of Latin American shares of every state on the hourly wages and employment.
Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis. Regressions control for years of education, potential
experience and its square, marriage dummy, black, Asian, Hispanic dummies, and year fixed effects. We report results
.with and without state-specific trends. *1%, ** 5%, † 10% significance level

Table 5: First-Stage Regressions
Share of Latin American Imm.

(1)

(2)

(3)

Share of
African
Imm.

Share of EuroAustralian
Imm.

Share of
Asian
Imm.

(5)

(6)

(7)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0004)

-0.0014
(0.0008)

0.76

0.85

0.94

-0.0001
-0.
0001
(0.0001)

0.0005
0.
0005
(0.0003)

00.0001
.0001
(0.0007)

0.87

0.96

0.98

(4)

A. Without Trends
Post-Mitch × Distance

-0.0021
(0.0007) *

-0.0018
-0.0020
(0.0006) * (0.0008) *
0.5796
(0.1730) *

Card-iv

0.0155
(0.0508)

Mexican Lag

0.0001
(0.0007)

Post-1990 × Distance
R2

0.86

0.90

0.86

0.93
B. With Trends

i h × Distance
i
Post-Mitch

-0.0022
0.0022
-0.0021
0.0021
-0.0023
-0.0023
(0.0010) ** (0.0010) ** (0.0010) **
0.5295
(0.1263) *

Card-iv

-0.3388
(0.0402) *

Mexican Lag

§

Post-1990 × Distance
R2

0.92

0.95

0.95

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by state and reported in parentheses. All regressions include state and year effects. Panel A
reports results without state-specific trends, while Panel B reports results with state-specific trends. The distance variable
measures the average crow miles from the capital cities of the Central American countries affected by Hurricane Mitch to the
Southern-most residential area in each state. *1%, ** 5%, † 10% significance level.

Table 6: IV Estimates of the Effects of Recent Immigration on Native Wages and
Employment
StateSpecific
Trends

Men
Dropouts

Women

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

-0.021
(0.026)

-0.022
(0.024)

-0.017
(0.016)

0.044
(0.044)

0.078
(0.048)

0.051
(0.037)

1,067,844

2,825,261

4,038,731

A. Hourly Wages
No
Yes
N

0.071
(0.033)

**

0.022
(0.019)

0.062
(0.057)

0.125
(0.059)

1,488,556

3,005,740

0.031
(0.018)
**

0.079
(0.032)
3,977,530

†

**

B. Employment
No

-0.026
(0.030)

-0.002
(0.017)

0.006
(0.007)

-0.041
(0.031)

-0.032
(0.025)

-0.009
(0.014)

Yes

0.022
(0.020)

-0.001
(0.014)

0.000
(0.010)

0.017
(0.018)

-0.001
(0.015)

-0.012
(0.013)

2,505,103
,
,

3,922,551
,
,

5,060,436
, ,

2,385,715
, ,

4,392,780
, ,

5,385,840
, ,

N

Notes: The Table reports IV estimates of Latin American shares of every state on hourly wages and employment of
natives. The share is instrumented with the interaction between the distrance from Central America and a post-Mitch
dummy. Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis. Regressions control for years of education;
potential experience and its square; a marriage dummy; black, Asian, Hispanic dummies; and state and year fixed
effects. We report results with and without state-specific trends.*1%, ** 5%, † 10% significance level.

Table 7: IV Estimates of the Effects of Recent Immigration on Veteran Latin American
Immigrant Wages and Employment
StateSpecific
Trends

Men
Dropouts

Women

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

A. Hourly Wages
No
Yes
N

0.062
(0.026)

**

0.042
(0.012)

*

0.029
(0.009)

*

0.043
(0.010)

*

0.024
(0.009)

**

0.021
(0.017)

-0.947
(182.237)

0.105
(0.066)

0.030
(0.059)

-0.083
(6.449)

0.138
(0.043)

153,760

86,320

85,006

87,083

68,259

85,272

*

0.024
(0.074)

B. Employment
No
Yes
N

-0.002
(0.009)

-0.008
(0.003)

-0.267
(17.782)

0.048
(0.023)

200,130
,

108,081
,

**

**

-0.005
(0.006)

0.003
(0.019)

0.001
(0.009)

-0.007
(0.008)

0.015
(0.016)

0.026
(0.408)

-0.099
(3.809)

0.012
(0.017)

106,613
,

177,555
,

109,364
,

113,722
,

Notes: The Table reports IV estimates of Latin American shares of every state on hourly wages and employment
indicator of Veteran Latin American immigrants. The share is instrumented with the interaction between the distrance
from Central America and a post-Mitch dummy. Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis.
Regressions control for years of education; potential experience and its square; a marriage dummy; black, Asian,
Hispanic dummies; and state and year fixed effects. We report results with and without state-specific trends.*1%, **
5%, † 10% significance level.

Table 8: Effects of Recent Latin American Immigration on the Native and
Earlier Immigrant Populations
Share of
Natives

Share of
Earlier
Latin

Share of
Earlier
African

Share of
Earlier EuroAustralian

Share of
Earlier
Asian

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

A. Without Trends
Post-Mitch × Distance
R2

0.0003
(0.0041)
0.95

-0.0026
(0.0028)
0.81

-0.0001
(0.0001)
0.71

0.0006
(0.0008)
0.96

0.0094
(0.0043) **
0.88

B. With Trends
Post-Mitch × Distance
2

R

0.0019
(0.0034)

-0.0005
(0.0020)

0.99

0.98

-0.0001
(0.0001)
0.97

0.0042
0.0011
*
(0.0004) (0.0019) **
0.99

0.99

Notes: Standard errors are clustered by state and reported in parentheses. All regressions include
state and year effects. Panel A reports results without state-specific trends, while Panel B reports
results with trends. The distance variable measures the average crow miles from capital cities of
Central American countries to the Southern-most residential area in each state. *1%, ** 5%, †
10% significance level.

Table 9: IV Estimates of the effect of Recent LA, and Earlier Asian,and Euro-Australian
Immigration on Natives
Men
Immigrant Group Dropouts

HS

Women
College

Dropouts

HS

College

A. Hourly Wages
Latin

-0.169
(0.469)

-1.276
(6.723)

-0.433
(1.600)

-0.129
(0.399)

-0.639
(2.158)

-0.716
(3.696)

Asian

-0.052
(0.163)

-0.623
(2.346)

-0.309
(0.841)

-0.101
(0.148)

-0.316
(0.680)

-0.487
(2.192)

Euro-Australian

-0.499
(1.185)

-2.456
(13.915)

-0.845
(3.220)

-0.235
(0.979)

-1.239
(4.613)

-1.282
(6.835)

3,977,530

1,067,844

2,825,261

4,038,731

N

1,488,556

3,005,740

B. Employment
Latin

0.042
(0.325)

0.280
(1.495)

0.103
(0.471)

0.023
(0.127)

0.131
(0.531)

0.187
(0.852)

Asian

-0.032
(0.143)

0.098
(0.598)

0.060
(0.265)

-0.019
(0.060)

0.033
(0.189)

0.127
(0.501)

Euro-Australian

0.143
(0.567)

0.614
(2.962)

0.186
(0.875)

0.065
(0.238)

0.302
(1.049)

0.316
(1.547)

2,505,103

3,922,551

5,060,436

2,385,715

4,392,780

5,385,840

N

Notes: The Table reports IV estimates of the share of recent Latin Americans and the shares of veteran Asian and European and
Australian immigrants. The instruments are the interaction between distance from Central America and a post-Mitch dummy
and the shares of immigrants from Asia and Europe/Australia if they had located as immigrants who came before 1970. Panel A
presents the results for regressions of hourly wages and Panel B presents results of linear probability models of employment.
Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for years of education; potential experience
and its square; a marriage dummy; black, Asian, and Hispanic dummies; and state and year fixed effects. All regressions include
state-specific trends.*1%, **5%, and †10% significance level.

Table 10: IV Estimates of the effect of Recent LA, and Earlier Asian,and Euro-Australian
Immigration on Veteran Latin Americans
Men
Immigrant Group Dropouts

Women

HS

College

Dropouts

HS

College

A. Hourly Wages
Latin

0.045
(0.051)

0.065
(0.091)

0.122
(0.129)

0.066
(0.102)

-0.306
(0.247)

-0.054
(0.049)

Asian

0.002
(0.046)

-0.018
(0.100)

0.084
(0.142)

-0.018
(0.097)

-0.422
(0.367)

-0.061
(0.071)

Euro-Australian

0.021
(0.066)

0.036
(0.089)

-0.168
(0.081) **

0.119
(0.104)

0.105
(0.169)

0.039
(0.071)

N

153,760

86,320

85,006

87,083

68,259

85,272

B. Employment
Latin

-0.030
(0.026)

-0.077
-0.094
(0.030) ** (0.039) **

-0.007
(0.051)

-0.163
(0.153)

-0.050
(0.038)

Asian

-0.058
(0.025)

-0.093
(0.026)

*

-0.050
(0.051)

-0.226
(0.205)

-0.051
(0.038)

0.065
(0.024)

0.061
(0.038)

0.049
(0.024)

*

0.097
(0.031)

0.136
(0.093)

0.071
(0.030) **

108,081

106,613

109,364

113,722

Euro-Australian

N

200,130

*

*

-0.097
(0.046)

177,555

*

Notes: The Table reports IV estimates of the share of recent Latin Americans and the shares of veteran Asian and European
and Australian immigrants. The instruments are the interaction between distance from Central America and a post-Mitch
dummy and the shares of immigrants from Asia and Europe/Australia if they had located as immigrants who came before
1970. Panel A presents the results for regressions of hourly wages and Panel B presents results of linear probability models of
employment. Clustered standard errors by state are reported in parenthesis. All regressions control for years of education;
potential experience and its square; a marriage dummy; black, Asian, and Hispanic dummies; and state and year fixed effects.
All regressions include state-specific trends.*1%, **5%, †10% significance level.

Figure 1: Central American Countries Affected by Hurricane
Mitch and U.S. Southern States

.01

.02

.03

.04

.05

.06

.07

Central Americans / All Americans

.08

Fi gure 2: Share of Central Americans in the Closest and Farthest States 1991-200

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Year
Share of CAs in Closest States

Share of CAs in Farthest States

Blue bar: Share of Central Americans in Quintile of States Closest to Central America
Red bar: Share of Central Americans in Quintile of States Farthest Away from central America

Table A.1: Distances from the Central American Capital Cities
to the Southern-Most Cities in U.S. States

State
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Washington
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
N. Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming

Southern-Most
City
Grand Bay
Juneau
Douglas
Texarkana
El Centro
Trinidad
Bridgeport
Laurel
D.C.
Key West
Bainbridge
Honolulu
Preston
Mound City
Evansville
Keokuk
Oswego
Hickman
Cameron
Kittery
Crisfield
Barrington
Cassopolis
Fairmont
Biloxi
Caruthersville
Red Lodge
Falls City
Laughlin
Keene
Cape may
Hobbs
N.Y. City
Murphy
Forman
Ironton
Idabel
Lakeview
Waynesburg
Westerly
Hilton head
Vermillion
Chattanooga
Brownsville
Kanab
Pennington
Jonesville
Walla Walla
Bluefield
Kenosha
Cheyenne

Tegucigalpa
1131
3891
1848
1401
2201
1912
2050
1830
1820
804
1171
4644
2429
1589
1647
1832
1663
1553
1150
2226
1788
2107
1919
2082
1130
1530
2502
1861
2240
2179
1870
1631
2000
1461
2289
1707
1446
2768
1829
2096
1313
2061
1451
1053
2220
2153
1578
2851
1639
1964
2144

Managua
1266
4037
1985
1544
2335
2056
2021
1932
1927
902
1294
4745
2574
1723
1779
1970
1807
1676
1294
2324
1890
2202
2044
2222
1267
1666
2648
2005
2378
2277
1971
1775
2101
1563
2431
1833
1591
2910
1953
2193
1422
2203
1577
1196
2362
2254
1678
2995
1755
2097
2290

Guatemala
city
1105
3759
1666
1317
2009
1767
1977
1886
1866
892
1185
4421
2286
1556
1622
1779
1566
1560
1062
2288
1847
2174
1915
2015
1094
1488
2376
1772
2061
2238
1929
1481
2056
1522
2206
1703
1326
2602
1902
2161
1360
1979
1448
901
2054
2207
1639
2697
1663
1935
2020

San
Salvador
1157
3856
1776
1394
2121
1867
1992
1902
1887
888
1219
4530
2385
1612
1675
1844
1649
1598
1139
2301
1861
2184
1959
2087
1150
1548
2470
1852
2170
2252
1943
1582
2072
1534
2284
1747
1417
2708
1920
2172
1379
2056
1490
1001
2160
2224
1651
2800
1694
1991
2113

Average
Central
American
Capitals
1164.75
3885.75
1818.75
1414
2166.5
1900.5
2010
1887.5
1875
871.5
1217.25
4585
2418.5
1620
1680.75
1856.25
1671.25
1596.75
1161.25
2284.75
1846.5
2166.75
1959.25
2101.5
1160.25
1558
2499
1872.5
2212.25
2236.5
1928.25
1617.25
2057.25
1520
2302.5
1747.5
1445
2747
1901
2155.5
1368.5
2074.75
1491.5
1037.75
2199
2209.5
1636.5
2835.75
1687.75
1996.75
2141.75

Notes: The table reports straight-line miles from each Central American Capital city to the Southern-most city in each U.S. state.

