                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                GLOBAL BUSINESS CYCLES:
                              CONVERGENCE OR DECOUPLING?

                                           M. Ayhan Kose
                                          Christopher Otrok
                                           Eswar S. Prasad

                                        Working Paper 14292
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14292


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Brookings Institution, Cornell University, Johns
Hopkins University, University of Wisconsin, and the 2008 NBER Summer Institute. We would like
to thank Mark Aguiar, Stijn Claessens, Selim Elekdag, Charles Engel, Fabrizio Perri, Mark Watson
and seminar participants for useful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, IMF policy, or the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                GLOBAL BUSINESS CYCLES:
                              CONVERGENCE OR DECOUPLING?

                                           M. Ayhan Kose
                                          Christopher Otrok
                                           Eswar S. Prasad

                                        Working Paper 14292
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14292


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Brookings Institution, Cornell University, Johns
Hopkins University, University of Wisconsin, and the 2008 NBER Summer Institute. We would like
to thank Mark Aguiar, Stijn Claessens, Selim Elekdag, Charles Engel, Fabrizio Perri, Mark Watson
and seminar participants for useful comments. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of the IMF, IMF policy, or the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2008 by M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Business Cycles: Convergence or Decoupling?
M. Ayhan Kose, Christopher Otrok, and Eswar S. Prasad
NBER Working Paper No. 14292
October 2008
JEL No. C11,C32,E32,F41,F42

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the evolution of the degree of global cyclical interdependence over the period
1960-2005. We categorize the 106 countries in our sample into three groups -- industrial countries,
emerging markets, and other developing economies. Using a dynamic factor model, we then decompose
macroeconomic fluctuations in key macroeconomic aggregates -- output, consumption, and investment
-- into different factors. These are: (i) a global factor, which picks up fluctuations that are common
across all variables and countries; (ii) three group-specific factors, which capture fluctuations that
are common to all variables and all countries within each group of countries; (iii) country factors, which
are common across all aggregates in a given country; and (iv) idiosyncratic factors specific to each
time series. Our main result is that, during the period of globalization (1985-2005), there has been
some convergence of business cycle fluctuations among the group of industrial economies and among
the group of emerging market economies. Surprisingly, there has been a concomitant decline in the
relative importance of the global factor. In other words, there is evidence of business cycle convergence
within each of these two groups of countries but divergence (or decoupling) between them.


M. Ayhan Kose                                       Eswar S. Prasad
Research Department                                 Department of Applied Economics and
International Monetary Fund                         Management
akose@imf.org                                       Cornell University
                                                    440 Warren Hall
Christopher Otrok                                   Ithaca, NY 14853
Department of Economics                             and NBER
University of Virginia                              eswar.prasad@cornell.edu
PO Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
cmo3h@Virginia.EDU
                                                  1


                                          I. Introduction
       The global economic landscape has shifted dramatically since the mid-1980s. First, there
has been a rapid increase in trade and financial linkages across countries. Second, emerging
market economies have increasingly become major players and they now account for about a
quarter of world output and a major share of global growth. These developments, along with the
imminent U.S. recession and concerns about its international spillover effects, have generated a
vigorous debate about changes in the patterns of international business cycle comovement. On
the one hand, the conventional wisdom suggests that the forces of globalization in recent decades
have increased cross-border economic interdependence and led to convergence of business cycle
fluctuations. Greater openness to trade and financial flows should make economies more
sensitive to external shocks and increase comovement in response to global shocks by widening
the channels for these shocks to spill over across countries.
       On the other hand, in recent years the impressive growth performance of emerging
market economies, especially China and India, seems to have been unaffected by growth
slowdowns in a number of industrial countries. This has led to questions about the potency of
international channels of business cycle transmission. Some observers have even conjectured that
these emerging markets have “decoupled” from industrial economies, in the sense that their
business cycle dynamics are no longer tightly linked to industrial country business cycles. These
two views of cross-border interdependence have very different implications for the evolution of
global business cycles.
       What guidance does economic theory offer for discriminating between these two views?
Theory delivers rather nuanced predictions about the impact of increased trade and financial
linkages on cross-country output comovement. For example, rising financial linkages could
result in a higher degree of business cycle comovement via the wealth effects of external shocks.
However, they could reduce cross-country output correlations by stimulating specialization of
production through the reallocation of capital in a manner consistent with countries’ comparative
advantage. Trade linkages generate both demand- and supply-side spillovers across countries,
which can result in more highly correlated output fluctuations. On the other hand, if stronger
trade linkages facilitate increase specialization of production across countries, and if sector-
specific shocks are dominant, then the degree of comovement of output could fall (see Baxter
and Kouparitsas, 2005).
                                                    2

        As for other macroeconomic aggregates, the resource-shifting effect in standard business
cycle models implies that global integration should reduce investment correlations by shifting
capital to and raising investment growth in countries with relatively high productivity growth. By
contrast, rising financial integration should increase consumption correlations by enabling more
efficient risk sharing. The empirical validity of these (sometimes conflicting) theoretical
predictions remains an open issue.
        Our objective in this paper is to provide a comprehensive empirical characterization of
global business cycle linkages among a large and diverse group of countries. We focus on the
following questions: First, what are the major factors driving business cycles in different groups
of countries? Are these factors mainly global or are there distinct factors specific to particular
groups? Second, how have these factors evolved as the process of globalization has picked up in
pace over the past two decades? The answers to these questions have important implications for
the debate on the relative merits of the two competing views about whether global business
cycles are converging or decoupling.
        We extend the research program on global business cycles in several dimensions. First,
our study is much more comprehensive than earlier studies as we use a larger dataset (106
countries) with a longer time span (1960-2005). With few exceptions, the existing literature on
international business cycles has focused on industrial countries.1 Given the rising prominence of
the emerging markets in the global economy, and particularly in the context of an analysis of
international business cycle spillovers, this narrow focus is no longer tenable. Indeed, the current
debate about convergence or decoupling is largely about whether and how emerging markets will
be affected by the U.S. business cycle. Our use of a large sample of countries allows us to draw a
sharp contrast across the different groups of countries in terms of their exposure to the global
economy. In addition, the relatively longer time span of the data enables us to consider distinct
sub-periods and, in particular, analyze the changes in business cycles that have taken place
during the period of globalization (1985-2005) relative to earlier periods.
        Second, unlike most existing studies, we specifically consider the roles played by global
cycles and distinguish them from cycles common to specific groups of countries—industrial



1
 See Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2008) for a brief survey of the literature studying the extent of business
cycles comovement among industrial countries.
                                                  3

economies, emerging markets, and other developing economies. This distinction between the
latter two groups of non-industrial countries turns out to be important for our analysis.
       Third, we study the extent of global business cycle comovement in a number of
macroeconomic variables rather than solely focusing on output. A key insight from our brief
discussion of theory above is that the common practice of measuring business cycles and
spillovers based on fluctuations in output can be rather restrictive. Indeed, our approach of using
multiple macroeconomic indicators rather than just GDP to characterize business cycles can be
traced back to classical scholars of business cycles (Burns and Mitchell, 1946; Zarnowitz, 1992).
The NBER also looks at a variety of indicators for determining turning points in U.S. business
cycles.2
       In addition, we employ a set of recently developed econometric tools to analyze these
questions. The novel methodology that we implement is based on estimation of a dynamic factor
model and is critical for our purposes. Our model enables us to simultaneously capture
contemporaneous spillovers of shocks as well as the dynamic propagation of business cycles in a
flexible manner, without a priori restrictions on the directions of spillovers or the structure of the
propagation mechanism. We decompose macroeconomic fluctuations in national output,
consumption, and investment into the following factors: (i) a global factor, which picks up
fluctuations that are common across all variables and countries; (ii) three factors specific to each
group of countries, which capture fluctuations that are common to all variables and all countries
in a given group; (iii) country factors, which are common across all variables in a given country,
and (iv) idiosyncratic factors specific to each time series.
       The estimated factors reflect elements of commonality of fluctuations in different
dimensions of our data. The importance of studying all of these factors in one model is that they
obviate problems that could be caused by studying a subset of factors, which could lead to a
mischaracterization of commonality. For instance, group-specific factors estimated in a smaller
model may simply reflect global factors that are misidentified as being specific to a particular
group. Moreover, by including different macroeconomic aggregates, we get better measures of

2
  The NBER focuses on the evolution of five indicators—real GDP, real income, employment, industrial
production, and wholesale-retail sales. Others have used variables such as real GDP and unemployment to
pin down the sources of business cycles (Blanchard and Quah, 1989). King et. al (1991) study joint
fluctuations in output, consumption and investment to identify trends and cycles.
                                                  4

the commonality of fluctuations in overall economic activity. The dynamic factors capture
intertemporal cross-correlations among the variables and thereby allow for the effects of
propagation and spillovers of shocks to be picked up. This methodology is also useful to analyze
how the global and group-specific factors have affected the nature of business cycles within each
group of countries over time.
        We report a rich set of results about the evolution of global business cycles. Our first
major result is that there has been a decline over time in the relative importance of global factors
in accounting for business cycle fluctuations in our sample of countries. In other words, there is
no evidence of global convergence of business cycles during the recent period of globalization.
Even if we use a broader definition of global business cycle convergence by taking the total
contribution of all common factors—global and group-specific—there has been little change in
overall business cycle synchronicity. This sum has been stable over time because of the
substantial increase in the contribution of group-specific factors to business cycles. This brings
us to our next interesting result.
        During the period of globalization, there has been a modest convergence of business
cycles among industrial countries and, separately, among emerging market economies. That is,
group-specific factors have become more important than global factors in driving cyclical
fluctuations in these two groups of countries. This phenomenon of group-specific business cycle
convergence is a robust feature of the data—it is not limited to countries in any particular
geographic region and is not a mechanical effect of episodes of crises. The distinction between
emerging markets and other developing economies is crucial for uncovering this result. This
distinction has become sharper over time as there has been little change in the relative
importance of group-specific factors for the latter group, where business cycle fluctuations are
largely driven by idiosyncratic factors.
        We also find that country-specific factors have become more important for the group of
emerging market economies in the recent period of globalization, while they have become less
important for industrial economies. The rising comovement among output, consumption and
investment in the former group ties in with a recent literature showing that countries with
intermediate levels of financial integration—i.e., emerging market economies—have not been
able to achieve improved risk sharing during the globalization period (Kose, Prasad and
Terrones, 2007). Moreover, the more successful emerging market economies have increasingly
                                                   5

depended on domestically-financed investment, rather than relying on foreign capital to boost
investment (Gourinchas and Jeanne, 2007; Aizenman et al., 2007; Prasad et al., 2007). On the
other hand, countries with high levels of financial integration—mostly industrial countries—
have been able to use international financial markets to more efficiently share risk and delink
consumption and output.


                                     II. Methodology and Data
        The econometric methodology that we employ needs to be able to identify different
sources of cyclical fluctuations, account for dynamic and persistent relationships among different
variables, and be suitable for a large dataset. To meet these requirements, we employ a dynamic
latent factor model. We first discuss the main features of our empirical model and then briefly
describe the dataset.


II.1 A Dynamic Factor Model
        In recent years, dynamic factor models have become a popular econometric tool for
quantifying the degree of comovement among macroeconomic time series.3 The motivation
underlying these models is to identify a few common factors that drive fluctuations in large
multi-dimensional macroeconomic datasets. These factors can capture common fluctuations
across the entire dataset (i.e., the world) or across subsets of the data (e.g., a particular group of
countries). The factor structure itself is directly motivated by general equilibrium models as
shown in Sargent (1989) and Altug (1989). In our case, we do not interpret the factors as
representing specific types of shocks such as technology—instead, we view them as capturing
the effects of many types of common shocks, including technology shocks, monetary policy
shocks, etc. Dynamic factor models are particularly useful for characterizing the degree and
evolution of synchronization in various dimensions without making strong identifying
assumptions to disentangle different types of common shocks.
        We construct a model that contains: (i) a global factor common to all variables (and all
countries) in the system; (ii) a factor common to each group of countries; (iii) a country factor

3
 In addition to analysis of business cycles comovement, factor models have been used in a variety of
contexts. See Otrok and Whiteman (1998) for an application to a forecasting exercise, and Bernanke,
Boivin and Eliasz (2005) for an application to the analysis of monetary policy.
                                                                            6

common to all variables in each country; and (iv) an idiosyncratic component for each series.
Since our primary interest is in comovement across all variables in all countries (or groups of
countries), we do not include separate factors for each of the macroeconomic aggregates
(including factors in yet another dimension would also make the model intractable for the
number of countries we study).
        The dynamic relationships in the model are captured by modeling each factor and
idiosyncratic component as an autoregressive process. Specifically, let Yti , j,k denote the growth
rate of the ith observable variable in the jth country of economy type k. Here we have three
variables per country (indexed by i), three economy types (indexed by k), and 106 countries
(indexed by j). The model can then be written as:


(1)     Yt i , j , k = β global
                         i , j ,k
                                  ft global + β economy
                                                i , j ,k
                                                         k ft
                                                              economy k
                                                                        + β ciountry
                                                                              , j ,k
                                                                                     j ft
                                                                                          country j
                                                                                                    + ε ti , j ,k ,

(2)      f tm = φ m (L)f tm−1 + µ mt for m = 1…(1+ K + J),

(3)     ε it, j,k = φ i , j,k (L)ε it,−j1,k + ν it, j,k

where φi,j,k(L) and φm(L) are lag polynomial operators, νti,j,k are distributed N(0, σ i2, j,k ), µtm are

distributed N(0, σ 2m ), and the innovation terms µtm and νti,j,k are mutually orthogonal across all

equations and variables in the system. The β parameters are called factor loadings and capture
the sensitivity of each observable variable to the latent factors. For each variable, the estimated
factor loadings quantify the extent to which that variable moves with the global factor, the factor
for its economy type, and the country-specific factor, respectively. The lag polynomials can in
principle be of different order; however, for simplicity and parsimony, we restrict them to be
AR(3) for each factor and idiosyncratic term. Since we are using annual data, this should capture
most spillovers, either contemporaneous or lagged, across variables and countries.
        There are two related identification problems in the model given by equations (1)-(3):
neither the signs nor the scales of the factors and the factor loadings are separately identified. We
identify the signs by requiring one of the factor loadings to be positive for each of the factors. In
particular, we impose the conditions that the factor loading for the global factor is positive for
U.S. output; that country factors have positive factor loadings for the output of each country; and
                                                       7

the factors for each country group have positive loadings for the output of the first country listed
in each group in Appendix A.4 Following Sargent and Sims (1977) and Stock and Watson
(1989), we identify the scales by assuming that each σ 2m is equal to a constant. The constant is
chosen based on the scale of the data so that the innovation variance is equal to the average
innovation variance of a set of univariate autoregressions on each time series. The results are not
sensitive to this normalization. Technical details about the estimation of the model are in
Appendix B.


II.2 Advantages of Dynamic Factor Models
        We now briefly review the advantages of our approach, first by contrasting it with some
common alternatives. A standard approach to measuring comovement, and one that is widely
used in the literature is to calculate sets of bivariate correlations for all variables in a dataset.5
Deriving summary measures from large datasets requires one to take averages across the
estimated correlations, a procedure that can mask the presence of comovement across a subset of
the data. One way to reduce the number of bivariate correlations is to specify a country or
weighted aggregate to serve as the reference against which other countries’ correlations are
computed. However, changes in the reference country/aggregate often lead to significantly
different results. Such weighting schemes also inevitably give rise to questions about the weights
and concerns that a large county may dominate the global business cycle by virtue of its size
when, in fact, that country may be disengaged from the rest of the world. Moreover, static
correlations cannot capture the dynamic properties of the data, such as autocorrelations and
cross-autocorrelations across variables.
        Factor models obviate these problems. They do not require one to average across
variables or define a “numeraire” country. Instead, they identify the common component and, at

4
  The sign restriction is simply a normalization that allows us to interpret the factors in an intuitive way.
For example, we normalize the factor loading for GDP growth in the U.S. on the global factor to be
positive. This implies that the global factor falls in 1974 and 1981, consistent with the fact that most
countries had a recession in those years. If, instead, we were to normalize using Venezuela, an oil
exporting country that benefited from the 1974 oil price shock, the factor would rise in 1974. The U.S.
factor loading on the global factor would then be negative.
5
  Other measures include: (1) the concordance statistic (Harding and Pagan, 2002), which measures the
synchronization of turning points; and (2) coherences (the equivalent of correlations in the frequency
domain, although, unlike static correlations, they could allow for lead-lag relationships between two
variables). Similar to simple correlations, these other measures are subject to a variety of limitations.
                                                  8

the same time, detect how each country responds to the common component. For example,
suppose one country is positively affected by a shock while a second is negatively affected by
the same shock. The factor model will assign a positive factor loading to one country, and a
negative one to the other, thereby correctly identifying the sign of the common component for
each country. More importantly, factor models are flexible enough that multiple factors can be
specified in a parsimonious way to capture the extent of synchronicity across the entire dataset as
well as the synchronicity specific to subsets of the data (e.g., particular groups of countries).
Furthermore, since the factors are extracted simultaneously, we can assign a degree of relative
importance to each type of factor.
       In our dynamic latent factor model, country “weights” are derived as part of the
estimation process. That is, the econometric procedure searches for the largest common dynamic
component across countries (in static factor models, this is labeled the first principal component).
For example, if the world contained one large country and a number of small countries, and the
small countries moved together but were unrelated to the large country, our procedure would
identify that common component across the smaller countries. While some may view this as
problematic in that the large country contains a significant part of world GDP, we consider this a
virtue, since we are trying to characterize the degree of synchronicity of cycles across a large set
of countries. In order to do so, we need to identify which countries in fact move together. Of
course, in practice, large countries affect small ones through various linkages and our procedure
does capture this.
       The factor model is also well suited to studying the joint properties of fluctuations in
output, consumption, and investment. Using multiple macroeconomic aggregates, rather than just
output, allows us to derive more robust measures of national and global business cycles.
Moreover, since each variable can respond with its own magnitude and sign to the common
factors, the model can simultaneously capture the effects of changes in comovement across
different macroeconomic aggregates. For example, if consumption comovement goes up from
one period to the next across two countries, we would observe an increase in the factor loading
for consumption in both countries for either the global or group-specific factor (depending on
how widespread the increase in consumption comovement is and which groups the two countries
belong to). At the same time, we would observe a decrease in the size of the factor loading on the
investment variables in those countries. The same would happen, with a greater decline in the
                                                                       9

factor loading on investment, if the increase in consumption comovement was accompanied by a
decrease in investment comovement.
         To summarize, our empirical model is quite flexible in capturing the degree of and
changes in the patterns of comovement across different countries, groups of countries, and
macroeconomic aggregates. It can also handle dynamic propagation of shocks from various
sources. The dynamic factor model is in fact a decomposition of the entire joint spectral density
matrix of the data. As such, it incorporates all information on the dynamic comovement of the
data. In the process, it allows us to identify the relative importance of different types of global,
group-specific, country-specific and idiosyncratic factors. The model is computationally
intensive but tractable without a priori restrictions on the effects or propagation structure of
various shocks.


II.3. Variance Decompositions
         We use variance decompositions to measure the relative contributions of the global,
group-specific and country-specific factors to business cycle fluctuations in each country. This
provides an empirical assessment of how much of a country’s business cycle fluctuations are
associated with global fluctuations or fluctuations among a group of countries. We estimate the
share of the variance of each macroeconomic variable attributable to each of the three factors and
the idiosyncratic component. With orthogonal factors, the variance of the growth rate of the
observable quantity Yti,j,k can be written as follows:6


    var(Yti, j,k ) = (β i,global
                            j, k
                                 ) 2 var(f tglobal ) + (β i,economy
                                                             j, k      2
                                                                    k ) var(f t
                                                                               economy k
                                                                                         ) + (β i,country
                                                                                                   j, k      2
                                                                                                          j ) var(f t
                                                                                                                     country j
                                                                                                                               ) + var(ε i,t j, k )


Then, the fraction of volatility due to, say, the global factor would be:
             (β i,global
                    j, k
                         ) 2 var(f tglobal )
                    var(Yti, j,k )


6
  Even though the factors are uncorrelated, samples taken at each pass of the Markov chain will not be,
purely because of sampling errors. To ensure adding up, we took a further step for these calculations, and
orthogonalized the sampled factors, ordering the global factor first, the regional factor second, and the
country factor third. Our simulations suggest that the order of orthogonalization has little impact on the
results. In particular, all of the results remain qualitatively similar under alternative orderings, and the
quantitative differences are small.
                                                    10

These measures are calculated at each pass of the Markov chain; dispersion in their posterior
distributions reflects uncertainty regarding their magnitudes.


II.4 Data
        Our dataset, primarily drawn from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators,
comprises annual data over the period 1960–2005 for 106 countries. Real GDP, real private
consumption, and real fixed asset investment constitute the measures of national output,
consumption, and investment, respectively. All variables are measured at constant national
prices. We compute the growth rates and remove the mean from each series.
        We divide the countries into three groups: industrial countries (23 INCs), emerging
market economies (24 EMEs), and other developing countries (59 ODCs). Appendix C shows
the distribution of countries among the three groups. For our purposes, the key distinction among
the EMEs and ODCs is that the former group has attained a much higher level of integration into
global trade and finance.7 For instance, the average growth rate of total trade (exports plus
imports) has been more than twice the growth rate of GDP in the former group since the mid-
1980s, while the corresponding figure for the ODCs is much lower. EMEs have also received the
bulk of private capital inflows going from industrial to non-industrial countries. Over the last two
decades, the total gross stocks of foreign assets and liabilities of all EMEs have risen more than
five-fold and are now an order of magnitude larger than those of all ODCs. 8
        To study how business cycles have evolved over time in response to trade and financial
integration, we divide our sample into two distinct periods—the pre-globalization period (1960-
1984) and the globalization period (1985-2005). There are three reasons for this demarcation.
First, global trade and financial flows have increased markedly since the mid-1980s. Countries
have intensified their efforts to liberalize external trade and financial account regimes and the

7
  On average, EMEs also had higher per capita incomes and experienced higher growth rates than ODCs
over the last two decades. Over the period 1960-1984, industrial countries on average accounted for more
than 70 percent of world GDP (in PPP terms) while the aggregate share of the EMEs was roughly 25
percent. During the globalization period, the share of EMEs in world GDP has increased to 34 percent
while that of industrial economies has fallen to 62 percent. The share of ODCs has registered a slight
decline over time.
8
  The trade openness ratio for EMEs has risen from 28 percent to 78 percent over the last two decades.
Similarly, for INCs, the openness measure has increased from 26 percent to 46 percent during the period
of globalization. In contrast, the openness ratio for ODCs has been rather stable around 65 percent. For a
detailed account of changes in trade and financial linkages, see Akin and Kose (2008).
                                                   11

fraction of countries with a fully liberalized trade (financial) account in our sample has increased
from 20 (30) percent to close to 70 (80) percent over the past two decades.9 These factors have
led to a dramatic increase in global trade flows, both in absolute terms and relative to world
income, during the globalization period. For example, the ratio of world trade to world GDP has
surged from less than 30 percent in 1984 to more than 50 percent now. The increase in financial
flows has also been remarkable as the volume of global assets and liabilities has risen more than
ten-fold during the same period (see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2006). In other words, global
economic linkages clearly became much stronger during the second period.
        Second, after a period of stable growth during the 1960s, the first period witnessed a set
of common shocks associated with sharp fluctuations in the price of oil in the 1970s and a set of
synchronized contractionary monetary policies in the major industrial economies in the early
1980s. This demarcation is essential for differentiating the impact of these common shocks from
that of globalization on the degree of business cycle comovement. Third, the beginning of the
globalization period coincides with a structural decline in the volatility of business cycles in both
industrial and non-industrial countries.10


                     III. Dynamic Factors and Episodes of Business Cycles
        In this section, we examine the evolution of different factors and analyze their ability to
track important business cycle episodes since 1960. Since conventional measures of business
cycles have tended to focus on fluctuations in output, we restrict our analysis in this section to
the decomposition of output growth fluctuations into different factors.


III.1. Evolution of the Global and Group-Specific Factors
        Figure 1 (top panel) displays the posterior mean of the global factor, along with the 5 and
95 percent posterior quantile bands for the estimated factors. These bands form a 90 percent
probability coverage interval for the factor—that is, the probability that the factor lies in this
interval is 0.9. The tightness of this interval suggests that the global factor is estimated fairly

9
  Moreover, the beginning of the globalization period marks the start of the Uruguay Round negotiations
which speeded up the process of unilateral trade liberalizations in many developing countries.
10
   See Blanchard and Simon (2001), McConnell and Perez-Quiros (2000) and Stock and Watson (2005).
Explanations for this decline in volatility are many, ranging from “the new economy” driven changes to
the more effective use of monetary policy.
                                                      12

precisely. The fluctuations in this factor reflect the major economic events of the past four
decades: the steady expansionary period of the 1960s; the boom of the early 1970s; the deep
recession of the mid-1970s associated with the first oil price shock; the recession of the early
1980s stemming from a variety of forces including the debt crisis and the tight monetary policies
of major industrialized nations; the mild recession of the early 1990s; the 2001 recession and the
subsequent recovery.
        The behavior of the global factor is also consistent with several interesting stylized facts
pertaining to the amplitude and sources of global business cycles. First, the global factor has
become less volatile after the mid-1980s. In particular, our estimations suggest that the standard
deviation of the global factor decreased from 1.4 percent in the 1960-1984 period to 0.5 percent
during 1985-2005. This is consistent with the structural decline in the volatility of business
cycles in a number of countries we discussed earlier.
        Second, consistent with other studies, fluctuations in the price of oil appear to be related
to the turning points of global business cycles (see Backus and Crucini, 2000). For example, the
largest troughs in the global factor closely coincide with the sharp increases in the price of oil, as
the major oil price increases of 1974 and 1980-81 were associated with global recessions.
However, the contemporaneous correlation between the global factor and the growth rate of the
oil price is rather small, suggesting that there are other important factors besides oil prices that
matter for global business cycles.11 Third, the worldwide recession in the early 1980s was deeper
than the one in the mid-1970s.
        The group-specific factors are orthogonal to the global factor by construction and, as we
discussed earlier, any common shocks affecting all countries will be picked up by the global
factor.12 The group-specific factors capture any remaining comovement among countries within
each group (Figure 1, lower panels).13 While the maintained assumption of the model is that the

11
   The correlation between the global factor and the world price of oil, measured by the index of average
spot prices (from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics), is -0.04.
12
   In small samples, it is possible that the global and group-specific factors will be correlated due to a
spurious correlation associated with the short sample. That is, two independent but serially correlated
processes will often have a non-zero measured cross-correlation in small samples. In our estimates, the
average correlation between the global factor and group-specific factors is less than 0.1. In all the results
reported here, we impose orthogonality by regressing the group-specific factors on the global factor and
retaining the residual.
13
   We calculated 5 percent and 95 percent quantile bands for all of the estimated factors, but leave them
out of the plots to reduce clutter. Plots showing the quantile bands are available from the authors.
                                                  13

innovations to the group-specific factors are orthogonal to each other, this assumption is neither
necessary nor imposed. In practice, we do find a moderate amount of correlation between the
group-specific factors, with the cross correlations amounting to about 0.56. One possibility is
that there is a second global factor that we have not accounted for. We checked whether this is
the case by conducting additional simulations allowing for a second world factor, but the results
suggest this factor is not quantitatively important and does not explain the comovement between
the group-specific factors. A close visual inspection of the group-specific factors shows that they
do at times move in the same direction, but the factors remain distinct. For example, in the 1991-
1993 recession period, both the INC and EME factors decline, giving rise to a positive
correlation. However, the timing, depth and breadth of the recession differ across these factors,
so they remain separate and distinct from each other despite their apparently high correlation.
The fluctuations in the group-specific factors also reflect some important cyclical episodes
specific to each group. For example, the INC factor captures the 2001 recession and subsequent
recovery while the factors for the EMEs and ODCs pick up the Asian crisis in 1997.


III.2. Country Factors and Domestic Economic Activity
       We now examine the evolutions of the global, group-specific, and country factors for a
few selected countries and see how those factors match up with actual output growth in those
countries. To make the scales of the factors and output growth comparable for each country, the
factors are multiplied by their respective factor loadings. This implies that the sum of the three
scaled factors and the idiosyncratic component is equal to the growth rate of output of each
country. The results are presented in Figure 2.
       The top left panel shows the median of the estimated U.S. country-specific factor along
with the global factor, the industrial country group-specific factor, and the growth rate of U.S.
output. The U.S. country factor captures most of the peaks and troughs of the NBER reference
dates for U.S. business cycles.14 While the U.S. country factor and the global factor exhibit some
common movements, there are some notable differences between the two factors in almost every


14
  The NBER reference business cycle dates for the U.S. are as follows: Troughs: Feb. 1961, November
1970, March 1975, July 1980, November 1982, March 1991, and November 2001. Peaks: April 1960,
December 1969, November 1973, January 1980, July 1981, July 1990, and March 2001. All other
reference business cycle dates are taken from IMF (2002).
                                                    14

decade. Despite these differences, the contemporaneous correlation between the fluctuations in
the U.S. output and the global factor is strongly positive (0.44).
        The top right panel of Figure 2 displays the global factor, the industrial country group-
specific factor, the country-specific factor and the actual output growth rate for Japan. The rapid
growth rate of the Japanese economy during the 1960s was captured by the country factor while
the impact of the global factor during this period was rather minor. Nevertheless, there is a
relatively high correlation between the global factor and the Japanese country factor (0.53) from
1960 to 1992. Since the early 1990s, however, this link appears to have disappeared as the
country-specific factor plays a more significant role in driving business cycles in Japan and the
correlation drops to -0.23 during the period 1993-2005.
        The lower panels of Figure 2, which plot the estimated factors for Mexico and Singapore,
illustrate that the country-specific factors play a relatively more important role in explaining
business cycles in the EMEs. These factors also exhibit some important historical business cycle
episodes. For instance, the Mexican country factor captures the Tequila crisis of the 1994-95.


                      IV. Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations: 1960-2005
        We now examine the sources of business cycle fluctuations with the help of variance
decompositions over the full sample period. As a summary measure of the importance of the
factors, we present the average variance shares (within the relevant groups of countries)
attributable to each factor for the world and the three groups of countries defined earlier. We do
not report standard errors for these cross-country averages but will do so when we look at
individual country results. Although most of the literature on international business cycle
transmission has tended to focus on output as the key indicator of domestic cycles, we discuss
the sources of fluctuations in consumption and investment as well. 15


IV.1 Common Cycles: Global and Country-Specific Factors
        Table 1 shows that the global factor accounts for a significant fraction of business cycle
fluctuations in all three macroeconomic variables over the period 1960-2005, implying that there

15
  We also calculated the median (rather than mean) variance shares attributable to each factor for the full
sample and each group of countries. These were generally close to the average shares reported in Tables
1-6, indicating that there are no obvious outlier countries driving our results. Hence, we only report
results using means. The results using medians are available from the authors.
                                                      15

is a “world business cycle.” The global factor on average explains 11 percent of output growth
variation among all countries in the sample. It also accounts for 9 percent and 6 percent of the
volatility of growth rates of consumption and investment, respectively. While these numbers may
seem small at first glance, note that the common factor across the three macroeconomic
aggregates is for a very large and diverse set of countries.
          The factor loadings associated with output and consumption growth on the global factor
are positive for most countries (i.e., the posterior distributions of the factor loadings have very
little mass in symmetric intervals about zero).16 Since the global factor is identified by a positive
factor loading for U.S. output growth, these findings also imply that positive developments in the
U.S. economy are generally associated with positive developments in the rest of the world.
          While the global factor is important in each group of countries, on average it plays a
more dominant role in explaining business cycles in industrial countries. The average variance
share of output growth attributable to the global factor in industrial countries is 27 percent, about
three to four times as much as in the two groups of nonindustrial countries. The global factor is
also associated with a substantial share of the variance in consumption and investment growth
among industrial countries, accounting on average for 24 percent and 12 percent of the total
variance of these variables, respectively. These shares are also much larger than the
corresponding shares for EMEs or ODCs.
          Once we account for the world business cycle, are there common cycles across any of the
remaining groups of countries? Table 1 shows that the group-specific factor accounts for about 5
percent of output growth fluctuations in the full sample. This factor, like the global factor, is also
more important for industrial countries than for EMEs or ODCs. On average, it accounts for 13
percent of output growth fluctuations in industrial countries, compared to 6 percent and 2
percent, respectively, for EMEs and ODCs.
          A more comprehensive measure of how much a country’s cyclical fluctuations are tied in
to those of other countries is to look at the sum of the variance contributions of the global and
group-specific factors. The rankings of the different groups remain much the same, although the
magnitudes are of course larger. Among industrial countries, the total contribution of these two
factors averages 41 percent for output and nearly 30 percent for consumption and investment.
For EMEs, the corresponding averages are 14 percent and 9 percent, respectively. The histogram
16
     We do not report the factor loadings; they are available from us upon request.
                                                   16

in Figure 3 shows the cross-country distribution of the variance contributions of the common
factors. It confirms that a significant fraction of output variation is indeed attributable to the
common factors. In half of the countries in our sample, the common factors together account for
more than 10 percent of the variation in output growth.


IV.2 National Cycles: Country and Idiosyncratic Factors
        The country and idiosyncratic factors play important roles in driving business cycles
around the world (Table 1). The country factor is on average more important in explaining output
variation than is the idiosyncratic factor (47 percent versus 35 percent), but the reverse is true for
fluctuations in consumption and investment. Looking across the three groups of countries, it is
evident that as countries become more developed (and, as an empirical corollary to development,
also become more exposed to global trade and financial flows), the global and group-specific
factors appear to become more relevant in explaining national business cycles at the expense of
the country and idiosyncratic factors.
        A striking result is that, among EMEs, country-specific factors account for 60 percent of
the variation in output, much higher than in industrial countries (39 percent) or ODCs (44
percent). This means that the degree of comovement across the three main macroeconomic
aggregates is much greater within countries in this group, once we’ve stripped out the part of the
comovement attributable to factors that are common across all countries in the sample or across
all EMEs. Interestingly, the pattern is reversed for consumption fluctuations in EMEs. Among
these countries, the contribution of the idiosyncratic factor is highest (51 percent) and the
combined share of the global and group-specific factors in explaining consumption fluctuations
is only 8 percent. This pattern holds for ODCs as well, with the total contribution of common
factors to consumption fluctuations amounting to only 5 percent. Taken together, these results tie
in well with a recent literature showing that developing countries have not been able to achieve
much international risk sharing, as measured by correlations of domestic consumption with
world consumption (or income). Their consumption fluctuations are closely correlated with their
own output fluctuations and, in addition, their consumption fluctuations are not correlated with
those of other countries. We will discuss this result in greater detail in later sections when we
explore the evolution of global business cycles.
                                                   17

        We also note that, for the sample as a whole and also for each group of countries, the
total contribution of the global and group-specific factors is greater for output than for
consumption. Indeed, Figure 4 shows that this is true even when we look at the global and group-
specific factors by themselves. This implies that, on average, country-specific and idiosyncratic
factors play a more important role in explaining consumption fluctuations than is the case for
output fluctuations. This result echoes a well-known stylized fact in the literature that, contrary
to the predictions of conventional theoretical models of international business cycles, output is
more highly correlated across countries than consumption (Backus et al., 1995, refer to this as
the “quantity anomaly”).
        Another notable result from Table 1 is that, among ODCs, the contribution of the
idiosyncratic factor is greater than that of any other factor. This is true for all variables, but
especially so for investment, where on average the idiosyncratic factor accounts for 73 percent of
fluctuations. This finding suggests that investment fluctuations in these countries do not seem to
be closely tied to either domestic or world business cycles.
        Although the results in Table 1 reveal interesting contrasts across different groups of
countries, they also mask large differences in the relative importance of different factors among
individual countries. This becomes evident even when we use a finer breakdown of the three
coarse country groups. Table 2 is a counterpart of Table 1 but shows the results for smaller
groups of industrial countries. These results are based on the estimation of the full model and the
group-specific factor here refers to that for all industrial countries. On average, the global factor
is more important for the G-7 and EU-12 countries than for other groups. The U.S. and Canada,
in particular, seem to march to their own beat compared to other groups of industrial countries.
The differences are even more stark when we look at the results for individual countries.17


IV.3. Summary
        To summarize, there are three major results from our analysis of variance decompositions
for the period 1960-2005. First, there exists a global business cycle. The global factor accounts
for a modest but significant share of macroeconomic fluctuations across all country groups,
although it is more important for explaining business cycles in industrial countries than in EMEs

17
  Detailed variance decompositions for each country in our sample are available from the authors upon
request.
                                                    18

or ODCs. Second, there appear to be cycles specific to each group of countries, but even the
group-specific factor plays a significantly more important role among industrial countries than
among the other two groups. This is consistent with other evidence that industrial country
business cycles are more closely aligned with each other and with the global business cycle. As
noted earlier, we do not weight countries by their GDP weights, so this is not a mechanical
result. Third, the contributions of global and group-specific factors together to the variance of
output growth are much higher—across country groups, time periods etc.—than their
contributions to the variance of consumption growth, suggesting that there are still unexploited
opportunities for international risk sharing. This differential is greater for EMEs and ODCs than
for industrial countries, implying that the potential benefits of efficient international risk sharing
could be even greater for these two groups (see Prasad et. al, 2003).


              V. Globalization and the Evolution of International Business Cycles
        In light of our earlier discussion of the effects of global trade and financial integration, a
logical (and intrinsically interesting) question is whether—and, if so, how—the patterns of
international business cycle synchronicity have changed over time in response to the forces of
globalization. In this section, we first provide an analysis of this question. Next, we consider the
evolution of the extent of risk sharing around the world based on cross-country comovement of
consumption. We then briefly analyze how the contributions of different factors to investment
fluctuations have evolved over time.


V.1 Convergence or Decoupling?
        The convergence hypothesis suggests that, with closer economic integration, business
cycles should become more synchronized across countries over time. Table 3 shows the variance
decompositions in a manner analogous to Table 1 but based on models estimated separately for
the pre-globalization (1960-84) and globalization (1985-2005) periods.18 Contrary to the



18
   By estimating the model over two sub-samples we are allowing the model parameters, such as the
factor loadings and those that determine the structure of propagation of shocks, to vary across sub-
samples. This will yield a different variance decomposition. However, the estimate of the factor itself is
very similar whether estimated over the full sample or over subsamples. This result is not very surprising
as the index of common activity in a period should not be affected by data many periods away. It is also
                                                                                              (continued)
                                                  19

convergence hypothesis, the average contribution of the global factor to output fluctuations falls
in half, from 15 percent to 7 percent for the full sample. The same pattern holds for consumption
fluctuations and, to a much lesser degree, for fluctuations in investment (see Figure 5). These
patterns also hold up for each of the country groups. In fact, they are much stronger when we
look at output fluctuations by country group. For industrial countries, the average contribution of
the global factor falls dramatically, from 28 percent to 9 percent. The decline is also large for
EMEs—from 13 percent to 4 percent—while it is somewhat smaller for ODCs—from 10 percent
to 7 percent.
        In contrast to the declining importance of the global factor, the group-specific factor has
on average played an increasingly more dominant role in explaining business cycles over time
(Figure 6). For example, the average share of the variance of output and consumption attributed
to the group-specific factor has nearly doubled during the globalization period. These patterns
are particularly strong, for all three macro aggregates, among the industrial countries and EMEs.
In contrast, the group-specific factor for ODCs has played only a minor role in either period. Our
long sample, which covers a substantial period of the recent era of globalization, and our
demarcation of the pre-globalization and globalization periods are essential in enabling us to
identify the emergence of group-specific cycles in the industrial countries and EMEs during the
period of globalization. In the next section, we also study the significance of the temporal
changes in the importance of global and group-specific factors at the country level and show that
these changes are indeed statistically significant.
        As we discussed earlier in the paper, a useful metric to measure the extent of business
cycle synchronization around the world is the sum of the variance shares of the global and group-
specific factors. Interestingly, when we look at the total contributions of these two common
factors, there is much greater stability in their contributions to fluctuations in each of the macro
aggregates and for each of the country groups (Table 3 and Figure 7). This is of course the
consequence of a substantial increase in the relative importance of the group-specific factor. For
instance, looking at the variance decompositions for output fluctuations, the relative
contributions of the group-specific factor rise from 17 percent to 31 percent for industrial


consistent with the recent work of Stock and Watson (2007) who show that latent factors can be estimated
consistently despite parametric instability.
                                                  20

countries and from 3 percent to 9 percent for EMEs. This largely offsets the decline in the
variance contributions of the global factor, implying that the sum of the contributions of the two
factors is only slightly smaller in the globalization period relative to the pre-globalization period.
These results also show that, contrary to the convergence hypothesis, national business cycles
have not in general become more synchronized at the global level.
       Our findings suggest the need for a nuanced approach to the hypotheses of convergence
and decoupling. While there appears to be no support for the hypothesis of global convergence of
business cycles, there is a higher degree of synchronization in business cycles within the groups
of industrial countries and EMEs during the globalization period, implying that the convergence
hypothesis is valid at least for these groups of countries. At the same time, the emergence of
group-specific cycles provides partial support for the decoupling hypothesis as it suggests that
business cycles in EMEs are now influenced more by their own group-specific dynamics than
they were in the pre-globalization period.
       How can we explain these results? As noted earlier, there were large common
disturbances during the pre-globalization period—the two oil prices shocks—and some
correlated shocks in the major industrial countries, notably the disinflationary monetary policy
stance in the early 1980s and the associated increase in real interest rates in the group of
industrial countries.19 From the mid-1980s onward (globalization period), however, common
global disturbances have become less important in explaining international business cycle
fluctuations. These developments have led to a decline in the importance of global factor in
explaining business cycles.
       At the same time, intra-group trade and financial linkages among industrial countries and
EMEs have risen rapidly, especially after the mid-1980s. While there has been a sharp increase
in intra-group financial linkages among industrial countries, intra-group trade linkages have
become particularly strong among EMEs during this period. For example, the share of intra-
group trade in the total international trade of EMEs doubled from less than 18 percent in 1984 to
36 percent in 2005. During this period, EMEs’ trade with the group of industrial countries as a
share of the EMEs’ total trade has declined from 70 percent to 50 percent. Moreover, during the
period of globalization, the countries in these two groups have increased the pace of

19
  Recent research shows that the implementation of similar macroeconomic policies can lead to a higher
degree of business cycle synchronization (see Darvas, Rose, and Szapáry, 2005).
                                                   21

diversification of their industrial (and trade) bases. This has been accompanied by a greater
degree of sectoral similarity across countries within each group (see Akin and Kose, 2008). With
these changes, intra-group spillovers have begun to contribute more to concurrent cyclical
fluctuations than common disturbances. These changes have been associated with a notable
increase in the roles played by group-specific factors for the groups where such intra-group
linkages have become much stronger. Not surprisingly, the importance of the global and group-
specific factors in explaining business cycles in ODCs, the group least exposed to the forces of
globalization, has barely changed between the two periods.
        How do our findings compare with the results in the earlier literature? Earlier studies
have typically focused on just output fluctuations and limited their analysis to groupings of
countries within the same geographic region. However, these studies often report conflicting
results. For example, some recent papers document that there is a distinct European business
cycle while others argue the opposite.20 Other authors find regional cycles specific to East Asia
and North America (see Helbling et. al, 2007). Kose, Otrok, and Whiteman (2008) find that a
common G-7 factor, on average, explains a larger share of business cycle variation in the G-7
countries since the mid-1980s compared with 1960–72. 21 This finding is consistent with our
results since we also report that the group-specific factor has become more important in
accounting for business cycles in industrial countries since the mid-1980s. As we discuss in the
next section, the increase in the share of variance due to the group-specific factor is quite large
for the G-7 countries.
        Rather than focusing on specific regions or groups of countries, our analysis provides a
global perspective about the evolution of business cycles. First, the statistical model we employ
simultaneously estimates a global factor and factors specific to particular groups of countries.
This avoids the problem that, while countries in groups (regional or otherwise) could display

20
   For evidence of a European business cycle, see Artis, Krolzig, and Toro (2004) and references therein.
But Canova, Ciccarelli, and Ortega (2007) argue that, since the 1990s, the empirical evidence does not
reveal a specific European cycle. Bordo and Helbling (2004) find a trend toward increased
synchronization among industrial countries, while Monfort et. al (2003) conclude that the degree of
comovement among G-7 economies has been declining. Changes in bilateral output correlations often are
not significant, a point emphasized by Doyle and Faust (2005).
21
   They document that business cycle synchronization among the G-7 countries increased during the
1970s and early to mid-1980s. The subsequent decline reflects decreased synchronization with Japan and,
to a lesser extent, Germany. Stock and Watson (2005) report that the share of output fluctuations in the
other five G-7 countries that can be attributed to common factors increased from 1960-83 to 1984-2002.
                                                  22

comovement, the source of this comovement may not be distinctly group-specific, but rather,
worldwide. Our analysis also shows that the relevant grouping for detecting common cycles is
based not necessarily on geographic proximity but on levels of economic development and
integration into global trade and financial markets. Moreover, our sample is much more
comprehensive than those used in earlier studies.22
       Do stronger global linkages result in an increase in the degree of international business
cycle comovement as suggested by our findings? A number of studies report that cross-sectional
differences in bilateral output correlations are systematically related to differences in the strength
of bilateral trade and financial linkages. In addition, financial linkages are an important factor in
explaining higher degrees of synchronization of both output and consumption fluctuations.23
While the latter is to be expected, as financial integration should reduce country-specific income
risk through asset diversification, the former is less obvious since increases in financial
integration between two countries could, in principle, reduce the correlation between their
outputs because of increased specialization (see, for instance, Kalemli-Ozcan, Sorensen, and
Yosha, 2003).


V.2 Consumption Comovement
       We turn next to look at the evolution of variance shares in explaining consumption
fluctuations. For industrial countries, the increase in the variance contribution of group-specific
factors to consumption fluctuations is particularly large—from 9 percent to 24 percent (Table
3)—but the joint share of the global and group-specific factors is unchanged. For EMEs and
ODCs, the two common factors jointly account for a slightly lower share of consumption
fluctuations in the globalization period. One interpretation of these results is that industrial
countries have been able to use financial globalization to effectively share risk amongst
themselves, a result found by various other authors as well (Sorensen et al., 2007). On the other
hand, EMEs and ODCs are yet to attain this benefit of globalization as their consumption

22
   For instance, Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003) use data from 60 countries, but their sample period is
limited to1960-1990. The use of recent data is important since globalization really picked up steam only
in the mid-1980s. Moreover, our use of a larger sample (and larger sub-samples within each group) allows
us to draw a sharper contrast across country groups in terms of their exposure to the global economy.
23
   For the impact of trade linkages, see Baxter and Kouparitsas (2005) and the references therein. For
financial linkages, see Imbs (2006) and Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2003).
                                                   23

fluctuations are still closely tied to domestic cycles (see Kose, Prasad and Terrones, 2007).
Consumption comovement measured in this manner is of course not a decisive test of risk
sharing, although a broad class of open economy models does yield this interpretation.


V.3. Dynamics of Investment
        For industrial countries and EMEs, the share of investment variance attributable to the
global and group-specific factors goes up in the globalization period. This is a curious result for
which conventional theoretical models do not yield a convincing explanation. While one can
easily rationalize the increase in the importance of the global and group-specific factors in
explaining output and consumption variation over time, it is not clear what drives the increase in
the investment variance explained by these common factors. In standard stochastic dynamic
business cycle models, stronger trade and financial linkages generally lead to lower investment
correlations across countries. Reduced restrictions on capital and current account transactions
should induce more “resource shifting”, through which capital and other resources rapidly move
to countries with more favorable technology shocks (see Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland, 1995; and
Heathcote and Perri, 2002).24


V.4. Summary
        We now summarize our key results from this section. The global factor has become less
important for macroeconomic fluctuations in industrial economies and EMEs during the period
of globalization. In addition, there has been a slight decrease in the degree of international
synchronization of business cycles as measured by the joint contribution of the global and group-
specific factors to explaining business cycles in the globalization period. By contrast, for both
industrial countries and EMEs, the importance of group-specific factors has increased markedly.
This result runs contrary to the notion that globalization induces greater business cycle
synchronicity across all countries, rather than just groups of countries at comparable stages of
economic development. These patterns hold up not just for output, but also for consumption and
investment fluctuations. In short, there has been a substantial convergence of business cycles

24
   Some recent theoretical papers produce results consistent with the dynamics of investment we report
here In Head’s (2002) model, cross-country correlations of investment are positive because of increasing
returns to the worldwide variety of intermediate goods. Also see Heathcote and Perri (2004).
                                                 24

among industrial economies and among EMEs, but there has also been a concomitant divergence
or decoupling of business cycles between these two groups of countries.
        Our results point to two dimensions in which the data do not support the predictions of
conventional theoretical models. Globalization has not yet been associated with an increase in
the degree of risk sharing achieved by EMEs and ODCs as would be expected on the basis of
standard international business cycle models. Moreover, contrary to the predictions of such
models, the importance of global and group-specific factors for investment fluctuations has risen
during the period of globalization, implying a higher degree of cross-country comovement of
fluctuations in this variable.


                                    VI. Sensitivity Experiments
        We now examine our key results through different lenses in order to verify their
robustness and understand their implications.


VI.1. Results for Sub-groups of Countries
        First, we look at smaller groups of countries to check if a particular set of them may be
driving the results. For instance, there has been a sharp increase in trade and financial flows
amongst EU countries, especially since the time when the EMU started looking like a reality.
Among the EMEs, the level of trade and financial integration among Asian economies has
increased quite sharply over the last decade. Perhaps the result we have uncovered is specific to
such smaller groups of countries.
        Table 4 shows cross-country means from the decompositions for selected sub-groups
within the larger group of industrial countries. As before, the decompositions are based on
estimates of the full model and the group-specific factor refers to the factor common across all
industrial countries. The top panel replicates the relevant panel from Table 3 as a benchmark.
The key patterns we identified for industrial countries—in particular, an increase in the
contribution of the group-specific factor, a decline in the contribution of the global factor, and a
small decline in the sum of the two--come through very strongly for the G-7 and the EU-12. The
patterns are similar, although less strong, when we consider just the U.S. and Canada by
themselves.
                                                 25

       Table 5 shows the results of a similar exercise for EMEs, using regional groupings of
countries. Our main result comes through very strongly for emerging markets in both Asia and
Latin America, indicating that our key result is not an Asia-centric phenomenon. For instance,
among the emerging markets in Latin America, the contribution of the global factor to the
variance in output growth fluctuations falls from 23 percent in the pre-globalization period to 5
percent in the globalization period. The contribution of the group-specific factor, by contrast,
goes from 1 percent to 10 percent. The results for Africa are mixed and do not show any clear
patterns.
       Table 6 has results for regional groupings among the ODCs. One interesting pattern is
that the total contribution of the world and group-specific factors is on average much smaller for
Asian and African ODCs than it is for Latin American ones during the pre-globalization period.
For the Latin American countries, the contribution of the global factor declines in the
globalization period but the contribution of the group-specific factor is small in both periods,
implying that common factors have a far less important role in macro fluctuations in these
countries during the globalization period.


VI.2. Changes in the Importance of Global and Group Factors: Country-Specific Results
       The next question is whether the averages that we have presented in the tables so far are
representative of what is going on at the country level. To address this issue, for each country we
now break down the relative contributions of the different factors to each of the variables.
Figures 8-9 show the relative contributions of the global and group-specific factors to output
fluctuations in individual industrial countries and emerging markets, with the contributions
shown separately for the pre-globalization and globalization periods. We also show the posterior
coverage intervals (of length two standard deviations) around the posterior means of the
estimated variance contributions. Non-overlapping posterior coverage intervals indicate
statistically significant changes between the two periods.
       Among industrial countries, the variance contribution of the global factor drops from the
first period to the second for 16 countries, remains unchanged for 6 others, and increases for only
one country. The picture is reversed for the relative importance of the group-specific factor,
which goes up for 13 countries and declines for 2. These patterns are quite similar when we look
at emerging markets as well, with the relative importance of the global factor going up for only 2
                                                  26

countries but declining for 12. The relative importance of the group-specific factor, by contrast,
rises for 14 emerging markets and declines for none of them.
       Thus, the individual country results confirm that the relative contribution of the global
factor to industrial country and emerging market business cycles has fallen significantly in the
globalization period, while the contribution of the respective group-specific factors has risen.


VI.3. Implications of Crises
       Another important question is whether our results are driven entirely by crises. This is a
concern mainly for emerging markets, some of which experienced simultaneous crises. During
the globalization period, the most prominent widespread crisis has of course been the Asian
financial crisis of 1997-98, which directly affected a handful of countries in our sample. We
cannot just exclude the crisis years since they are an integral part of the analysis of fluctuations;
from a more mechanical perspective, that would also distort the lag-lead patterns in the data.
Nevertheless, to account for this episode, we first re-estimated the models including dummies for
the crisis years (the models already include country fixed effects) and interactions of those
dummies with the countries that were hardest hit by the Asian crisis (Korea, Malaysia,
Philippines, Thailand). Second, we used the original model estimates and then calculated the
mean pre-globalization and post-globalization contributions of different factors for the emerging
markets group excluding the crisis countries. Neither of these experiments yielded results very
different from the ones that we have reported so far (results are available from the authors).


VI.4. Alternative Breakpoints
       Another issue relates to the choice of breakpoint. In Section II, we have already discussed
a variety of reasons why 1985 is a logical cutoff point for identifying the beginning of the
globalization period. We also ran some formal tests to examine whether there exists a structural
break in the sample. In particular, we perform some univariate break tests for a variance break
following Stock and Watson (2005). We use the Andrews (1993) test for a break in either the
unconditional variance or the persistence of each time series at an unknown date (see Appendix
C for details). Searching over the middle 2/3 of the full time span of the sample, we find that 80
percent of those time series that have a break in their unconditional variance experience that
break in or before 1984. A similar test for a break in the autoregressive parameter of a univariate
                                                  27

AR(1) model also indicates that roughly 80 percent of the series that have a break have it by
1984. By choosing the 80 percent threshold, we are attempting to get as “clean” a look at the
globalization period as possible. A break test on the entire multivariate factor model would be
difficult to apply and beyond the scope of this paper. However, these simple univariate tests
indicate that our break date of 1984 is reasonable. As a further robustness test, we estimated the
full factor model based on break dates ranging from 1983 to 1987 and found nearly identical
results, confirming that our results are not crucially dependent on the exact break date.


                                          VII. Conclusion
       In this paper, we have provided a comprehensive examination of the evolution of global
business cycle linkages. We find that the global factor has become less important for
macroeconomic fluctuations in both industrial economies and EMEs during the globalization
period (1985-2005) relative to the pre-globalization period (1960-1984). By contrast, for both
industrial countries and EMEs, the importance of group-specific factors has increased markedly.
There has been little change in the degree of international synchronization of business cycles as
measured by the joint contribution of the global and group-specific factors to explaining business
cycles in the globalization period.
       What are the implications of these results for the recent debate about whether there has
been a global convergence or decoupling of national business cycles? Our findings suggest the
need for a nuanced approach to this debate. Contrary to the convergence hypothesis, rising trade
and financial integration are not associated with global convergence of business cycles, as
evidenced by the decline in the importance of the global factor. But there is indeed some
evidence of convergence at a different level. The increase in trade and financial linkages among
industrial countries and among EMEs has been associated with the emergence of group-specific
cycles. In other words, there has been a substantial convergence of business cycles among
industrial economies and among EMEs, but there has also been a concomitant divergence or
decoupling of business cycles between these two groups of countries.
       Our findings should not be interpreted as a blanket endorsement of the decoupling
hypothesis in the context of recent discussions about the possible spillover effects of a U.S.
recession. Our results apply to a large set of industrial countries, not just the United States.
Moreover, our study focuses on macroeconomic variables representing the real side of the
                                                   28

economy, but leaves out financial ones.25 In other words, our findings do not speak to the
possibility of financial decoupling (or lack thereof). In any event, our results suggest that even
the existence of large spillover effects across financial markets need not necessarily imply real
spillovers of similar magnitude.
        Changes in the relative importance of global and group-specific factors in driving
national business cycles may be relevant for assessing the likely spillover effects of domestic
shocks and the design of stabilization policies to counter them. However, existing theories have
yet to provide clear guidance on these issues.26




25
   Helbling et. al (2007) report that U.S. recessions are more worrisome for the rest of the world than a
mid-cycle slowdown since U.S. import growth turns sharply negative during recessions, and cross-
country asset price correlations increase significantly during financial market downturns.
26
   While international policy coordination serves an important role in an integrated world economy in the
traditional models based on trade multiplier mechanisms, Obstfeld and Rogoff (2001) argue that increased
integration may in fact diminish the need for monetary policy coordination. See Canzoneri, Cumby, and
Diba (2005) for a survey.
                                              29


References
Akin, Cigdem and M. Ayhan Kose, 2008, “Changing Nature of North-South Linkages: Stylized
        Facts and Explanations,” Journal of Asian Economics, Vol. 19, pp. 1-28..
Aizenman, Joshua, Brian Pinto, and Artur Radziwill, 2007, “Sources for Financing Domestic
        Capital—Is Foreign Saving a Viable Option for Developing Countries?” NBER Working
        Paper No. 10624, forthcoming, Journal of International Money and Finance.
Altug, Sumru, 1989, “Time-to-Build and Aggregate Fluctuations: Some New Evidence,”
        International Economic Review, Vol. 30:4, pp. 889-920.
Andrews, Donald, 1993, “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with Unknown
        Change Point,” Econometrica, Voo. 61, pp. 821–856.
Artis, Michael J. Hans-Martin Krolzig, and Juan Toro, 2004, “The European Business Cycle,”
        Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 56:1, pp. 1–44.
Backus David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland, 1995, “International Business Cycles:
        Theory and Evidence,” in C. Plosser ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, Princeton
        University Press, pp. 331–357.
Backus, David K., and Mario J. Crucini, 2000, “Oil Prices and the Terms of Trade.” Journal of
        International Economics, Vol. 50:1, pp. 203-231.
Baxter, Marianne, and Michael Kouparitsas, 2005. “Determinants of Business Cycle
        Comovement: A Robust Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 52:1, pp. 113-
        57.
Bernanke Ben S., Jean Boivin, and Piotr Eliasz, 2005, “Measuring the Effects of Monetary
        Policy: A Factor-augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach”, Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 120, pp. 387-422.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Danny Quah, 1989, “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
        Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review, Vol. 79:4, pp. 655-73.
Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon, 2001, “The Long and Large Decline in U.S., Output
        Volatility,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 135–174.
Bordo, Michael D., and Thomas Helbling, 2004, “Have National Business Cycles Become More
        Synchronized?” in Macroeconomic Policies in the World Economy, ed. by H. Siebert
        (Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer Verlag).
Burns, Arthur F., and Wesley C. Mitchell, 1946, Measuring Business Cycles, National Bureau of
        Economic Research, New York
Canova, Fabio, Matteo Ciccarelli, and Eva Ortega, 2007, “Similarities and Convergence in G-7
        Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54, pp. 850–78.
Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad T. Diba, 2005, “The Need for
        International Policy Coordination: What's Old, What's New, What's Yet to Come?”
        Journal of International Economics, Vol. 66, pp. 363–84.
Darvas, Zsolt, Andrew K. Rose, and György Szapáry, 2005, “Fiscal Divergence and Business
        Cycle Synchronization: Irresponsibility Is Idiosyncratic,” NBER Working Paper No.
        11580.
Doyle, Brian, and Jon Faust, 2005, “Breaks in the Variability and Comovement of G-7 Economic
        Growth,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 87:4, pp. 721-40
                                              30

Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin, 2000, “The Generalized
       Dynamic-Factor Model: Identification and Estimation,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, Vol. 82, pp. 540–54.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne, 2007, “Capital Flows to Developing Countries:
       The Allocation Puzzle,” NBER Working Paper No. 13602.
Gregory, Allan W., Allen C. Head, and Jacques Raynauld, 1997, “Measuring World Business
       Cycles,” International Economic Review, Vol. 38, pp. 677–702.
Harding, Don, and Adrian Pagan, 2002, “Dissecting the Cycle: A Methodological Investigation,
       Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49:2, pp. 365–81.
Head, Allen, 2002, “Aggregate Fluctuations with National and International Returns to Scale,”
       International Economic Review, Vol. 43, pp. 1101-1125.
Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri, 2002, “Financial Autarky and International Business
      Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 49, pp. 601–28.
Heathcote, Jonathan, and Fabrizio Perri, 2004, “Financial Globalization and Real
      Regionalization,” Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 119:1, pp. 207-43
Helbling, Thomas, Peter Berezin, M. Ayhan Kose, Michael Kumhof, Doug Laxton, and Nikola
       Spatafora, 2007, “Decoupling the Train? Spillovers and Cycles in the Global Economy,”
       World Economic Outlook (April 2007), pp. 121–60.
Imbs, Jean, 2006, “The Real Effects of Financial Integration,” Journal of International
       Economics, Vol. 68:2, pp. 296–324.
Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Bent Sorensen, and Oved Yosha, 2003, “Risk Sharing and Industrial
       Specialization: Regional and International Evidence,” American Economic Review,
       Vol. 93, pp. 903–18.
King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock and Mark Watson, 1991, “Stochastic Trends and
       Economic Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, Vol. 81, pp. 819-840.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles Whiteman, 2003, “International Business
       Cycles: World, Region, and Country Specific Factors,” American Economic Review,
       Vol. 93, pp. 1216–39.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles Whiteman, 2008, “Understanding the
       Evolution of World Business Cycles,” forthcoming, Journal of International Economics.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco Terrones, 2003, “How Does Globalization Affect
       the Synchronization of Business Cycles?” American Economic Review-Papers and
       Proceedings, Vol. 93, pp. 57–62.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Marco Terrones, 2007, “How Does Financial
       Globalization Affect Risk Sharing? Patterns and Channels,” IMF Working Paper No.
       07/238.
Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 2006. “The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:
       Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities: 1970–2004,” IMF
       Working Paper 06/69.
McConnell, Margaret, and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2000, “Output Fluctuations in The United
       States: What Has Changed Since the Early 1980s?” American Economic Review, Vol. 90,
       pp. 1464–76.
                                              31

Monfort, Alain, Jean-Paul Renne, Rasmus Rüffer, and Guillermo Vitale, 2003, “Is Economic
       Activity in the G7 Synchronized? Common Shocks Versus Spillover Effects,” CEPR
       Discussion Paper No. 4119.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 2002. “Global Implications of Self-Oriented National
       Monetary Rules,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 177, pp. 503–35.
Otrok, Christopher and Charles Whiteman, 1998, “Bayesian Leading Indicators: Measuring and
       Predicting Economic Conditions in Iowa,” International Economic Review, Vol 39:4.
Prasad, Eswar, Raghuram Rajan and Arvind Subramanian, 2007, “Foreign Capital and Eonomic
       Growth,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1:2007, pp. 153-230.

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, 2003, Effects of Financial
        Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence, IMF Occasional
        Paper No. 220.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Christopher A. Sims, 1977, “Business Cycle Modeling Without
        Pretending to Have Too Much A Priori Economic Theory,” in Christopher A. Sims et al.,
        New Methods in Business Cycle Research, (Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of
        Minneapolis).
Sorensen, Bent E., Yi-Tsung Wu, and Yu Zhu , 2007, “Home Bias and International Risk
        Sharing: Twin Puzzles Separated at Birth,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
        Vol. 26:4, pp. 587-605.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson, 1989, “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading
        Economic Indicators,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, (Cambridge: The MIT
        Press, 1989), 351-394.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 2005, “Understanding Changes in International Business
        Cycles.” Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 3:5, pp. 968-1006
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson,, 2007, “Forecasting in Dynamic Factor Models Subject
        to Structural Instability.” Mimeo, Harvard and Princeton Universities.
Tanner, M., and W. H. Wong, 1987, “The Calculation of Posterior Distributions by Data
        Augmentation,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 82, pp. 84–88.
Zarnowitz, Victor, 1992, Business Cycles: Theory, History, Indicators, and Forecasting, NBER
        Studies in Business Cycles, Vol. 27 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
                                                      32


Appendix A. A Bayesian Approach to Estimating Dynamic Factor Models
        The estimation procedure we use for our dynamic factor model is a Bayesian approach that
exploits Gibbs sampling techniques. These techniques make it computationally feasible to draw from the
exact finite sample distribution of the parameters and factors of interest in our model. The approach that
we use builds upon the work of Otrok and Whiteman (1998) and does not rely on asymptotics in either
the cross-sectional or the time dimension but at the same time is feasible from a computational standpoint
for datasets where there are a large number of factors.
        Our estimation procedure is better suited to answering the questions addressed in this paper than
many of the alternatives. There are, of course, classical approaches to estimating dynamic factor models.
Gregory et. al. (1997) follow Quah and Sargent (1993) and use Kalman filtering and the EM algorithm to
estimate a dynamic factor model for the G-7 capturing the world as well as country specific cycles.
Unfortunately, for a dataset of the dimension we are interested in (106 countries, 318 variables, and 110
factors), this approach is computationally infeasible. For very large datasets, such as ours, the
approximate factor model approaches of Stock and Watson (1989) and Forni et. al. (1998) are quite
efficient at extracting factors. However, the approximate factor models cannot be applied to situations
where we wish to impose zero restrictions on some factor loadings to “identify” some factors as
belonging to a particular country or a set of zero restrictions to limit other factors to a particular economy
type. For example, we identify a country factor by having an unrestricted non-zero factor loading for all
variables in that country. The variables of all other countries are restricted to have a zero factor loading on
this country factor. The parametric approach we take can easily handle these restrictions.
        Since analytic forms for the joint posterior of the factors and parameters are unobtainable, we
employ numerical methods to simulate from the joint posterior distribution of the factors and parameters.
We use a “data augmentation” algorithm to generate draws from the joint posterior of interest (see Tanner
and Wong, 1987; Otrok and Whiteman, 1998). Data augmentation builds on the following key
observation: if the factors were observable, under a conjugate prior, the model (1)-(3) would be a simple
set of regressions with Gaussian autoregressive errors. Then, conditional on the regression parameters and
the data, one can determine the conditional distribution of the factors. It is straightforward to generate
random samples from this conditional distribution, and such samples can be employed as stand-ins for the
unobserved factors.
        To be more specific, the dynamic factor analysis model in equations (1)—(3) can be thought of as
consisting of a specification of a Gaussian probability density for the data {yt} conditional on a set of

parameters ϕ and a set of latent variables {ft}. Call this density function gy(Y|ϕ,F) where Y denotes the
IJT × 1 vector of data on the observables, and F denotes the M × 1 vector of dynamic factors. In addition,
there is a specification of a Gaussian probability density gf(F) for F itself. Given a prior distribution for
                                                      33


ϕ, π(ϕ), the joint posterior distribution for the parameters and the latent variables is given by the product

of the likelihood and prior, h(ϕ,F|Y) = gy(Y|ϕ,F)gf(F)π(ϕ). As is shown in Otrok and Whiteman (1998),

although the joint posterior h(ϕ,F|Y) is extremely cumbersome, under a conjugate prior for ϕ the two

conditional densities h(ϕ|F,Y) and h(F|ϕ,Y) are quite simple. Moreover, it is possible to use this fact and

Markov-Chain Monte Carlo methods (MCMC) to generate an artificial sample {ϕj,Fj} for j = 1,…,J as
follows:
1. Starting from a value F0 in the support of the posterior distribution for F, generate a random drawing

ϕ1 from the conditional density h(ϕ|F0,Y).

2. Now generate a random drawing F1 from the conditional density h(F|ϕ1,Y).

3. This process is repeated, generating at each step drawings ϕj ~ h(ϕ|Fj-1,Y) and Fj ~h(F|ϕj-1,Y).
Under regularity conditions satisfied here (see Tanner and Wong, 1987), the sample so produced is a

realization of a Markov chain whose invariant distribution is the joint posterior h(ϕ,F|Y). What makes

this process feasible is the simplicity of the two conditional distributions. For example, h(ϕ|F,Y) is easily
constructed from equation (1) when F is known. In particular, equation (1) is just a normal linear
regression model for yi given the factors (albeit a regression that has autocorrelated errors). Because the
prior for the intercept and factor loadings is Gaussian, the conditional posterior for the parameters (σi, ai

and the bi’s) is also Gaussian. The other conditional density, h(F|ϕ,Y) is a little more complicated
because it is the solution to a Gaussian signal extraction problem. Kalman filter techniques are commonly
used to solve such problems, but when the time series is short, as in this application, it is straightforward
to solve the problem directly. Solving the problem without using the Kalman filter is especially useful
when the number of factors is large, as in the problem we study. (With a large number of factors the state
equation in the Kalman filter can become computationally very burdensome.) Otrok and Whiteman
(1998) do this as follows: first, they write the joint density for the data and the dynamic factors given the
parameters as a product of I*J*M independent Gaussian densities (I*J of them are associated with the
observable time series, M with the dynamic factors). Second, from this joint distribution, simple normal
distribution theory is used to obtain the conditional distribution for any one of the factors given the rest
and the parameters. These normal distributions involve inverses of T × T covariance matrices that can be
handled using conventional procedures provided T is not large. In the model analyzed here, T = 40 is not
problematic.
                                                     34

        The prior on all the factor loading coefficients is N(0,10), which is quite diffuse. For the
                                                                         ⎡1 0 0 ⎤
parameters of autoregressive polynomials, the prior is N(0,Σ), where Σ= ⎢⎢0 .5 0 ⎥⎥ . Because the data are
                                                                         ⎢⎣0 0 .25⎥⎦

growth rates, this prior embodies the notion that growth is not serially correlated though the prior is loose
enough to allow for significant serial correlation; also, the probability that lags are zero grows with the
length of the lag.27 Experimentation with tighter and looser priors for both the factor loadings and the
autoregressive parameters did not produce qualitatively important changes in the results reported below.
The prior on the innovation variances in the observable equations is Inverted Gamma (6, 0.001), which is
also quite diffuse.
        Since we are not sampling from the posterior itself (the elements of the Markov chain are
converging to drawings from the posterior), it is important to monitor the convergence of the chain. We
do so in a number of ways. First, we restarted the chain from a number of different initial values, and the
procedure always converged to the same results. Second, we experimented with chains of different
lengths ranging from lengths of 2,500 to 10,000. The results remained unchanged. The results we report
are based on a chain of length 5,000.




27
 Otrok and Whiteman (1998) discuss the procedure for ensuring stationarity of the lag polynomial. The
method involves drawing from a truncated Normal distribution in the Metropolis-Hastings step.
                                                        35

Appendix B: Testing for Structural Breaks
        There is substantial evidence of structural breaks in many macroeconomic time series. One
approach to identifying structural breaks in our model would be to specifically allow for breaks in the
factor loadings, innovation terms and autoregressive parameters in the model described by equations (1)-
(3). Unfortunately, given the size of our model the econometric implementation of such a procedure is
infeasible. Instead, we use a sequence of univariate break tests to shed light on the potential for breaks in
the data. The tests we use consider breaks in both persistence and volatility and allow for one break at an
unknown date for each variable (Andrews 1991).
        The first test we employ estimates an AR(1) model to each time series and tests for a break in
both the constant term and autoregressive parameter. The Andrews test requires us to estimate the model
over the whole sample and then again allowing for a break at each possible date. That is we estimate:
         y t = a + D(s) + ρy t −1 + D(s)αy t −1 + ε t
        where D(s) is a dummy variable that takes the value 0 before the break date and 1 at the break
date (s = t) and all dates after the break date. For each possible break date we estimate the model in (4)
and calculate the Wald statistic:
        k*( (SSR-SSU)/k )/( SSU/(T-2*k))
        where SSR is the sum of squared residuals from the regression with no break (D(s) = 0 for all t)
and SSU is the sum of squared residuals for the regression that allows for a break. K is the number of
parameters that may break, in our case k = 2. T is the number of time series observations. We calculate
the Wald statistic for all possible break dates in the middle 2/3 of the sample, since tests near the
endpoints have been known to be unreliable, and use the max of the Wald statistics as our potential break
date. The statistical significance of this break can be checked against the critical values provided in
Andrews (1991), which depend on S/T.
        To test for a break in only the volatility in each series, we regress the demeaned absolute value of
each series on a constant for the restricted regression and then on a constant and a dummy variable for the
unrestricted regression. That is, for the unrestricted regression we estimate:
         y t * = a + D(s) + ε t
where yt* is the demeaned absolute value of the series, for all possible break dates. The Wald statistic is
as given above with k = 1 degrees of freedom.
                                             36


Appendix C: List of Countries


                                  Groups of Countries
    INDUSTRIAL   EMERGING MARKETS                OTHER DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Australia        Argentina          Burundi                   Sri Lanka
Austria          Brazil             Benin                     Lesotho
Belgium          Chile              Burkina Faso              Madagascar
Canada           China              Bangladesh                Mali
Switzerland      Colombia           Bolivia                   Mozambique
Denmark          Egypt, Arab Rep.   Barbados                  Mauritania
Spain            Hong Kong, China   Botswana                  Mauritius
Finland          Indonesia          Cote d'Ivoire             Malawi
France           India              Cameroon                  Niger
United Kingdom   Israel             Congo, Rep.               Nigeria
Germany          Jordan             Comoros                   Nicaragua
Greece           Korea, Rep.        Cape Verde                Nepal
Ireland          Morocco            Costa Rica                Panama
Iceland          Mexico             Dominican Republic        Paraguay
Italy            Malaysia           Algeria                   Rwanda
Japan            Pakistan           Ecuador                   Senegal
Luxembourg       Peru               Ethiopia                  El Salvador
Netherlands      Philippines        Gabon                     Seychelles
Norway           Singapore          Ghana                     Syrian Arab Republic
New Zealand      Thailand           Guinea                    Chad
Portugal         Turkey             Gambia, The               Togo
Sweden           Taiwan             Guinea-Bissau             Trinidad and Tobago
United States    Venezuela, RB      Equatorial Guinea         Tunisia
                 South Africa       Guatemala                 Tanzania
                                    Guyana                    Uganda
                                    Honduras                  Uruguay
                                    Haiti                     Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                    Iran, Islamic Rep.        Zambia
                                    Jamaica                   Zimbabwe
                                    Kenya

Data sources: Primarily from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI),
supplemented with the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook (WEO)
database.
                                                 37

                                              Table 1
                                      Variance Decompositions
                                            All Groups
                                            (1960-2005)

Group                           Factor                  Output       Consumption       Investment
World                           Global                   11.48           8.58              5.51
                                Group                     5.22           2.79              5.39
                                Global+Group             16.70          11.37             10.90
                                Country                  46.75          39.70             30.90
                                Idiosyncratic            35.31          47.80             57.04

Industrial Countries            Global                   27.10           24.30            12.13
                                Group                    13.40            5.89            15.63
                                Global+Group             40.51           30.19            27.76
                                Country                  38.64           34.88            40.76
                                Idiosyncratic            20.28           34.17            30.85

Emerging Market Economies       Global                    7.85            4.84             3.89
                                Group                     6.27            3.52             4.74
                                Global+Group             14.12            8.36             8.63
                                Country                  60.30           39.77            46.97
                                Idiosyncratic            24.56           51.01            43.46

Other Developing Countries      Global                   6.88            3.97              3.59
                                Group                     1.60            1.29             1.66
                                Global+Group              8.48            5.27             5.26
                                Country                  44.40           41.55            20.52
                                Idiosyncratic            45.55           51.81            72.78

Notes: We estimate the model over the full sample period (1960-2005) and compute the variance
decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output, consumption and investment.
In each cell, we then report the cross-sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant
factor. The cross-sectional means are calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the
first column. The rows marked (Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of
the global and group-specific factors.
                                                 38



                                               Table 2
                                      Variance Decompositions
                                   Industrial Country Subsamples
                                             (1960-2005)

Group                           Factor                  Output       Consumption       Investment
Industrial Countries            Global                   27.10          24.30             12.13
                                Group                    13.40           5.89             15.63
                                Global+Group             40.51          30.19             27.76
                                Country                  38.64          34.88             40.76
                                Idiosyncratic            20.28          34.17             30.85

G-7                             Global                   35.74           33.00            17.00
                                Group                    10.35            5.49            16.33
                                Global+Group             46.09           38.49            33.33
                                Country                  38.47           36.96            45.73
                                Idiosyncratic            14.89           23.84            20.20

US-Canada                       Global                   22.62           25.28             6.21
                                Group                     4.24            1.10             1.82
                                Global+Group             26.86           26.38             8.02
                                Country                  53.83           51.32            69.83
                                Idiosyncratic            18.69           21.60            21.30

EU 12                           Global                   36.67           31.50            16.56
                                Group                    14.81            5.46            18.38
                                Global+Group             51.48           36.96            34.94
                                Country                  28.81           25.25            34.86
                                Idiosyncratic            19.10           36.97            29.56

Notes: We estimate the model over the full sample period (1960-2005) and compute the variance
decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output, consumption and investment.
In each cell, we then report the cross-sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant
factor. The cross-sectional means are calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the
first column. The rows marked (Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of
the global and group-specific factors.
                                                        39


                                                       Table 3
                                               Variance Decompositions
                                                     All Groups

                                                        1960-1984                           1985-2005
Group                        Factor          Output   Consumption   Investment   Output   Consumption   Investment
World                        Global           14.67      10.94          7.14       7.03       5.28          5.89
                             Group             5.66       4.33         5.62       10.69       8.04          9.95
                             Global+Group     20.33      15.27         12.76      17.72      13.32         15.84
                             Country          43.99      39.14         28.60      42.10      36.21         34.51
                             Idiosyncratic    33.31      43.09         56.21      35.17      46.06         45.10

Industrial Countries         Global          27.68       25.27           12.06    9.36       10.59         9.63
                             Group           17.16       9.39            15.29   31.27       23.54        28.04
                             Global+Group    44.84       34.66           27.35   40.62       34.13        37.67
                             Country         33.34       32.13           39.25   31.69       24.57        34.65
                             Idiosyncratic   20.66       31.72           31.88   23.71       37.09        24.35

Emerging Market Economies    Global          13.28        7.22            6.38    4.20        3.71         3.80
                             Group           2.65        3.84            3.13     9.31       6.04          9.80
                             Global+Group    15.93       11.06            9.52   13.51       9.75         13.60
                             Country         53.40       36.38           39.57   61.39       46.23        51.24
                             Idiosyncratic   28.56       50.50           48.63   21.26       40.06        31.51

Other Developing Countries   Global          10.16        6.86            5.53    7.28        3.86         5.28
                             Group           2.40        2.56            2.86     3.22       2.81          2.96
                             Global+Group    12.56        9.42            8.40   10.50       6.67          8.24
                             Country         44.32       43.00           19.99   38.31       36.67        27.66
                             Idiosyncratic   40.17       44.50           68.79   45.29       52.01        58.72

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then
compute the variance decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output,
consumption and investment in each of these two periods. In each cell, we then report the cross-
sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant factor. The cross-sectional means are
calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the first column. The rows marked
(Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of the global and group-specific
factors.
                                                       40


                                                       Table 4
                                              Variance Decompositions
                                           Industrial Country Subsamples

                                                  1960-1984                            1985-2005
Group                  Factor          Output    Consumption   Investment   Output   Consumption   Investment
Industrial Countries   Global           27.68       25.27         12.06       9.36      10.59          9.63
                       Group            17.16        9.39         15.29      31.27      23.54         28.04
                       Global+Group     44.84       34.66         27.35      40.62      34.13         37.67
                       Country          33.34       32.13         39.25      31.69      24.57         34.65
                       Idiosyncratic    20.66       31.72         31.88      23.71      37.09         24.35

G-7                    Global          36.87        36.20         16.14     12.26       15.37        11.51
                       Group           14.42         9.27         17.03     31.67       21.89        33.33
                       Global+Group    51.29        45.47         33.17     43.94       37.26        44.84
                       Country         32.02        30.05         42.78     32.86       32.75        37.07
                       Idiosyncratic   15.57        23.01         22.43     19.19       25.71        14.94

US-Canada              Global          35.17        39.99         12.90     13.12       21.69        12.39
                       Group            1.93         1.20          0.97     12.49        7.80         8.11
                       Global+Group    37.10        41.19         13.87     25.61       29.49        20.50
                       Country         43.50        37.15         65.85     47.52       39.78        60.63
                       Idiosyncratic   18.42        20.18         18.63     22.67       26.17        14.96

EU 12                  Global          34.81        30.56         15.48      7.30        8.61         9.05
                       Group           18.46         7.41         18.31     45.14       33.48        37.16
                       Global+Group    53.27        37.98         33.79     52.44       42.09        46.21
                       Country         26.50        26.71         34.55     22.85       17.11        26.28
                       Idiosyncratic   19.13        33.78         30.15     21.23       37.06        24.55

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then
compute the variance decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output,
consumption and investment in each of these two periods. In each cell, we then report the cross-
sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant factor. The cross-sectional means are
calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the first column. The rows marked
(Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of the global and group-specific
factors.
                                                       41


                                                      Table 5
                                              Variance Decompositions
                                            Emerging Economy Subsamples

                                                       1960-1984                           1985-2005
Group                       Factor          Output   Consumption   Investment   Output   Consumption Investment
Emerging Market Economies   Global           13.28       7.22          6.38       4.20       3.71        3.80
                            Group             2.65       3.84          3.13       9.31       6.04        9.80
                            Global+Group     15.93      11.06         9.52       13.51       9.75       13.60
                            Country          53.40      36.38         39.57      61.39      46.23       51.24
                            Idiosyncratic    28.56      50.50         48.63      21.26      40.06       31.51

Emerging Asia               Global           10.01       6.26         5.72       3.80        3.72        4.52
                            Group            3.51        3.77         4.22       9.99        5.45        9.36
                            Global+Group     13.52      10.03        9.94       13.78        9.17       13.88
                            Country          49.32      30.85        33.69      56.38       41.73       49.07
                            Idiosyncratic    34.92      56.99        53.95      26.00       44.92       33.06

Emerging Asia 10            Global           12.31       9.05         6.41       3.65        3.71        4.27
                            Group             3.88       3.95         4.46      10.78        7.15        9.88
                            Global+Group     16.19      13.00        10.87      14.43       10.86       14.15
                            Country          53.48      31.90        39.91      61.94       46.60       54.34
                            Idiosyncratic    28.24      53.08        46.74      19.70       38.10       27.65

Emerging Latin America      Global           22.97      11.11        9.15        4.45        3.82        2.69
                            Group             1.24       4.52         1.43       9.70        8.66       10.08
                            Global+Group     24.21      15.63        10.58      14.15       12.48       12.78
                            Country          57.68      42.10        50.09      69.96       47.58       60.93
                            Idiosyncratic    16.18      40.33        37.29      12.31       36.35       23.34

Emerging Africa             Global            3.95       0.91         1.68       6.31        3.27        2.29
                            Group             1.09       1.93         0.96       2.88        1.23       12.05
                            Global+Group      5.04       2.85         2.65       9.19        4.51       14.34
                            Country          69.02      57.85        46.86      68.94       75.34       33.53
                            Idiosyncratic    24.20      37.46        48.48      17.03       16.54       48.51

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then
compute the variance decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output,
consumption and investment in each of these two periods. In each cell, we then report the cross-
sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant factor. The cross-sectional means are
calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the first column. The rows marked
(Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of the global and group-specific
factors.
                                                         42

                                                        Table 6
                                               Variance Decompositions
                                         Other Developing Economy Subsamples

                                                        1960-1984                         1985-2005
Group                        Factor          Output   Consumption   Investment   Output Consumption Investment
Other Developing Economies   Global           10.16       6.86          5.53       7.28     3.86       5.28
                             Group             2.40       2.56          2.86      3.22      2.81       2.96
                             Global+Group     12.56       9.42         8.40       10.50     6.67       8.24
                             Country          44.32      43.00         19.99      38.31    36.67       27.66
                             Idiosyncratic    40.17      44.50         68.79      45.29    52.01       58.72

Developing Asia              Global           4.15       3.34         0.50       10.43     4.50        8.85
                             Group            1.69       3.07          1.88       2.81      2.20       2.32
                             Global+Group     6.37       6.44         2.38       13.12      7.34       11.40
                             Country         60.83       59.63        20.69      43.98     27.52       40.28
                             Idiosyncratic   30.53       31.15        74.55      37.12     60.70       42.54

Developing Latin America     Global          18.25       12.74        7.94       8.73      4.24        4.74
                             Group            2.61        2.05         3.36      3.10       1.94       2.03
                             Global+Group    20.86       14.79        11.30      11.83      6.18        6.77
                             Country         44.45       46.41        29.15      37.22     35.34       34.56
                             Idiosyncratic   31.79       35.95        56.48      45.13     53.62       53.70

Developing Africa            Global          7.47        4.84         5.18       6.27       3.53       5.00
                             Group            2.40       2.70          2.79      3.32       3.26       3.44
                             Global+Group    10.09       7.66         8.11       9.59       6.86       8.50
                             Country         42.09       39.38        16.05      38.02     38.43       23.09
                             Idiosyncratic   44.97       49.86        73.21      46.43     50.18       62.97

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then
compute the variance decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output,
consumption and investment in each of these two periods. In each cell, we then report the cross-
sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant factor. The cross-sectional means are
calculated for the relevant cluster of countries indicated in the first column. The rows marked
(Global+Group) are just the sums of the average variance shares of the global and group-specific
factors.
                                                                                     43


                                                              Figure 1
                                                  Global and Group-Specific Factors

                                                                             Global Factor
 4.0


 2.0


 0.0


-2.0


-4.0
       1961

              1963

                     1965

                            1967

                                   1969

                                          1971

                                                 1973

                                                        1975

                                                               1977

                                                                      1979

                                                                              1981

                                                                                     1983

                                                                                            1985

                                                                                                   1987

                                                                                                          1989

                                                                                                                 1991

                                                                                                                         1993

                                                                                                                                 1995

                                                                                                                                         1997

                                                                                                                                                1999

                                                                                                                                                       2001

                                                                                                                                                              2003

                                                                                                                                                                     2005
                                                         Global Factor and Group Factor for INDs
 4.0                                                                                                                                                                        6.0


 2.0                                                                                                                                                                        3.0


 0.0                                                                                                                                                                        0.0


-2.0                                                                                                                                                                        -3.0


-4.0                                                                                                                                                                        -6.0
       1961

              1963

                     1965

                            1967

                                   1969

                                          1971

                                                 1973

                                                        1975

                                                               1977

                                                                      1979

                                                                              1981

                                                                                     1983

                                                                                            1985

                                                                                                   1987

                                                                                                          1989

                                                                                                                  1991

                                                                                                                         1993

                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                         1997

                                                                                                                                                1999

                                                                                                                                                       2001

                                                                                                                                                              2003

                                                                                                                                                                     2005
                                          Global Factor                                                          Group Factor for INDs


                                                 Global Factor and Group Factors for EMEs and ODCs
 6.0                                                                                                                                                                        10.0


 3.0                                                                                                                                                                        5.0


 0.0                                                                                                                                                                        0.0


-3.0                                                                                                                                                                        -5.0


-6.0                                                                                                                                                                        -10.0
       1961

              1963

                     1965

                            1967

                                   1969

                                          1971

                                                 1973

                                                        1975

                                                               1977

                                                                      1979

                                                                              1981

                                                                                     1983

                                                                                            1985

                                                                                                   1987

                                                                                                          1989

                                                                                                                  1991

                                                                                                                         1993

                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                         1997

                                                                                                                                                1999

                                                                                                                                                       2001

                                                                                                                                                              2003

                                                                                                                                                                     2005




                            Global Factor                             Group Factor for ODCs                                     Group Factor for EMEs



Notes: In the top panel, we estimate the model over the full sample period and then plot the mean of the
posterior distribution of the estimated global factor (the dark solid line). The dashed/dotted lines around the
mean show 5 percent and 95 percent quantile bands of the distribution of estimates of the global factor. In the
middle and bottom panels, we estimate the model over the full sample period and then plot the mean of the
posterior distribution of the estimated factors. INDs, EMEs and ODCs refer to Industrial Countries, Emerging
Market Economies and Other Developing Countries, respectively.
                                                                             Figure 2
                                                      Output Growth and Estimated Factors for Selected Countries

                                                   United States                                                                                                          Japan
  12.0                                                                                                              12.0


   8.0                                                                                                               8.0


   4.0                                                                                                               4.0


   0.0                                                                                                               0.0


  -4.0                                                                                                               -4.0


  -8.0                                                                                                               -8.0


 -12.0                                                                                                              -12.0
         1961

                1964

                       1967

                              1970

                                     1973

                                            1976

                                                    1979

                                                           1982

                                                                  1985

                                                                         1988

                                                                                1991

                                                                                       1994

                                                                                               1997

                                                                                                      2000

                                                                                                             2003




                                                                                                                            1961

                                                                                                                                   1964

                                                                                                                                          1967

                                                                                                                                                  1970

                                                                                                                                                         1973

                                                                                                                                                                1976

                                                                                                                                                                       1979

                                                                                                                                                                              1982

                                                                                                                                                                                     1985

                                                                                                                                                                                            1988

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                      Mexico                                                                                                           Singapore
  12.0                                                                                                              12.0

   8.0                                                                                                               8.0


   4.0                                                                                                               4.0


   0.0                                                                                                               0.0


  -4.0                                                                                                               -4.0


  -8.0                                                                                                               -8.0


 -12.0                                                                                                              -12.0
         1961

                1964

                       1967

                              1970

                                     1973

                                            1976

                                                    1979

                                                           1982

                                                                  1985

                                                                         1988

                                                                                1991

                                                                                       1994

                                                                                               1997

                                                                                                      2000

                                                                                                             2003




                                                                                                                            1961

                                                                                                                                   1964

                                                                                                                                          1967

                                                                                                                                                  1970

                                                                                                                                                         1973

                                                                                                                                                                1976

                                                                                                                                                                       1979

                                                                                                                                                                              1982

                                                                                                                                                                                     1985

                                                                                                                                                                                            1988

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                              Global Factor                                      Group-Specific Factor
                                                                                              Country-Specific Factor                            Output Growth


Notes: We estimate the model over the full sample period. For the relevant country in each plot, we then show the means of the posterior
distributions for each of the factors, along with overall annual output growth for that country.
                                                          Figure 3
                                 Average Variance Explained by the Global and Group Factors
                                                        (1960-2005)
                         100
                                                               Global      Group        Global+Group

                         80
Share of Countries (%)




                         60



                         40



                         20



                          0
                                10       20       30   40       50       60        70      80        90      100
                                                         Fraction of Variance (% )
Notes: We estimate the model over the full sample period and then compute the variance shares of
the two common factors in our model (global and group-specific) for each country. This plot shows
the frequency distribution of countries for which the total contribution share of the two common
factors is in the range of 0-10 percent, 10-20 percent etc.

                                                            Figure 4
                                     Average Variance Explained by Global and Group Factors
                                                          (1960-2005)
                         18.0


                                                              Global        Group         Global+Group
                         15.0
Fraction of Variance




                         12.0


                          9.0


                          6.0


                          3.0


                          0.0
                                         Output                 Consumption                     Investment
Notes: We estimate the model over the full sample period (1960-2005) and compute the variance decompositions
for each country and, within each country, separately for output, consumption and investment. Each bar then represents
the cross-sectional mean of the variance share attributable to the relevant factor for that particular variable. The
cross-sectional means are calculated over the full sample of countries. The bar marked (Global+Group) represents
the sum of the average variance shares of the global and group-specific factors for each variable.
                                                                           Figure 5
                                                          Average Variance Explained by Global Factor

                                          All Countries                                                                          Industrial Countries
                       16                                                                                    32




                       12                                                                                    24




                                                                                      Fraction of Variance
Fraction of Variance




                        8                                                                                    16



                        4                                                                                     8



                        0                                                                                     0
                            Output        Consumption              Investment                                          Output       Consumption              Investment


                                     Emerging Market Economies                                                                  Other Developing Countries
                   16                                                                                    16



                   12                                                                                    12
Fraction of Variance




                                                                                      Fraction of Variance
                       8                                                                                     8



                       4                                                                                     4



                       0                                                                                     0
                            Output        Consumption              Investment                                         Output        Consumption              Investment

                                                                          1960-1984                               1985-2005

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then compute the variance decompositions for each country
and, within each country, for output, consumption and investment in each of these two periods. Each bar then represents the cross-sectional mean of the
variance share attributable to the global factor for that particular variable in a given period. The cross-sectional means are calculated over the relevant group of
countries.
                                                                      Figure 6
                                                 Average Variance Explained by Group-Specific Factors

                                            All Countries                                                                        Industrial Countries
                    12                                                                                  32



                        9                                                                               24




                                                                                     Fraction of Variance
 Fraction of Variance




                        6                                                                               16



                        3                                                                                   8



                        0                                                                                   0
                             Output        Consumption            Investment                                         Output        Consumption              Investment


                                      Emerging Market Economies                                                                Other Developing Countries
                        12                                                                                  12



                         9                                                                                   9
 Fraction of Variance




                                                                                     Fraction of Variance
                         6                                                                                   6



                         3                                                                                   3



                         0                                                                                   0
                             Output        Consumption            Investment                                          Output       Consumption              Investment

                                                                         1960-1984                               1985-2005

Notes: See Notes to Figure 5.
                                                          Figure 7
                               Average Variance Explained by Global and Group-Specific Factors
                                                        All Countries
                        25.0

                                                                1960-1984       1985-2005
                        20.0
 Fraction of Variance




                        15.0



                        10.0



                         5.0



                         0.0
                                     Output                 Consumption                Investment

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. We then
compute the variance decompositions for each country and, within each country, for output, consumption
and investment in each of these two periods. Each bar then represents the cross-sectional mean of the
variance share attributable to the sum of global and group-specific factors for that particular variable in
a given period. The cross-sectional means are calculated over the full set of countries in our sample.
                                                                      Figure 8
                                                     Output Variance Explained by Global Factor
                                                                                                                                          Industrial Countries
 60


 50


 40


 30


 20


 10


-
                                                                       Denmark




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Luxembourg
       Belgium




                                                                                                                                              United Kingdom

                                                                                                                                                                        Germany
                                                                                           Spain

                                                                                                                Finland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ireland

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Iceland



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Japan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     New Zealand
                                                                                                                                 France




                                                                                                                                                                                           Greece




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              United States
                  Australia

                               Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Italy
                                          Canada

                                                     Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Portugal

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Norway
                                                                                                                             Emerging Market Economies
 50



 40



 30



 20



 10



-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pakistan
                                                                   Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mexico
      Peru




                                                                                                                                                                                  Jordan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Philippines

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Singapore
                 Argentina




                                                   China




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Venezuela, RB
                                                                                                                          Indonesia

                                                                                                                                          India




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Morocco



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Malaysia
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Korea, Rep.
                              Brazil

                                         Chile




                                                                                                    Hong Kong, China




                                                                                                                                                               Israel




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Taiwan
                                                                                 Egypt, Arab Rep.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              South Africa




                                                                                                                                          1960-1984                                                                          1985-2005

Notes: We estimate the model separately over the two periods, 1960-1984 and 1985-2005. For each country,
we then show the posterior means of the share of the variance of output growth fluctuations accounted for by
the relevant factor in each panel. We also show the corresponding posterior coverage intervals of length two
standard deviations (%).
                                                               -
                                                                                                                                 -




                                                                   10
                                                                        20
                                                                             30
                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                        80
                                                       Peru                                                           Belgium

                                                  Argentina                                                          Australia
                                                      Brazil                                                          Austria
                                                       Chile                                                          Canada
                                                      China                                                       Switzerland




Notes: See notes to Figure 8.
                                                   Colombia
                                                                                                                     Denmark
                                            Egypt, Arab Rep.
                                                                                                                        Spain
                                    Hong Kong, China
                                                                                                                      Finland
                                                   Indonesia
                                                                                                                       France
                                                       India
                                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                      Israel
                                                                                                                     Germany




                                1960-1984
                                                     Jordan
                                                                                                                       Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 9




                                                 Korea, Rep.
                                                                                                                      Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                             Industrial Countries




                                                   Morocco
                                                                                                                      Iceland



                                                                                   Emerging Market Economies
                                                     Mexico
                                                                                                                         Italy




                                1985-2005
                                                   Malaysia
                                                                                                                        Japan
                                                    Pakistan
                                                                                                                  Luxembourg
                                                 Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Output Variance Explained by Group Factor




                                                                                                                  Netherlands
                                                  Singapore

                                                   Thailand                                                           Norway

                                                     Turkey                                                      New Zealand

                                                     Taiwan                                                          Portugal

                                              Venezuela, RB                                                           Sweden

                                                South Africa                                                     United States
