NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL AND FINANCIAL INDUSTRY BOOMS AND BUSTS
Gerard Hoberg
Gordon M. Phillips
Working Paper 14290
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14290

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We especially thank Matthew Rhodes-Kropf and David Robinson for many helpful comments. We
also thank Ron Giammarino, Bill Latham, Josh Lerner, Lubos Pastor, Paul Povel, Paul Seguin and
seminar participants at the AEA meetings, American University, Baruch, Delaware, George Mason,
Georgia State, the 2007 Frontiers of Finance Conference, Insead, NBER, NYU, Oxford, UBC, Vanderbilt,
University of Vienna, Washington University of St. Louis, the Western Finance Association and Yale
for helpful comments. All errors are the authors alone. Copyright 2007 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon
Phillips. All rights reserved. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Real and Financial Industry Booms and Busts
Gerard Hoberg and Gordon M. Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 14290
August 2008
JEL No. G10,G14,G31
ABSTRACT
We examine how product market competition affects firm cash flows and stock returns in industry
booms and busts. In competitive industries, we find that high industry-level stock-market valuation,
investment and new financing are followed by sharply lower operating cash flows and abnormal stock
returns. We also find that analyst estimates are positively biased and returns comove more when industry
valuations are high in competitive industries. In concentrated industries these relations are weak and
generally insignificant. Our results suggest that when industry stock-market valuations are high, firms
and investors in competitive industries do not fully internalize the negative externality of industry
competition on cash flows and stock returns.

Gerard Hoberg
Robert H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
4416 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
ghoberg@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Management
Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu

I

Introduction

Industries commonly go through cycles in which firms have very high valuations.
These high valuations are written about as the start of a “new era” in which productivity increases and new products justify very high stock-prices.1 These high
valuations frequently are accompanied by very high investment when firms perceive
the returns to investment to be high relative to their cost of capital. However, there
also exists the perception that industries commonly go through periods of over investment followed by subsequent low returns to investment. These periods of very high
investment followed by low returns have been seen most recently in the telecommunications industry. From 1997 to 2002, investors added $880 billion to this industry.
Subsequently over one-half of this investment has been lost according to Thomson
Financial in New York, with at least 63 telecommunications firms going bankrupt.
This phenomenon of very high investment followed by low subsequent investment is not just present in the recent internet boom. Other industries such as the
Winchester disk drive industry and the early railroad industry have similar patterns.
Sahlmon and Stevenson (1987) note that in mid-1983 the Winchester disk drive industry had a market capitalization of $5.4 billion, but by years end, the industry
value fell to $1.4 billion as net income fell by 98 percent. Extensive miles of track
were laid (including spurs to future towns not yet built) by firms in the railroad
industry only to be followed by extensive bankruptcies in the late 1870s.2
Despite the attention that these industry booms and busts receive in the press,
little is known about how industry competition affects both financial and real industry business cycles. Our paper examines the extent that real and financial outcomes
following industry booms and busts are related to industry-level competition. These
industry business cycles are significant and are often unaligned with market-wide
cycles, suggesting that industry characteristics matter. We test theoretical predictions about whether competition, valuation uncertainty and high costs of information
gathering are important to understanding ex post outcomes. We find strong support
for the conclusion that market participants in competitive industries rely on common
industry information and do not internalize the effects of high competition.
We find that changes in operating performance and future abnormal stock re1
See WSJ March 23, 2000 “Is there rational for lofty prices?” and January 19, 1999 “IPOs are
different in current era of net-stock mania”.
2
See: http://www.eslarp.uiuc.edu/ibex/archive/vignettes/rrboom.htm.
The Chicago Sun
Times wrote in 1872: that wealth from the railroads “will so overflow our coffers with gold that
our paupers will be millionaires, and our rich men the possessors of pocket money which will put
to shame the fortunes of Croesus.”

1

turns are negatively related to ex ante industry-level valuation (our measure of industry booms) and new financing in competitive growth industries but much less so
in concentrated industries. High stock-market valuations in competitive industries
are likely to be followed by subsequent downturns in cash flows and stock returns,
especially when there is substantial new financing and investment by firms in the
industry. These relations are significantly more negative than similar relations in
concentrated industries, and cannot be explained by standard controls including
size and value/growth proxies. Our results also persist after controlling for recent
changes in capital expenditures in the industry and after controlling for potential
mean reversion in operating cash flows.
We examine whether the predictable busts we observe were predicted by analysts
and investors, and we consider analyst forecasts of earnings per share (EPS). We
perform predictive tests of future EPS using ex-ante analyst forecasts, and find that
analyst estimates were positively biased in competitive growth industries, especially
those with the high relative valuations. We do not find analogous biases in concentrated industries nor in industries with high market risk. Our findings are also robust
to excluding the internet boom of 1998 to 2000 form our sample.
Our results for abnormal stock returns also show large differences in industries
with high valuations. These patterns differ based on industry competitiveness. In
competitive industries with the highest relative valuation, and also in competitive
growth industries, we find that firm abnormal stock returns are negatively related to
industry relative valuation, high investment and industry new finance. We also find
that predictable busts are associated with high comovement of firm returns within
competitive industries.
These findings are economically significant - both for operating cash flows and
stock returns. In competitive industries, a one standard deviation increase in relative
industry valuation is associated with a three percent decline in operating cash flows.
A one standard deviation increase in industry financing is associated with a 5.5
percent decline in operating cash flows.
In competitive growth industries, annual abnormal stock returns for an industry
level portfolio in the highest quintile of relative industry valuation are over three percentage points lower than a portfolio in the lowest quintile. If we weight by firm rather
than by industry, this abnormal return difference exceeds ten percentage points. In
concentrated industries, quintile returns are non-monotonic, and magnitudes are less
than half as large.
Our results are consistent with a new explanation not previously documented:

2

the effect of high competition among firms on both cash flows and stock prices in
competitive industries. The predictable busts we observe in competitive industries
are consistent with a failure of investors and industry participants to internalize the
effect of competition on longer term outcomes. These effects are not correctly forecasted by analysts and are not anticipated in stock returns using the latest style
and factor adjustment models. In contrast, we do not find evidence of predictable
busts in concentrated industries. Firms in concentrated industries, given their enhanced pricing power, are more likely to internalize the effect of their actions on
industry-wide prices, cash flows, and stock returns.3
While the effect of competition on cash flows may be natural and expected,
the predictability of stock returns following booms and busts, after adjusting for
style characteristics and Fama-French factors, is more puzzling. We thus investigate
whether our evidence is consistent with the predictions of recent rational models of
booms and busts. Pastor and Veronesi (2005) (PV) show that increases in systematic
risk can cause industry busts after booms as industry participants adopt a standard
technology. Aguerrevere (2006) and Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004) also
predict that systematic risk might increase after booms associated with the exercise
of real options. DeMarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006a,b) predict that participants
with relative wealth concerns rationally overinvest (both in physical and financial
assets) in industries with high systematic risk.
We find that market betas increase and idiosyncratic risk decreases after industry
booms consistent with PV (2005). We also find that adjusting stock returns by ex
post measured changes in risk reduces the magnitude of the return predictability we
document. However, in industries with the highest valuations, nearly all of the return
predictability persists after adjusting for these changes. Hence, change-in-risk-based
explanations cannot explain the extent of our findings in the most highly-valued
competitive industries. Consistent with the concern for relative wealth, our results
are stronger in competitive industries with higher ex ante market risk. However,
while this effect may explain part of our results regarding high industry investment,
relative investment is less significant than our other industry variables in predicting
future cash flows and stock returns.
We conclude that although the effect of competition on changes in cash flows may
be natural in competitive industries, current stock market theories cannot explain the
extent of the predictability of stock returns that we document. Also, these theories
3

There is related research in economics that has examined theoretically whether there can be
excessive competition and entry within industries. Weizsacker (1980), Martin (1984), Mankiw and
Whinston (1986) and Scharfstein (1988) present models addressing this question. We discuss this
literature more extensively in the next section.

3

cannot explain the biased analyst estimates we find in some competitive industries.
Overall, our findings in more extreme industries are consistent with stock market
participants not anticipating the magnitude of the effects of competition.
Related to our paper is the recent theoretical and empirical work by Rhodes-Kropf
and Viswanathan (2004) and Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005),
respectively. In these papers, misvaluation occurs at the sector and firm level in a
rational setting, and this affects merger and acquisition activity. Managers are not
able to distinguish between misvaluation and possible synergies, and merger waves
can arise. This signal extraction problem is also related to papers on rational herding
and investment cascades (early models are Scharfstein and Stein (1990) and Welch
(1992)).4
What is shared by these models and our interpretation of our findings is that
firms may make inefficient decisions when they rely on information common to all
firms. Our study focuses on the impact of industrial organization given that firms
face a coordination problem in competitive industries, and may not internalize, or
have the incentives to internalize, the effect of their actions on industry prices and
returns. These issues are likely to be most extreme when information about rival
firms is costly or difficult to gather, as is likely the case in competitive industries
where larger numbers of rival firms exist.
Our results add to existing results in several new ways. First, our paper’s main
focus is on industry structure, and we show that subsequent outcomes after industry
booms and busts vary dramatically across levels of industry competitiveness. Our
results show that competitive industries, but not concentrated industries, experience
significant downturns following high industry valuation and new industry financing.
These downturns effect both stock returns and cash flows.5 Second, we show that
the effects of industry new financing and industry valuation on stock returns in
competitive industries are especially negative in the top tercile of ex-ante industry
valuation and the top tercile of ex-ante industry market risk. Third, we show that
changes in firm risk only partially explain predictable boom and bust patterns. These
results support key predictions of industrial organization theories, and theories of
4

The idea that noisy signals can create cycles dates back to the original Lucas island economy
and the real business cycle models of Kydland and Prescott.
5
Although not considering the role of industry competition, related empirical work also documents results related to ours. Beneish and Nichols (2008) also use accounting based measures
of investment, valuation, and financing activity and relate them to stock returns at the firm level.
More specialized articles find low stock returns following high investment (see Titman, Wei, and Xie
(2004) and Polk and Sapienza (2006) for cross-sectional results, and Lamont (2000) for time-series
results). Related to our results on industry financing, Baker and Wurgler (2000) show that when
the share of equity issuance is in the top quartile, market-wide returns are 15 percent below the
average market-wide returns over time.

4

decision making under high uncertainty, and shed new light on how industry business
cycles might form.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a discussion of industrial organization based theories of booms and busts and presents
testable implications. Section III discusses the data and our empirical measures of
firm valuation and relative valuation. Sections IV and V present and discuss the
results on how industry valuation and financing booms impact subsequent operating
cash flows and stock returns, respectively. Section VI concludes.

II

Industrial Organization and Booms and Busts

In this section we review the existing theoretical models and empirical findings that
are related to our paper. Given that our focus is on industrial organization, we focus
first on the potential impact of industrial organization on booms and busts. At the
end of this section we also consider the implications of risk-based theories of booms
and busts.

A

Concentrated and Competitive Industries

There is a large body of work that has focused on the effects of competition in
both concentrated and competitive industries. The most famous work dates back to
Schumpeter (1942) in which he coined the term “creative destruction.” Schumpeter’s
work focused on the process of creative destruction in which entrants challenge the
status quo through innovation. The view Schumpeter espoused in his posthumous
book published in 1942 is that entrants with new technologies challenge firms in
concentrated industries in order to displace established market leaders. Expansion
and entry occurs in these industries as these industries are “where the money is.”
Other articles suggest that competitive industries bear the greatest risk from
new competition. Schumpeter’s early work in 1912 focused on creative destruction
in competitive industries. In Schumpeter’s creative destruction story, there is an
innovation and the market forms high expectations (rationally or irrationally) about
the future prospects of this industry. These opportunities increase industry and
firm valuations above their long-run historical levels. Firms observing these positive
industry valuations, and positive own valuations, raise capital and invest. Firms
may suffer from a signal extraction problem, as they may not know what fraction
of the positive signal they receive is attributable to opportunities they have, or
opportunities available to all firms in the industry. Individually, firms try to invest
5

before competitors who receive the same investment opportunity as in Grenadier
(2002). More broadly, firms in competitive industries suffer from an inability to
coordinate their investment.
Related to this idea is the extensive research on R&D and patent races (summarized by Reinganum (1989)) showing there can be excessive entry. This literature
predicts that industries facing new opportunities that are also characterized by either significant economies of scale or patent protection can suffer excessive ex ante
competition with the total investment exceeding the amount that would be socially
optimal. This key feature is similar to business stealing models, where firms rationally do not consider the effect of rival firms. In contrast to business stealing models,
however, industries can be explicitly ex ante competitive with free entry.
Related to the extent of entry into industries are formal models of how excessive
entry may occur. Work by Von Weizsacker (1980), Perry (1984), Mankiw and Whinston (1986) formalize how there can be a tendency for excessive entry relative to the
social optimum as entrants rationally do not take into account previous fixed costs
by rival firms. The general implication of these models is that the industries have
to have large fixed costs and prices above marginal cost. Entrants enter and invest
if they can price below current industry prices. Firms enter despite large fixed costs
as they can subsequently steal market share away from existing firms.

B

High Information Costs and High Uncertainty

Understanding how information is produced around times of industry innovation
is central to understanding how investment decisions might vary across industries.
In this section, we discuss the theoretical motivation for how poor outcomes can
arise in competitive industries, especially if firms are unable to efficiently gather
information about rivals, and if valuation uncertainty is high. We begin by discussing
non-Industrial Organization theories of valuation booms and busts, and the link to
common industry comovements in cash flows and stock returns.
Veldkamp (2006) develops a rational model in which high fixed costs of producing
information on individual firms causes investors to focus on signals that are common
to many firms. How decisions are made when information is common to many firms
is also central to Scharfstein and Stein (1990), Welch (1992), and Rhodes-Kropf and
Viswanathan (2004) (RKV) regarding herding, cascades, and merger decisions. A
unifying theme is that high uncertainty can lead managers to make decisions similar
to those of prior participants.
Empirically we follow Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) and consider an economy
6

in which cash flows for firm i are driven by common market wide and industry shocks
that cause firms in the same industry to have stock returns that comove as follows:
ri,j,t = Bi,0 + Bi,m ∗ rm,t + Bi,j ∗ rj,t + i,j,t

(1)

where ri,j,t is the return of firm i in industry j at time t, rm,t is the market return,
rj,t is the return of industry j and i,j,t is a firm specific shock.
As Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) note, this expression for comovement is
based on a large literature including Roll (1988) and recently Durnev, Morck, and
Yeung (2004). The authors focus on the relationship between stock comovements and
investment efficiency. It is important to note that, although stock price comovements
can be related to demand shocks as well as numerous other theoretical causes,6
virtually all theories predict that comovement mechanisms result in less information
on firm-specific fundamentals being impounded into stock prices. When comovement
is high, managers thus have little information outside of common signals, and are
likely to make similar investment decisions, especially when information is difficult
to gather from other sources.
We postulate that information about rivals and optimal investment policy is
difficult and costly to gather when large numbers of firms exist as in a competitive
industry. Thus, market participants are more likely to rely on common industry price
movements. We abstract from the overall market in equation (1) and operationalize
the link to industry concentration in the following specification (Hj,t denotes the
industry Herfindahl):
ri,j,t = Bi,j ∗ (1 − Hj,t ) ∗ rj,t + i,j,t

(2)

The idea expressed here is that when the industry is very competitive, Hj,t will be
close to zero and industry-level shocks will drive more of each firm’s stock return,
consistent with the postulated high costs of gathering firm-specific information in
competitive industries. In this setting, optimal investment policy will be a function of known quantities including industry returns, industry competitiveness, and
information gathered from firm-specific sources including stock prices (ηi,j,t ):
∗
= δ(rj,t , Hjt , ηi,j,t )
Ii,j,t

(3)

The following linear functional form operationalizes the assumption that managers
face higher information gathering costs in competitive industries:
∗
= δ1 ∗ (1 − Hj,t ) ∗ rj,t + δ2 ∗ Hj,t ∗ ηi,j,t
Ii,j,t
6

(4)

Comovement can also be linked to industry herding as discussed earlier, lack of transparency as
modeled by Li and Myers (2005), contagion as in Pritsker and Kodres (2002) and Kyle and Xiong
(2001), style investing as in Barberis and Shleifer (2003), and investor sentiment as in Barberis,
Shleifer, and Wurgler (2005).

7

We note that investment is a function of a firm’s marginal q, as well as the firm
specific shock i,j,t , and that this information is contained in ηi,j,t . Substituting qi,j,t
and i,j,t for ηi,j,t yields:
∗
= δ1 ∗ (1 − Hj,t ) ∗ rj,t + δ2 ∗ Hj,t ∗ qi,j,t + δ3 ∗ Hj,t ∗ i,j,t
Ii,j,t

(5)

When the cost of gathering information on large numbers of rivals is high, firms in
competitive industries will thus invest more following high industry stock returns
(rj,t ). Firms in concentrated industries will rely more on firm specific information
and research (qi,j,t and i,j,t ). This relationship can be amplified by the fact that firms
in highly competitive industries face a non-cooperative investment choice, wherein
an optimal response to a new investment opportunity is to invest before competitors.
Therefore more immediate investment is more likely to occur in competitive industries than in concentrated industries. This implies that the elasticity of investment
to industry price shocks in competitive industries is high.
Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2004) and Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007) show
that such a positive association between investment and returns creates tension because investment policy is less efficient. The authors attribute this to private information being less informative when returns are more synchronous, and investors
convey less useful firm-specific information to managers through prices.
Initial positive returns following a shock might cause high investment. This in
turn might generate additional positive returns and investment until the new capacity
starts producing. The degree of resulting overinvestment can be amplified further by
managerial motives to try to capture more of the market, and also because managers
might be shielded from blame because rival managers make similar decisions.
Overinvestment following positive industry shocks can then lead to subsequent
industry busts affecting subsequent returns and cash flows at the firm and industry
level as follows:
∗
∗
ri,j,t+1 = Bi,0 + Bi,j ∗ (1 − Hj,t ) ∗ rj,t+1 + i,t+1 + αi (Ii,j,t
− Ii,j,t ) + αj (Ij,t
− Ij,t ) (6)
∗
∗
∆CFi,j,t,t+1 = θi,0 + θi,j (1 − Hj,t )j,t+1 + i,t+1 + γi (Ii,j,t
− Ii,j,t ) + γj (Ij,t
− Ij,t ) (7)

These two equations motivate our examination of how ex post returns and cash
flows may depend on ex ante industry returns and investment, and why we consider
industry concentration.
Hypothesis 1: In competitive industries, especially those with high price uncertainty; high valuation, high investment and high financing will be associated with
lower ex post industry and firm profitability and lower ex post stock returns. These
8

predictable booms and busts should be associated with high return comovement and
optimistic analyst forecasts.

C

Alternative Risk Based Theories

Following our examination of cash flows, we examine the effect of industry competition on abnormal stock returns. Recent work by Hou and Robinson (2005) empirically supports the contention that there is competitive risk priced in stock market
returns. For theoretical consistency, if competitive risk is priced, assets exposed to
this competitive risk factor should be more procyclical. In our context, competitive
risk can be procyclical as follows. In boom times, opportunities arise that require
additional financing and investment. Industry valuations then increase above their
historical values. These valuations can be leveraged when GDP growth is high, as
access to capital is likely to be highest. However, in competitive industries, firms
will aggressively exploit these opportunities and thus capital will flow more quickly
into these industries, causing competitive industries to be more pro-cyclical. Return differences in competitive versus concentrated industries might thus load on a
systematic priced risk factor related to changes in GDP, and we test the following
hypothesis:
Hypothesis 2A: Decreased stock returns following booms in competitive industries
result from a systematic priced risk factor related to product market competition.
Aguerrevere (2006) introduces product market competition into a real options
based model of the firm, and shows that competition can affect asset returns and
firm risk via industry demand. A key prediction is that market risk will decrease as
demand increases in competitive industries (industry booms), but will then increase
as demand declines (industry busts). Decreases in market risk during booms arise
because firms in competitive industries face a high likelihood of preemption by competitors. These firms find it optimal to exercise growth options earlier than firms
in concentrated industries. When demand decreases, market risk increases more in
competitive industries because firms in these industries optimally delay shut down
decisions because the benefits of shutting down capacity accrue most to industry
rivals. This increase in market risk in competitive industries is especially strong as
these firms have higher operating leverage when demand declines.7
Hypothesis 2B: During industry booms, systematic risk decreases more for firms
in competitive industries than in concentrated industries. Following decreases in
7

The operating leverage effect on stock market risk and returns in a real option context was
introduced by Carlson, Fisher, and Giammarino (2004).

9

demand (industry busts), systematic risk increases more for firms in competitive
industries than in concentrated industries.
Three recent articles offer explanations regarding how boom and bust patterns
can develop rationally given effects of risk. Pastor and Veronesi (2005) and DeMarzo,
Kaniel, and Kremer (2006a,b) model how new technological opportunities can play a
role in the formation of rational boom and subsequent bust patterns. While many of
these theories are hard to separate from models of excessive competition or herding,
we do test two hypotheses about the role of risk in booms and busts.
In Pastor and Veronesi (2005), there is a rational boom and bust linked to a
switch of uncertainty (risk) from idiosyncratic to systematic. This change in the
composition of risk occurs after firms standardize on the winning technology. This
increase in systematic risk will thus cause a subsequent drop in stock prices. We thus
test the following prediction of their model:
Hypothesis 2C: Systematic risk will increase and idiosyncratic risk will decrease
following industry valuation booms.
The alternative to Hypotheses 2B and 2C is that risk changes do not explain
subsequent stock market returns given market participants fail to take into account
the effect of product market competition on cash flows.
We test a related hypothesis from Demarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006b) and Demarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006a) (henceforth DKK). DKK model how profitable
and fast growing firms have low expected returns because they provide consumption insurance to investors, especially when future resources are in limited supply
and when the technology is correlated with aggregate consumption.8 These relative
wealth concerns can explain why overinvestment and herding can develop in industries that are viewed as providing large fractions of future consumption. As noted
by the authors, these concerns should be most relevant when the distribution of
industry returns is highly correlated with the market. The main idea is that high
systematic risk implies comovement, and hence a more likely outcome that other
agents in the economy will become rich if the new technology is successful. We thus
test the following prediction:
Hypothesis 2D: In industries with high systematic risk, subsequent stock market
returns will be especially negatively related to high industry valuation, investment,
and financing.
8

While they focus on the dissipation of rents in competitive industries with decreasing returns
to scale, they do not model the differences between competitive and concentrated industries.

10

III
A

Data and Methodology
Industry Competitiveness

We classify industries by their competitiveness on the basis of three-digit SIC codes
using measures that capture both public and private firms. We discard all firms
residing in industries that are identified as “miscellaneous” by the Census Bureau,
as it is likely that firms in these groups cannot be classified (and hence they do
not compete in similar product markets).9 We also classify industries into growth
and value industries based on industry-average book to market ratios. We first
winsorize firm book-to-market ratios at the 1/99 percentile level prior to taking
industry averages and classify growth (value) industries as industries in the lowest
(highest) tercile of industry book-to-market ratios.
We merge data obtained from Compustat and CRSP to obtain information on
firm financials and stock prices. Following standard practice in the literature, we
exclude from our sample financial firms (SICs 6000-6999) and regulated utilities
(SICs 4900-4999). We also restrict our sample to the years 1972 to 2004, as net
equity and debt issuing activity are not available prior to this period. In order for a
firm year to remain in our sample, at a minimum, the firm must have valid CRSP
and COMPUSTAT data both in the given year and in the previous year. Merging
the CRSP and Compustat databases, and applying these filters, yields a total of
108,522 firm year observations.
We classify industries into competitive and concentrated industries using both
public and private firms.10 We calculate a measure of industry concentration that
accounts for privately held firms by combining COMPUSTAT data with Herfindahl
data from the Commerce Department and employee data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS).11 The inclusion of BLS data is necessary to examine all industries
with greater depth, as the Department of Commerce Herfindahl data only covers
manufacturing industries.
To classify industries by their competitiveness, we calculate a Herfindahl–Hirschman
Index (HHI) for each industry in each year using a two-step procedure. First, for
the subsample of manufacturing industries (where we have actual HHIs including
both public and private firms for every fifth year), we regress actual industry HHI
9

Because they operate in nearly identical product markets, we also combine the following industries in each set of parentheses: (20, 70), (210, 211), (220-225), (254, 259), (278, 279), (322, 323),
(333, 334), (520, 521), (533, 539), (540, 541), (570, 571), and (700, 701).
10
Our initial tables just used Compustat public firms to classify industries. These tables are
available from the authors and showed similar, slightly stronger findings.
11
We thank David Robinson for sharing these data with us.

11

from the Commerce Department on three variables: the Compustat public-firm-only
Herfindahl,12 the average number of employees per firm using the BLS data (based
on public and private firms), and the number of employees per firm for public firms
using Compustat data. We also include interaction variables of each of these firm
size variables with the HHI calculated from Compustat data.
In our second stage, we use the coefficient estimates from this regression to compute fitted HHI for all industries. This fitted method has the advantage of capturing
the influence of both public and private firms, and can also be computed for all
industries. To mitigate measurement error, we do not use these fitted HHIs in any
regression, but rather we classify industries into concentrated versus competitive terciles based on this variable. We classify industries in the highest tercile of fitted HHI
as concentrated and those industries in lowest tercile as competitive.
The correlation between actual HHIs, as specified by the Department of Commerce for manufacturing industries, and our fitted HHIs, is 54.2%. The correlation
between Compustat HHIs using segment data and the actual manufacturing HHIs
is only 34.1%.13 The less than perfect 54.2% correlation between our fitted measure
and the actual HHIs suggests that the acquisition of additional data by future researchers might be useful. However, we conclude that our fitted HHIs offer significant
improvements relative to the basic COMPUSTAT HHI, and also have the advantage
over manufacturing HHIs in that they cover all industries.

B

Industry Valuation, Investment and Financing

In order to identify the conditions that likely surround industry booms and busts,
we construct three proxies of new industry-level opportunities and relative industry
valuation: (1) industry-wide valuation relative to historical values using a procedure
described below, (2) industry-wide investment relative to predicted investment, and
(3) industry financing. These proxies either reflect beliefs about an industry having
good future prospects (industry valuation), or they measure current actions that are
consistent with acting on new opportunities (investment and finance).
We define an industry and firm’s “relative” time-series valuation (we refer to this
12

We compute Compustat HHI using the firm segment tapes in years the segment data is available
(1984 onwards) to break a multi-segment firm’s sales into the industries in which it operates. We
then include two Compustat HHI variables in our regression. The first variable equals the HHI in
years prior to 1984, and zero in years when the segment tapes are available. The second one equals
the HHI in subsequent years using the segment tapes, and zero in previous years.
13
In an earlier version of this paper we conducted all of our tests results using the Herfindahls
computed from Compustat and the Compustat segment tapes. The predictable cashflows and stock
returns (significant coefficients) we found were similar to the ones we report in the tables.

12

measure as relative valuation subsequently) using a three step procedure that is based
on the valuation model in Pastor and Veronesi (2003). From Pastor and Veronesi
(2003), we use the empirical model they specifiy in equation (28) and the specification
they report in model (0) of Table II. We do not use the more extended specifications
of their Table II as we do not include as variables the forward looking measures
for return on equity and stock returns.

We only use lagged data in constructing

our measure of relative valuation given that we are examining ex post returns and
operating performance and do not want to have a look ahead bias in our predictions.
To construct our measure of relative valuation for each firm and industry, we use the
following three steps:
(1.)

We estimate the Pastor and Veronesi (2003) valuation model using using

data from year t − 10 to t − 1 for all firms in inudstry j. Using the same variable
definitions they use, we regress the log of the market-to-book ratio, log( M
), on
B
minus the reciprocal of one plus firm age (AGE), a dividend dummy (DD), firm
leverage (LEV), the log of total assets (SIZE), the volatility of profitability (VOLP),
and current firm return on equity (ROE) for each firm i in industry j (we suppress
the j industry subscript, as the equation is estimated separately for each industry).
Given VOLP is constant for each firm, we estimate this equation using an unbalanced
panel with random firm fixed effects.

log(

M
)i,τ = a+bAGEi,τ +cDDi,τ +dLEVi,τ +elog(SIZEi,τ )+f V OLPi,τ +gROEi,τ ,
B
(8)
τ = t − 10, ..., t − 1

(2.) From this estimation we use the estimated industry-specific regression coefficients to compute predicted values for firm market-to-book in year t. We estimate
the valuation regression above using rolling 10 year windows of lagged data in each
industry to get a set of coefficients that we apply to each year t to get a measure
of predicted valuation.

The fitted valuation model used in the first step assumes

that firm i’s market-to-book at time t is a function of its current characteristics and
the industry specific prices of characteristics estimated from past years. Thus we
use time t characteristics and coefficient estimates estimated from t − 10 to t − 1 to
compute predicted firm market-to-book ratios for time t.
(3) The last step is to compute relative (undpredicted) valuations , which we
henceforth call relative valuations, for each firm i at time t. A firm’s total relative
valuation is its actual log( M
) less its predicted log( M
) for year t as follows:
B
B
RelativeV aluationi,t = log(

M
M
)i,t − P redicted( log( )i,t )
B
B
13

(9)

Relative industry-level valuation is the average of all valuations over all firms
in each three-digit SIC industry. Firm-level relative valuation is the total relative
valuation minus this industry-level component.
The results we obtain later are robust to other valuation models including model
(3) from Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan (2005), where the dependent
variable is is the log of firm market value.

In addition, we also estimate a simpler

model that is analogous to a Price to Earnings (PE) model where we regress the log
of the market value on log net income and a dummy for negative net income.
These models were also estimated on 10 years of lagged data by industry and
then the coefficients are used to predict current period market value using current
characteristics including net income. Our measure of relative valuation is then calculated as the difference between the log of current market value and the predicted
log market value.
Relative firm- and industry-level investment is computed using a similar method.
We regress log capital expenditures divided by lagged property plant and equipment
on standard variables from investment models, including lagged Tobin’s q, variables
capturing the cash firms of firms (cash flow divided by book value of equity (ROE)
and a dividend paying dummy (DD)).14 We also include additional variables given the
existing literature. Leverage (LEV) captures the debt-overhang effect on investment
that Hennessy (2004) models. Age of the firm captures potential firm differences in
replacement rates of capital and recovery rates if disinvestment occurs. Volatility
of cash flow (VOLP) captures the real option effect of volatility of cash flows on
investment. Tobin’s q is calculated as the market value of equity plus the book value
of debt and preferred stock divided by the book value of assets.
log(

Investi,t
) = a + bT OBIN Qi,t−1 + cROEi,t + dDDi,t + eAGEi,t +
P P Ei,t−1

(10)

f LEVi,t + gV OLPi,t + hlog(SIZEi,t )
From this model, we calculate relative (unpredicted) investment (which we call
relative investment) as the actual investment less the predicted investment using each
fitted industry regression. Relative industry investment is the average total relative
investment in each industry. Relative firm investment is the total relative investment
minus this industry component.
We define total “new financing” in a given year as the sum of a firm’s net equity
issuing (COMPUSTAT annual data item 108 minus item 115) and net debt issuing
14

Cash flow has been shown by many papers to be related to investment. We do not take a view
on the cause of this relation.

14

activity (annual data item 111 minus item 114) in a given year divided by assets.
Industry new financing is the sum the total amount of new financing over firms in
the industry divided by the total industry assets. Firm-specific new financing is then
the total new financing less the industry component.
These proxies are constructed using each industry’s known ex-ante characteristics.
These proxies can be used in an unbiased fashion to predict future stock returns and
future accounting performance.

C

Descriptive Industry Statistics

Table I lists the top 5 booms in competitive industries (those in the lowest tercile
based on sales HHI using three-digit SIC codes from Compustat) in each of the
following four decades: 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and in the new millennium.
[Insert Table I here]
Table I shows that in all competitive industries, Herfindahl indices are below
.25. Some of the most extreme booms have over one hundred publicly traded firms
competing in the same SIC code. The business services industry had 843 public
firms. Although this last example is part of the well-known late 1990s technology
boom, the other examples suggest that high levels of valuation at the industry level
are not unique. Extreme competitive industries in the 1980s (valuations are over
100% above predicted industry valuations) deviated just as far from their long-term
valuations as those in the 1990s. More broadly, most extreme booms were not in
technology industries, as was the case in the late 1990s. For example, at least two
of the extreme 1980s boom industries were related to groceries and apparel. In the
1970s, more traditional industries including petroleum extraction and electrical work
were among the most extreme booms. Finally, because weighted relative valuations
are similar to unweighted valuations, we conclude that both large and small firms
alike are prone to industry booms and busts.
[Insert Table II here]
Table II lists the top 5 booms in concentrated industries (those in the highest
tercile based on predicted HHI), in the same four decades. The selected industries
generally have concentration levels near or exceeding 0.4. Tables I and II also show
that basic Compustat Herfindahls are generally similar to our fitted Herfindahls. Because our tests do not use the concentration measures explicitly, but rather examine
15

industries based on high and low competition categories, we thus expect and find
similar results using either Herfindahl measure.
Perhaps one difference between concentrated and competitive industries is that
booms appear to be somewhat more extreme in concentrated industries. For example, Guided Missiles and Space Vehicles were 298% above their predicted industry
valuations in 1995, and Musical Instruments were 220% above their predicted industry valuations in 1987. The existence of large booms in concentrated industries
indicates that ample power exists to examine whether subsequent busts occur. However, our later tables show that we do not find evidence that concentrated industries
experiencing booms actually underperform. Hence, unlike those in competitive industries, high industry valuations in concentrated industries likely last several years.

D

Firm-Level Data and Summary Statistics

We compute changes in firm-level operating cash flow (COMPUSTAT annual item
13) scaled by assets (COMPUSTAT annual item 6) in each year. We later examine
if they are related to ex ante industry and firm level relative valuation, investment
and new finance. For robustness, we also estimate our results using the change in
operating cash flow scaled by beginning period assets (year t) and find similar results.
We compute abnormal returns using two methods advocated by recent studies.
Our main results are based on Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997).
A firm’s “monthly abnormal return” is its raw return less the return of one of 125
benchmark portfolios formed on the basis of size, book to market, and past 12 month
return. Portfolios are formed at the end of each June, and (1) firm size is the
CRSP market capitalization on the formation date, (2) the book to market ratio
uses accounting data from the most recent fiscal year ending in the last calendar
year, and (3) past return is based on the 12 month period ending in May of the
formation year.15 Portfolio breakpoints are based only on NYSE/AMEX firms, and
we first form quintiles in each year based on firm size. Firms in each size quintile
are then further sorted into quintiles based on industry-adjusted book to market
ratios. Each portfolio is then further sorted into quintiles based on each firm’s past
12 month return. We also consider a separate method based on adjustments proposed
by Mitchell and Stafford (2000) (see robustness in Section V).
Table III reports summary statistics for these cashflow and return variables, and
for our key boom and bust proxies. Panel A shows that industry relative valuation
has a sample-wide mean that is near zero and a standard deviation that is large at
15

This timing ensures that previous fiscal year accounting data is public information.

16

nearly 24%. This indicates that many industries have valuations both above and
below predicted levels. Our New Financing variables are slightly positive, as more
firms raise new capital relative to those who are paying down debt and repurchasing
shares. The table also shows that all three firm level variables have higher standard
deviations than their industry counterparts. Hence, firms can deviate far from industry valuations, as one standard deviation is a full 47% of the value of an industry.
[Insert Table III here]
Panels B and C display descriptive statistics for competitive and concentrated
industries, respectively. For virtually all variables, mean levels remain close to zero.
Comparing the two panels also reveals that most variables have similar distributions
in competitive and concentrated industries. For example, both groups have industry
relative valuation standard deviations of 19.9%. We conclude that industry booms
appear to be quite similar in both groups from an ex ante perspective, and so it is
unlikely that our comparative tests are biased toward any finding. Hence, our broad
findings regarding ex post busts only being predictable in competitive industries
(documented later) are perhaps especially surprising.
The average returns in Panels B and C also confirm the results of Hou and
Robinson (2005). The annual equivalent of the difference in monthly returns across
the two panels suggests that concentrated industries underperform competitive ones
by about 2.4% per year. We find a weak but opposite difference in accounting
performance across these two groups, a result that is also consistent with Hou and
Robinson (2005)’s findings.

IV

Operating Cash Flows and Analyst Forecasts

We now examine the effect of industry booms on subsequent firm-level operating
performance and the accuracy of analyst forecasts.

A

Ex Post Cash Flows

Table IV displays the results of firm-level regressions of the change in operating
cash flow on relative valuation, relative investment, and new financing. For each
independent variable, we separately examine industry and firm specific components
as discussed earlier.16 We focus on the industry variables to directly study the
16

All three firm-level variables are less than ten percent correlated with their corresponding industry components, so including both classes does not induce multicollinearity. This low correlation

17

main topic of our paper: industry booms and busts, and their link to industrial
organization. The firm-specific components provide a natural test of our relative
valuation and investment variables, and permit us to both control for results found in
existing studies and to examine whether firms that deviate from explained valuations
experience even worse outcomes holding industry relative valuations fixed.
Throughout our analysis, we also control for investment spikes (lagged one period
investment change) and mean reversion (lagged change in firm cash flows). These
controls account for the possibility that margins in an industry may decrease as
customers wait for a new innovation to hit the market. Investment would be high
in such a case as the industry might be in the process of replacing itself before
introducing the new product or innovation.17 Although not reported, our main
results do not change if we remove these controls.
We estimate the regressions using an unbalanced panel, and we correct standard
errors for correlation within years and within industries (three digit SIC), and for
heteroskedasticity. We do not present results for the fixed effects specification at
the firm level as Moulton (1986) has shown that this method is inappropriate and
produces negatively biased standard errors when you have additional variables at the
industry level. We also do not estimate Fama-MacBeth regressions when examining
operating cash flow, as our tests document the existence of firm-level effects. Petersen
(2005) has recently shown that Fama-MacBeth regressions are biased when there is a
significant firm-level effect (which we find in this case, as is common when examining
accounting data).
[Insert Table IV here]
Panel A of Table IV includes the entire sample and shows that industry-level
variables matter. Industry investment and industry new finance are most negative
for the one year horizon. Relative industry valuation, in contrast, is most negative
for the two year horizon.
Panels B and C display results for the most competitive and concentrated tercile
industries, respectively. Terciles are formed based on the fitted Herfindahl discussed
earlier. A key result is that industry relative valuation is far more important in
competitive industries, both statistically and economically, than in concentrated industries. Although industry relative valuation does not significantly predict one
year cash flow changes, it predicts two year changes at better than the 1% level in
is expected by construction.
17
We thank Matt Rhodes-Kropf for these suggestions.

18

competitive industries, and the coefficient in concentrated industries is nearly zero.
The table also shows that a formal test of differences in means indicates that the
competitive industries coefficient is also significantly different from the concentrated
industries coefficient at the 1% level.
Panels B and C also show that the negative one year industry investment coefficient in Panel A is also driven by competitive industries. This coefficient is roughly
five times as large as the analogous coefficient for concentrated industries. Overall,
the results support Hypothesis 1, and suggest that cash flows are negatively related
to proxies for industry booms in competitive industries, but not in concentrated industries. The analysis of both one and two year cash flow changes also suggests that
industry booms in competitive industries generally experience increases in valuation
prior to increases in investment activity. This more refined result is consistent with
Hypothesis 1. In particular, the theory outlined in Section II.B suggests that aggressive investment decisions might follow positive price signals such as high ex ante
industry returns.
Panel D shows that relative industry valuation, relative industry investment, and
new industry financing are also highly important in industries with declining concentration. These results support the proposition that high competition might be
a primary driver of extreme industry busts, as theories of industrial organization
suggest that declining concentration is one way to measure increasing competitiveness. These results are consistent with multiple firms in the same industry making
investment decisions based on common public signals.
[Insert Table V here]
Table V repeats the tests of Table IV for the subsample of firms residing in the
high growth tercile (those in the lowest tercile based on yearly sorts of industry book
to market ratios). The motivation for this test is that growth industries likely have
higher price uncertainty, and hence the predictions of Hypothesis 1 are likely to be
stronger in this subsample. As before, Panel A shows that high industry valuation is
negatively related to ex post cash flows, especially for the two year horizon. Relative
investment and finance are most negatively related to ex post cash flows for the one
year horizon.
As before, Panels B to D show that these results are driven by firms in competitive
industries and by firms in industries with declining concentration. However, the
coefficient magnitudes are larger for high growth industries (Table V) than for the set
of all industries (Table IV). For example, both the one and two year relative industry
19

valuation coefficients are negative and significant in Panel B, and this coefficient is at
least twice as large as the coefficient in Table IV. These results confirm the prediction
that predictable busts are both limited to competitive industries, and are larger in
growth industries where price uncertainty is expected to be high.
The relative industry investment coefficient also increases in size in the high
growth subsample, and the industry new finance coefficient also increases in Panel
D (this variable is not significant in Panel B in either table). It is especially noteworthy that these coefficients increase in magnitude and in significance despite the
smaller sample size in Table V, and that none of these variables are significant for
concentrated industries in Panel C. These results strongly support Hypothesis 1 and
more broadly confirm that price uncertainty plays an important role.
These results are also robust across specifications (not reported) including models with random firm effects, and to excluding the technology boom of 1998-2000
(reported in an earlier version).18 In a previous version of the paper, we also present
results using the alternative models in Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson, and Viswanathan
(2005) and a simpler “PE” model. The results are similar to the results discussed
above.
Although we do find that the mean reversion variable (change in EBITDA) suggests that cash flows do mean revert over longer horizons, and that recent investment
spikes (change in CAPX) induce some shorter-term reversion, our key findings regarding relative valuation, investment, and new finance obtain regardless of whether
these controls are included.

B

Analyst Forecasts

In this section, we examine whether analysts accurately predict cash flow realizations
conditioning on our measures of industry valuation, financing, and investment. This
test helps us to address whether analysts forecast the cash flow declines we observe,
and in particular, whether they forecast the effect of increased competition on ex-post
outcomes. Under Hypothesis 1, we would expect that industry relative valuations
would be associated with positively biased analyst forecasts given H1, but only in
competitive industries when valuation uncertainty is high.
We use the methods outlined in Hong and Kubik (2003) to examine analyst
forecast optimism. We use I/B/E/S analyst forecast data from 1983 to 2005, and we
18

This result suggests that the technology boom was indeed an important example of a recent
boom and bust, but also that the sequence of events surrounding the technology boom are not new,
as other industries have befell similar fates throughout our sample period.

20

use the I/B/E/S summary database as we are only interested in examining whether
analysts are biased in aggregate. To generate our measure of forecast optimism, we
first define Fi,t as the consensus mean forecast of earnings per share one year before
firm i’s fiscal year end in year t, and Ai,t as the actual earnings per share ultimately
realized at year t’s fiscal year end. Pi,t denotes the share price at the time the forecast
is made. Analyst forecast optimism is then defined as follows:
Fi,t − Ai,t
Optimismi,t =
Pi,t

(11)

In Table VI, we explore whether ex-post analyst forecast optimism is related to
our ex-ante measures of industry booms. We present results for competitive and
concentrated industries, as well as subsamples limited to firms that also reside in
industries in the high growth tercile. All terciles are formed by sorting industries in
each year on the basis of the given characteristic.
[Insert Table VI here]
Table VI shows that forecasts are biased upward in the competitive high growth
tercile, but not in the concentrated high growth tercile. We find no evidence of an
analyst bias in the broader sample of competitive or concentrated industries.
We conclude that analysts likely anticipate the effects of industry valuation on
future earnings accurately on average in broader samples, but do not anticipate the
more extreme cash flow declines observed in high growth industries. These results
suggest that, like managers, analysts face similarly high information gathering costs
in competitive industries, and are more likely to make predictions based on aggregate
price signals, especially valuation uncertainty is high. The findings in the high growth
competitive subsample are consistent with Hypothesis 1.
These findings suggest that some of the predictable busts we observe in broader
industry subsamples might be consistent with alternative theories including rational risk-based theories. We explore this conjecture more in later sections and find
support. However, the results in more extreme subsamples (eg those in high growth
industries) are more consistent with Hypothesis 1.

V
A

Stock Returns and Industry Factors
Industry Competition and Stock Returns

We now consider the effect of competition on outcomes in the stock market. Table VII
displays the results of firm-level regressions of monthly abnormal returns on relative
21

valuation, relative investment, and new financing. As before, for each independent
variable, we separately examine its industry average and its firm-specific deviation
from its industry average.
[Insert Table VII here]
Panel A of Table VII shows that industry relative valuation, relative investment
and new financing are negatively related to future stock returns. The relative industry valuation coefficient is especially negative in the more extreme subsamples
including high growth industries, high valuation industries, and high market risk
industries. This suggests that booms and predictable busts are larger for these more
extreme industries, consistent with valuation uncertainty being higher in these industries. The relative industry investment and industry finance variables are more
uniformly negative across subsamples.
The highly significant and negative coefficients on the firm-level variables affirms
the findings of existing studies, and the role of our proxies as valid measures of firm
value, and suggest that firms have a strong tendency to revert back to the valuation
suggested by their industry characteristics. Unique to our study is the inclusion
of the industry-level variables, and our finding that they are especially relevant in
competitive industries.
Given our strong industry results, it is natural to ask about the role of industrial organization. Panels B and C display results for the most competitive and
most concentrated tercile industries, respectively. As in earlier sections, we use the
“fitted concentration measure,” which predicts an industry’s concentration from a
combination of public and private industry data.
Hypothesis 1 predicts that that abnormal stock returns will be negative in competitive industries following periods of high valuation and investment. In the broad
sample (first column), we find that industry new finance is more important in Panel
B for competitive industries than in concentrated industries in Panel C, consistent
with Hypothesis 1. This coefficient is negative and significant at the 1% level in Panel
B, and is not significant in Panel C. The difference in coefficients is also significant
in two of three specifications. These results are also economically meaningful. For
example, the industry new finance coefficients are roughly two to three times larger
for some specifications in Panel B than in Panel C. The relative industry valuation
and relative industry investment variables are not significantly different in this broad
sample (first column).

22

Because Hypothesis 1 predicts that these variables should matter more when
price uncertainty is high, we next examine the extreme subsamples in the last three
columns. In all three extreme subsamples, we continue to find that industry new
finance matters, but we also now find that relative industry valuation is significantly
different across competitive (Panel B) and concentrated industries (Panel C). The
sign of this variable even reverses in some concentrated industry subsamples, and it
remains consistently negative and significant in competitive industries. We conclude
that our proxies for industry booms play a considerably stronger role in predicting
industry busts in competitive industries as is predicted by Hypothesis 1, and that
this result is most noteworthy in extreme industries where it is likely that valuation
uncertainty is high .
Panel D shows that industry new financing and relative investment are also important for industries with declining concentration and in particular, in the extreme
industry groupings with declining concentration. These findings further support Hypothesis 1, as theories of industrial organization suggest that declining concentration
is one way to measure increasing competitiveness.
The significance of both firm-level and industry-level variables suggests that, as
in the case of operating cash flows, the most extreme firms also have more negative
outcomes. Inferences from the RRV models (not reported to conserve space) are
essentially identical to those presented.
Demarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006b) (DKK) (Hypothesis 2D) present a theory of investment and relative wealth concerns, and suggest that predictable bust
patterns should be largest in high systematic risk industries. The high market risk
tercile in the last column of Table VII tests this prediction . In Panel B, we find that
the industry relative investment variable in the high market risk tercile is indeed
more negative and significant than in other subsamples, providing some support for
Hypothesis 2D. However, this result is rather weak, as a test of significance of the
difference in the coefficients between Panel B and C reveals that this coefficient is
not significantly different. Moreover, we do not find a significant result in the high
market risk tercile for declining concentration industries in Panel D.

B

Return Comovement

In this section we test the key prediction of Hypothesis 1 that return comovement will
be higher in competitive industries, especially when price uncertainty and valuations
are high (Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2007), Roll (1988), and Durnev, Morck, and
Yeung (2004)). In particular, the same variables associated with predictable busts
23

in competitive industries should also be associated with greater return comovement
with aggregate prices such as industry and market wide returns.
In Table VIII, the dependent variable is the R-squared of a regression of each
firm’s daily stock returns in the given year on the value weighted market index
and the firm’s value weighted three-digit SIC industry excluding the firm itself. We
report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regression
models where t-statistics are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and
corrected for heteroskedasticity. One observation is one firm in one year. We examine
this regression for competitive and concentrated subsamples, and for subsamples that
further limit firms to those in the highest growth or highest valuation tercile.
[Insert Table VIII: Return Comovement in Competitive Industries]
The first column in Table VIII strongly supports the conclusion that firm returns comove more with aggregate prices in competitive industries when industry
valuations are higher. In particular, the coefficient on relative industry valuation is
significantly positive in competitive industries, and also significantly different from
the coefficient in concentrated industries, both at the one percent level. The fourth
column shows that this relationship is entirely absent in concentrated industries. A
comparison of column one to columns two and three also illustrate that this result
is larger in high relative valuation industries, as the high relative valuation coefficient increases from .08 in column one to nearly 0.20 for the high value competitive
industry subsample in column three. These findings strongly support Hypothesis
1. The absence of this finding in concentrated industries is consistent with firms in
concentrated industries facing lower information gathering costs due to the smaller
number of rival firms, and hence returns rely less on aggregate price changes.
Although the results for high industry valuation are strong, we find little if any
link between return comovement and relative industry investment and new financing
in either competitive or concentrated industries. These results are consistent with
high valuations being key to the predictable busts predicted by Hypothesis 1.

C

Changes in Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risk

Pastor and Veronesi (2005) posit that high valuations and subsequent busts are,
in part, due to levels of systematic risk that can increase over time. Our findings
regarding stock returns in the high market risk tercile in Table VII are consistent
with this prediction, but this evidence is indirect. The theory further suggests that as
technologies are adopted, systematic risk can rise, resulting in a negative return event
24

(a bust) that is associated with stocks being penalized for their rise in systematic risk
(Hypotheses 2B, 2C). We now test the more specific prediction that observed industry
busts are characterized by increased systematic risk and decreased idiosyncratic risk.
We first define a firm year as beginning on July first of year y, and ending on
June 30th of year t+1. Where d denotes one trading day in year y, we then regress
the daily stock returns associated with firm i in year y on the three Fama-French
factors plus momentum as follows (one regression per firm-year):
ri,y,d = αi,y + βi,y,1 M KTd + βi,y,2 HM Ld + βi,y,3 SM Bd + βi,y,4 U M Dd + i,y,d

(12)

We define a firm year’s idiosyncratic risk as the standard deviation of the residuals
from this regression. We then focus on the specific theoretical predictions regarding the market beta (βi,y,1 ) and idiosyncratic risk noted above by regressing annual
changes in risk on our industry and firm measures of relative valuation, investment
and financing.
To conserve space, and because our goal is to explain the predictable industry
returns on Table VII, we only present results for competitive industries (we only find
predictable industry returns for this subsample). For independent variables collected
using data from calendar year t, the ex-ante risk level is measured from July of year
t to June of year t+1, and the ex-post risk level is measured from July of year t+1
to June of year t+2.
This method permits us to understand the impact that future changes in risk
have on simultaneously measured stock returns, as the theories we examine predict that risk will change ex-post while busts are in progress. We also include a
lagged risk exposure term in each regression to control for the mean reverting nature of risk exposures. We also include year fixed effects to maintain our focus on
cross sectional risk changes. The inclusion of year fixed effects also controls for the
well-known increasing time trend associated with economy-wide risk (see Campbell,
Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001)).
[Insert Table IX: Changes in Risk in Competitive Industries]
Table IX displays the results for market risk (Panel A) and idiosyncratic risk
(Panel B) in competitive industries. The results in Panel A suggest that market risk
increases when relative valuations are high in competitive industries. This finding is
true both in the broad competitive sample (column 1) and in the extreme competitive
subsamples (columns 2 to 4). However, these results support not only Hypothesis
2C, but also Hypothesis 1 which predicts that firms in competitive industries will
25

experience higher comovement with aggregate price signals (ie, they will have higher
market and industry betas). These findings in Panel A are also consistent with
Hypothesis 2B and the real options model of Aguerrevere (2006).
Panel B helps to clarify the ambiguity associated with the results in Panel A.
The results in Panel B support the Pastor and Veronesi (2005) predictions in the
broad sample, and in the high systematic risk subsample, as idiosyncratic risk falls
while market risk increases. However, high industry valuation is not related to ex
post changes in idiosyncratic risk in the high valuation subsample. We thus conclude
that our results support Hypothesis 2C for broad industry groupings and for high
systematic risk industries, but not for high valuation industries where valuation
uncertainty is likely to be high. Results in these latter industries are most consistent
with Hypothesis 1, and hence consistent with our paper’s broader findings for these
extreme industries.
We do not find support for Hypothesis 2C for either the high industry investment
or the new industry finance coefficients. In particular, neither variable exhibits positive association with ex post market risk along with negative association with ex
post idiosyncratic risk.
Because a key focus of our study is industrial organization, we also examine
whether an additional risk factor based on industry competition, as suggested by Hou
and Robinson (2005) (Hypothesis 2A), can explain our results. We construct such
a factor by first sorting industries into terciles based on their ex-ante concentration
levels (based on sales Herfindahl indices as discussed earlier). This new factor is
then defined as the equal weighted return of firms in the highest concentration tercile
industries minus the equal weighted return of firms in the lowest concentration tercile
industries. After including a control for this competitive risk factor, we find that
our results are materially unchanged. We also test whether including concentration
as an additional independent variable in our return predictability regressions (i.e.
concentration might be more accurately measured as a characteristic) can explain
our results. Once again, our results are materially unchanged, and we conclude
that this form of competitive risk cannot explain our findings. Because our paper
conditions on concentration along with valuation and financing activity, and Hou
and Robinson (2005) condition on industry concentration alone, these findings are
not inconsistent. Rather, we conclude that our findings are distinct.
The evidence presented in this section suggests that risk based explanations, especially theory presented by Pastor and Veronesi (2005) and Aguerrevere (2006), can
explain part of the link between high industry valuations and subsequent return reversals in competitive industries. However , these theories are not able to explain our
26

findings in extreme industry groups where price uncertainty and relative valuations
are high.
Also, we conclude that some results remain unexplained. For example, because
industry new financing is associated with a modest rise in systematic risk and a
sharper rise in idiosyncratic risk, it appears less likely that current risk based explanations can explain the patterns observed. Possible explanations for our industry
financing results include some broader theories including herding based explanations
and behavioral explanations including market timing. Theoretical work has not yet
examined the role that industrial organization might play in these alternative settings. What is clear throughout our findings is that large differences in changes in
cash flow, risk, and returns exist based on product market competition.

D

Can Ex Post Changes in Risk Explain Our Results?

In this section, we examine if ex post risk changes might explain or reduce the ability
of relative industry valuation, investment, and high financing to predict ex post stock
returns in competitive industries.19 The idea we are examining is whether market
participants anticipate future risk changes. Ex post risk changes might be important
if market participants are reacting to anticipated risk changes rather than unexpected
contemporaneous risk changes consistent with Hypothesis 2C.
We test this hypothesis using a two-stage approach. First, for a return observation
in year t+1 (given that our right-hand-side variables are indexed as year t), we regress
our monthly firm-level style matched abnormal returns on changes in the four risk
factors (MKT, HML, SMB, UMD) and idiosyncratic risk from year t to year t+2. We
also include controls for the year t risk levels given that our previous section’s results
show that risk exposures are mean reverting. These regressions are non-predictive,
as we examine changes in risk across the same period in which returns are measured.
Second, we take the residuals of this first stage regression and regress them on our
usual set of relative valuation, relative investment, and relative financing variables.
Table X displays the results for the entire sample (Panel A) and for competitive
industries (Panel B), and for subsamples based on high growth, high relative valuation, and high market risk, within each panel. The coefficients in each specification
can be compared to analogous models based on standard abnormal returns in Panel
A and Panel B in Table VII. We omit concentrated industries to conserve space, and
because there is no return predictability to explain in Table VII for this subsample.
Pastor and Veronesi (2005) (Hypothesis 2C) predict that changes in risk will explain
19

We thank Lubos Pastor for this suggestion.

27

all or part of the return predictability we reported in these earlier tables, while Hypothesis 1 and other alternatives including Demarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006b)
(Hypothesis 2D) predict that changes in risk will explain little of this return predictability. Hypothesis 2D predicts that underperformance will be driven by relative
wealth concerns, not changes in risk attributes.
[ Insert Table X here ]
Comparing the coefficients and significance levels in Table X with those in Table
VII yields some support for the Pastor and Veronesi (2005) prediction that changes
in risk can explain some of the return predictability we find. In Panel A (the entire
sample), for example, we find that changes in risk greatly reduce the explanatory
power of the industry relative valuation variable. However, in Panel B (competitive
industries), changes in risk are far less influential. For example, the high relative
industry valuation coefficient barely declines from 0.029 to just 0.027 in the high
valuation subsample in Panel B. In the broad sample (Panel A), this coefficient’s
reduction is much more substantial from 0.015 to 0.006.
It is also noteworthy that changes in risk do have some impact in the high systematic risk subsample in Panel B. Here, the high relative industry valuation coefficient
reduces from 0.018 to 0.010. Hence, our findings support Hypothesis 1 in competitive industries where valuation uncertainty is high, and support Hypothesis 2C in
broader industry groupings, especially in samples where systematic risk (ex ante
market beta) is high.
Table X also shows that accounting for changes in risk does not explain the return predictability of other variables including industry relative investment. Because
Demarzo, Kaniel, and Kremer (2006b) (DKK) attribute lower returns in industries
with high investment to relative wealth concerns, we expect that changes in risk will
not be able to explain returns if DKK’s predictions hold. Our findings regarding the
relative industry investment variable thus are consistent with both Hypothesis 2D
and Hypothesis 1, which is also generally silent regarding whether or not changes in
ex post risk will explain stock returns cross sectionally. Regarding the industry new
finance term, we also continue to see unchanged strong negative coefficients when we
adjust returns for changes in risk.

E

Economic Magnitude of Stock Market Returns

We examine the economic magnitude of both firm and industry-level stock returns
in the year following our ex-ante measures of relative industry valuation, investment,
28

and financing.
[Insert Table XI here]
In Table XI, we calculate both firm- and industry-level abnormal returns for quintile portfolios based on ex-ante relative industry valuation, industry investment, and
industry new financing. At the industry level, abnormal returns are equal weighted
averages of firm abnormal returns in the given month over all firms residing in the
given three digit SIC code. A firm’s abnormal return is its raw monthly return minus
the monthly return of a portfolio matched on the basis of NYSE/AMEX breakpoints
of size, industry-adjusted book to market, and past year returns as in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997).
Table XI shows that the magnitude of stock price underperformance in competitive industries with high relative industry valuation is economically relevant,
especially within the high growth subsample where price uncertainty is high. For
example, at the industry level in Panel C, the highest quintile of relative industry
valuation underperforms the lowest quintile by over 3.3% percentage points annually. We find similar findings for industry relative investment and industry relative
finance. The highest quintile of high industry relative investment and financing shows
significant underperformance in portfolio abnormal returns.
Table XI shows that these results are even stronger at the firm level - analogous
to weighting one observation as one firm. The highest quintile of relative industry
valuation has abnormal performance that is roughly 4.2 percentage points (per year)
lower than the lowest quintile in Panel B, and 15 percentage points lower in Panel
C. More modest, but still large, magnitudes obtain for new industry financing and
investment. Although we do not report results for concentrated industries to conserve
space, we do not find economically meaningful return differences across quintiles in
concentrated industries, especially for industry level variables.

F

Additional Robustness Tests

We examine robustness to using abnormal returns based on an adjustment proposed
by Mitchell and Stafford (2000) (MS). We first define a firm year as July to June.
We then regress each firm year’s twelve monthly stock returns on four factors: the
three Fama-French factors plus momentum.20 From these time series regressions, we
extract a database of yearly firm-specific intercepts describing each firm’s abnormal
20

We thank Ken French for providing these factors on his website.

29

return in the given year. We define a firm’s “Mitchell/Stafford alpha” as its yearly
intercept minus the average yearly intercept of firms residing in the given firm’s
benchmark portfolio based on size, book to market, and past 12 month returns
(based on 125 portfolios as described earlier). This two-stage method ensures that
returns are sufficiently adjusted for known risk factors even when the relationship
between factor loadings and returns is non-linear. These tests reveal that our main
results are robust.
To further ensure robustness, we also repeat our tests using three regression methods: (1) OLS with year fixed effects and industry clustering adjustments, (2) OLS
with year fixed effects and both industry and year clustering adjustments, and (3) the
Fama-MacBeth method. Our inferences do not depend on the chosen specification.

VI

Conclusions

Our paper examines real and financial outcomes of industry booms and busts and
whether these outcomes are related to industry-level characteristics. We document
significant industry booms and subsequent busts in the economy. Our results show
how real and financial components impact industry business cycles. We find that
in competitive industries, increases in industry valuations above predicted levels are
followed by significantly lower operating cash flows and stock returns. Firms in
competitive industries, and in particular in competitive growth industries, have especially negative cash flows and negative abnormal stock returns following episodes
of high industry financing and high relative industry valuation. We also find that
analyst forecasts of future earnings per share are biased upwards in these industries. In contrast, in concentrated industries these relations are weak and generally
insignificant.
These findings are economically significant, both for operating cash flows and
stock returns. In competitive industries, a one standard deviation increase in industry financing is associated with a 5.5 percent ex-post decline in operating cash flows.
In the stock market, style and risk-adjusted abnormal stock returns for a competitive high growth industry portfolio in the highest quintile of ex-ante relative industry
valuation are over three percentage points lower than a similar portfolio in the lowest quintile using industry weighted returns. Using firm weighted returns, abnormal
stock returns in competitive industries are more than ten percentage points lower in
the high industry valuation quintile than in a similar portfolio in the lowest quintile.
Additional adjustments for contemporaneous changes in risk do explain some

30

of our findings, as predicted by recent theories of booms and busts. However, in
industries with the highest valuations, nearly all of the return predictability persists
after adjusting for these changes. Hence, change-in-risk-based explanations cannot
explain the extent of our findings in the most highly-valued competitive industries.
Our results are most consistent with managers, analysts, and investors relying on
common industry signals in competitive industries. The resulting lack of coordination and the externality of high investment and financing on all firms generates poor
ex post outcomes in these competitive industries. This effect is likely to be greatest if
industry participants fail to consider, or do not have incentives to consider, the effect
of competition when making investment and financing decisions. In contrast, in concentrated industries these relations are weak and generally insignificant, consistent
with market participants internalizing the effects of competition on industry-wide
prices, cash flows, and stock returns.

31

References
Aguerrevere, Felipe, 2006, Real options, product market competition and asset returns, Working
Paper, University of Calgary.
Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2000, The equity share in new issues and aggregate stock
returns, The Journal of Finance 55, 2219–2257.
Barberis, Nicholas, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Style investing, Journal of Financial Economics 68,
161–199.
, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2005, Comovement, Journal of Financial Economics 75, 283–317.
Beneish, MD, and Craig Nichols, 2008, Identifying overvalued equity, Cornell University and Indiana
University Working Paper.
Campbell, John, Martin Lettau, Burton Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual stocks
become more volatile? an empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, The Journal of Finance 56.
Carlson, Murray, Adlai Fisher, and Ron Giammarino, 2004, Corporate investment and asset price
dynamics: Implications for the cross-section of returns, The Journal of Finance 61, 171–194.
Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang, 2007, Price informativeness and investment sensitivity to
stock prices, Review of Financial Studies 20, 619–650.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual fund
performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, The Journal of Finance 52, 1035–1058.
Demarzo, Peter, Ron Kaniel, and Ilan Kremer, 2006a, Relative wealth concerns and financial bubbles, Duke University Working Paper.
, 2006b, Technological innovation and real investment booms and busts, Duke University
Working Paper.
Durnev, Art, Randall Morck, and Bernard Yeung, 2004, Value enhancing capital budgeting and
firm-specific stock return variation, The Journal of Finance 59, 65–105.
Grenadier, S. R., 2002, Option exercise games: An application to the equilibrium investment strategies of firms, Review of Financial Studies 15, 691–721.
Hennessy, Christopher, 2004, Tobins q, debt overhang, and investment, The Journal of Finance 59,
1717–1742.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and biased
earnings forecasts, The Journal of Finance 58, 313–351.
Hou, Kewei, and David Robinson, 2005, Industry concentration and average stock returns, The
Journal of Finance 61.
Kyle, Albert, and Wei Xiong, 2001, Contagion as a wealth effect, The Journal of Finance 56,
1401–40.
Lamont, Owen, 2000, Investment plans and stock returns, The Journal of Finance 55.
Mankiw, Gregory, and Michael Whinston, 1986, Free entry and social inefficiency, Rand Journal of
Economics 17, 48–58.
Martin, Perry, 1984, Scale economies, imperfect competition, and public policy, Journal of Industrial
Economics 32, 313–330.
Mitchell, Mark, and Erik Stafford, 2000, Managerial decisions and long-term stock-price performance, Journal of Business 73, 287–329.
Moulton, B, 1986, Random group effects and the precision of regression estimates, Journal of
Econometrics 32, 385–97.
Pastor, Lubos, and Pietro Veronesi, 2003, Stock valuation and learning about profitability, The
Journal of Finance 58, 1749–89.

32

, 2005, Technological revolutions and stock prices, CRSP Working Paper No. 606.
Petersen, Mitchell, 2005, Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches, 2005 Working Paper.
Polk, Chris, and Paola Sapienza, 2006, The stock market and corporate investment, Northwestern
University Working Paper.
Pritsker, Matthew, and Laura Kodres, 2002, A rational expectations model of financial contagion,
The Journal of Finance 57, 769–99.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David Robinson, and S Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and merger
activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561–603.
Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, and S Viswanathan, 2004, Market valuation and merger waves, The Journal of Finance 59, 2685–2718.
Roll, Richard, 1988, R2 , The Journal of Finance 43, 541–566.
Scharfstein, David, 1988, Product-market competition and managerial slack, RAND Journal of
Economics 19, 147–155.
, and Jeremy Stein, 1990, Herd behavior and investment, American Economic Review 80,
465–79.
Titman, Sheridan, K.C. John Wei, and Feixue Xie, 2004, Capital investments and stock returns,
University of Texas Working Paper.
Veldkamp, Laura, 2006, Information markets and the comovement of asset prices, Review of Economic Studies 73, 823–845.
Weizsacker, C. C., 1980, A welfare analysis of barriers to entry, Bell Journal of Economics 11,
399–420.
Welch, Ivo, 1992, Sequential sales, learning and cascades, The Journal of Finance 47, 695–732.

33

Table I: Examples of Industry Booms in Competitive Industries
Three
Digit
SIC Code

Industry Name

Decade/
Year

Weighted
Market to
Book

Average
Firm
Mkt Value

Weighted
Relative
Valuation

Relative
Valuation

CSTAT Concentration
(Herfindahl)

Fitted Concentration
(Herfindahl)

Competitive Industries

34

131
233
173
287
571

Oil and Gas Extraction
Woman’s Apparel
Electrical Work
Fertilizers and Agriculture Chemicals
Home Furnishing Stores

1970s
1979
1976
1978
1979
1975

2.72
1.18
1.61
2.97
1.01

362.0
51.4
110.1
244.1
31.6

71.0%
58.5%
53.4%
104.6%
242.7%

72.7%
76.5%
102.1%
114.5%
126.0%

0.13
0.05
0.15
0.16
0.16

0.18
0.18
0.19
0.19
0.18

514
385
233
731
483

Groceries - Wholesale
Ophthalmic Goods
Woman’s Apparel
Advertising
Radio and Television Broadcasting

1980s
1983
1984
1985
1982
1985

1.09
4.79
1.85
1.73
5.23

196.5
125.7
165.1
124.8
321.7

109.4%
155.6%
114.0%
144.7%
174.3%

128.3%
131.3%
132.0%
135.5%
185.0%

0.08
0.20
0.10
0.15
0.13

0.18
0.24
0.20
0.20
0.22

367
737
872
571
233
422
513

Semi-Conductors + Elec. Comp.
Business Services
Accounting + Bookkeeping Svs.
Home Furnishing Stores
Woman’s Apparel
Public Warehousing And Storage
Apparel - Wholesale

1990s
1999
1999
1998
1993
1990
1996
1992

11.00
18.77
10.63
6.68
2.26
4.40
19.17

5,079.7
2,502.3
325.8
636.5
1,862.9
323.6
22.0

88.8%
100.2%
138.2%
141.2%
136.8%
190.0%
212.6%

64.6%
82.0%
115.7%
124.6%
136.8%
176.4%
193.3%

0.04
0.04
0.17
0.09
0.07
0.18
0.23

0.18
0.13
0.22
0.16
0.16
0.20
0.21

596
122
835
153
783
245

Catalog and Mail Order Houses
Coal Mining
Child Day Care Services
Operative Builders
Motion Picture Theaters
Prefabricated Buildings

2000s
2004
2003
2004
2003
2005
2004

5.40
4.68
6.36
1.70
26.45
1.49

344.5
1,442.0
765.6
1,491.4
1,423.6
296.5

97.6%
76.5%
101.5%
96.8%
188.4%
140.4%

85.0%
89.7%
100.8%
120.5%
150.8%
174.2%

0.08
0.09
0.18
0.08
0.49
0.18

0.16
0.23
0.18
0.14
0.21
0.20

Explanation: This table lists the top five industries with the highest relative valuation (valuation less predicted valuation) in each decade for competitive industries. Competitive
industries are those in the lowest tercile of the fitted sales based HHI (Herfindahl index) in each year. We present each three digit SIC industry’s identifying information and the year
in which it’s relative valuation peaked. Weighted market to book equity is the industry’s value weighted average of firm market-to-book ratios. Average firm market values are
reported in millions. To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
log( M
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using
characteristics from year t and the above model estimated using the previous ten years. CSTAT concentration is the sales weighted Herfindahl index for each industry (based on
segment data when available) using COMPUSTAT data only. The fitted concentration index is based on three digit SIC codes and is the inferred level of industry concentration from
three databases: Department of Commerce manufacturing HHI data, Bureau of Labor Statistics employee data, and Compustat sales data. We make one deviation from selecting the
top five industries in each decade: we add three industries (two in the 1990s and one in 2000s) from the top ten that have a very large number of firms (we list them due to their
importance).

Table II: Examples of Industry Booms in Concentrated Industries
Three
Digit
SIC Code

Industry Name

Decade/
Year

Weighted
Market to
Book

Average
Firm
Mkt Value

Weighted
Relative
Valuation

Relative
Valuation

CSTAT Concentration
(Herfindahl)

Fitted Concentration
(Herfindahl)

Concentrated Industries

35

517
422
321
516
387

Petroleum Stations and Terminals
Public Warehousing And Storage
Flat Glass
Chemicals + Allied Products
Watches, Clocks, and Clockwork

1970s
1979
1979
1978
1979
1975

1.14
1.20
1.16
1.26
0.27

1,252.5
201.4
145.9
390.9
3.2

40.2%
115.1%
99.7%
102.6%
185.2%

45.2%
98.8%
105.1%
147.7%
185.2%

0.62
0.94
0.60
0.76
0.52

0.49
0.32
0.38
0.36
0.29

458
211
736
732
393

Airport Terminals
Tobacco Manufactures
Personnel Supply Services
Consumer Credit Reporting Agencies
Musical Instruments

1980s
1982
1986
1986
1985
1987

3.69
2.57
6.88
5.63
1.28

21.3
2,095.5
107.4
73.5
76.3

152.1%
144.1%
170.5%
160.6%
220.8%

138.2%
144.1%
179.0%
191.4%
220.8%

0.74
0.27
0.17
0.43
1.00

0.28
0.68
0.39
0.44
0.65

301
102
502
387
376

Tires And Inner Tubes
Copper Ores
Furniture And Home Furnishings
Watches, Clocks, and Clockwork
Guided Missiles And Space Vehicles

1990s
1992
1995
1993
1993
1995

3.93
6.83
16.17
6.88
2.93

3,794.6
6,274.7
33.2
12.2
10,252.5

121.3%
131.4%
165.0%
237.1%
188.0%

119.6%
124.4%
140.4%
237.1%
298.3%

0.68
0.18
0.46
0.49
0.27

0.90
0.38
0.33
0.50
0.56

301
422
784
376
332

Tires And Inner Tubes
Public Warehousing And Storage
Video Tape Rental
Guided Missiles And Space Vehicles
Iron and Steel Fasteners

2000s
2004
2002
2005
2001
2004

16.12
2.74
4.94
3.17
2.86

2,932.7
4,539.6
1,177.5
9,479.3
2,971.1

109.7%
125.3%
115.9%
153.1%
150.0%

100.3%
125.3%
132.4%
165.5%
175.4%

0.48
0.72
0.55
0.61
0.31

0.88
0.50
0.55
0.79
0.36

Explanation: This table lists the top five industries with the highest relative valuation (valuation less predicted valuation) in each decade for concentrated industries. Concentrated
industries are those in the highest tercile of the fitted sales based HHI (Herfindahl index) in each year. We present each three digit SIC industry’s identifying information and the year
in which it’s relative valuation peaked. Weighted market to book equity is the industry’s value weighted average of firm market-to-book ratios. Average firm market values are
reported in millions. To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using
characteristics from year t and the above model estimated using the previous ten years. CSTAT concentration is the sales weighted Herfindahl index for each industry (based on
segment data when available) using COMPUSTAT data only. The fitted concentration index is based on three digit SIC codes and is the inferred level of industry concentration from
three databases: Department of Commerce manufacturing HHI data, Bureau of Labor Statistics employee data, and Compustat sales data.

Table III: Summary statistics
Standard
Variable

Mean

Deviation

Number of
Minimum

Maximum

Observations

Panel A: Entire Sample
Industry Relative Valuation

-0.022

0.239

-1.27

1.53

104,024

Industry New Financing

0.021

0.041

-.408

.638

104,024

Industry Relative Investment

-0.018

0.069

-.598

1.54

104,024

Firm Relative Valuation

-0.000

0.466

-3.21

3.31

104,024

Firm New Financing

0.012

0.137

-.849

1.46

104,024

Firm Relative Investment

-0.000

0.301

-2.25

5.24

104,024

Operating Cash Flow Change

-.008

.116

-1.45

1.59

97,780

Abnormal Return

0.001

0.157

-1.192

9.24

1,077,793

Panel B: Competitive Industries
Industry Relative Valuation

0.016

0.199

-1.03

1.03

48,558

Industry New Financing

0.024

0.040

-0.188

0.586

48,558

Industry Relative Investment

-0.027

0.072

-0.363

0.690

48,558

Firm Relative Valuation

-0.001

0.506

-3.211

3.310

48,558

Firm New Financing

0.023

0.166

-0.849

1.462

48,558

Firm Relative Investment

0.000

0.357

-2.249

5.246

48,558

Operating Cash Flow Change

-0.011

0.143

-1.447

1.591

45,119

Abnormal Return

0.002

0.176

-1.192

9.25

575,863

Panel C: Concentrated Industries
Industry Relative Valuation

0.023

0.199

-1.27

1.20

Industry New Financing

0.016

0.044

-0.41

0.64

17,163
17,163

Industry Relative Investment

-0.006

0.066

-0.57

1.54

17,163

Firm Relative Valuation

-0.002

0.427

-2.13

2.70

17,163

Firm New Financing

0.004

0.110

-0.727

1.37

17,163

Firm Relative Investment

0.000

0.235

-1.60

3.85

17,163

Operating Cash Flow Change

-0.009

0.088

-1.03

1.17

16,192

Abnormal Return

-0.000

0.130

-0.954

4.81

135,447

Explanation: The table displays summary statistics for the entire sample (Panel A), and for subgroupings based
on the level of ex-ante fitted concentration (Panels B and C). The fitted concentration index is based on three digit
SIC codes and is the inferred level of industry concentration from three databases: Department of Commerce
manufacturing HHI data, Bureau of Labor Statistics employee data, and Compustat sales data. Competitive and
concentrated industries are those in the lowest and highest tercile based on this index. To compute relative
valuation, we first fit the following model based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a
year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s
relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using characteristics from year t and the above
model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous
fashion, except we also include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the
sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities, industry variables are
the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw
quantities less the industry component. Operating cash flow is defined as operating income (COMPUSTAT annual
item 13) divided by assets (COMPUSTAT annual item 6). A firm’s abnormal return is its raw monthly return
minus the monthly return of a portfolio matched on the basis of NYSE/AMEX breakpoints of size,
industry-adjusted book to market, and past year returns as in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997).

36

Table IV: Regressions predicting Firm-level Operating Cash Flow Changes

Variable

All
Industries
1 Year

All
Industries
2 Years

Panel A: Sample-wide results
Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Change in EBITDA
Change in CAPX
Observations

0.0010 (0.140)
0.0034 (2.480)b
–0.0394 (–2.900)a
–0.0027 (–1.070)
–0.0673 (–3.210)a
–0.0287 (–2.670)a
0.0012 (0.340)
–0.0067 (–2.320)b
83,974
Panel B: Competitive Industries

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Change in EBITDA
Change in CAPX
Observations

–0.0048 (–0.430)
0.0057 (2.790)a,e
–0.0620 (–2.740)a
–0.0074 (–2.320)b,d
–0.0405 (–1.180)
–0.0352 (–2.560)b
0.0027 (0.440)
–0.0093 (–1.780)c
44,841
Panel C: Concentrated Industries

–0.0269 (–3.130)a
–0.0065 (–3.750)a
–0.0464 (–2.070)b
–0.0045 (–1.340)
–0.0357 (–1.390)
0.0126 (1.030)
–0.0081 (–1.920)c
0.0009 (0.290)
75,653
–0.0509 (–3.720)a,d
–0.0038 (–1.420)d
–0.0514 (–1.480)
–0.0108 (–2.550)b,e
0.0183 (0.430)
0.0130 (0.830)
–0.0111 (–1.400)
0.0057 (0.980)
39,624

Industry Relative Valuation
0.0123 (2.590)a
–0.0023 (–0.370)d
e
Firm Relative Valuation
0.0003 (0.160)
–0.0112 (–4.320)a,d
Industry Relative Investment
–0.0122 (–0.860)
–0.0365 (–1.870)c
Firm Relative Investment
0.0103 (1.720)c,d
0.0116 (1.580)e
Industry New Finance
–0.0418 (–1.530)
–0.0326 (–0.870)
Firm New Finance
–0.0079 (–0.510)
0.0202 (1.090)
Change in EBITDA
0.0023 (0.680)
–0.0031 (–0.620)
Change in CAPX
–0.0054 (–1.650)c
–0.0004 (–0.090)
Observations
16,169
14,867
Panel D: Industries with Declining Concentration
Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Change in EBITDA
Change in CAPX
Observations

–0.0236 (–2.850)a,d
0.0045 (2.310)b
–0.0596 (–3.180)a,e
–0.0032 (–0.770)
–0.0852 (–3.120)a,f
–0.0299 (–1.700)c
0.0049 (1.280)
–0.0086 (–2.260)b
36,601

–0.0534 (–6.060)a,d
–0.0066 (–2.590)a
–0.0635 (–2.060)b,f
–0.0004 (–0.070)
–0.0181 (–0.530)
0.0200 (1.080)
–0.0038 (–0.900)
–0.0026 (–0.650)
31,328

Explanation: We report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regressions.
t-statistics are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and are corrected for heteroskedasticity. One
observation is one firm in one year, and the dependent variable is the firm’s change in operating cash flow
(operating income / assets) from year t to year t+1. To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model
based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s
relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using characteristics from year t and the above
model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous
fashion, except we also include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the
sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities, industry variables are
the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw
quantities less the industry component. Competitive and concentrated industries are those in the lowest and
highest tercile based on industry concentration (HHI). Change in EBITDA and CAPX are the past year changes in
earnings before interest and taxes plus depreciation and capital expenditures, winsorized at the 1/99% level. * a, b,
and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d, e, and f denote
significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries in Panels B, C, and
decreasing versus increasing concentration in Panel D) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

37

Table V: Regressions predicting Firm-level Operating Cash Flow Changes in High
Growth Industries

Variable

All
Industries
1 Year

All
Industries
2 Years

Panel A: High Growth Industries
Industry Relative Valuation
–0.0214 (–1.930)c
–0.0568 (–4.250)a
b
Firm Relative Valuation
0.0054 (2.320)
–0.0032 (–1.100)
Industry Relative Investment
–0.0590 (–2.670)a
–0.0622 (–1.820)c
Firm Relative Investment
–0.0073 (–1.870)c
–0.0132 (–2.660)a
Industry New Finance
–0.0972 (–2.620)a
–0.0341 (–0.740)
Firm New Finance
–0.0279 (–1.800)c
0.0185 (1.060)
Change in EBITDA
0.0080 (1.190)
–0.0097 (–1.320)
Change in CAPX
–0.0122 (–1.930)c
–0.0003 (–0.040)
Observations
33,217
30,939
Panel B: Competitive High Growth Industries
Industry Relative Valuation
–0.0456 (–2.450)b,d
–0.1124 (–4.820)a,d
Firm Relative Valuation
0.0084 (2.660)a,e
0.0001 (0.040)d
Industry Relative Investment
–0.1023 (–3.030)a
–0.0924 (–1.950)c
Firm Relative Investment
–0.0126 (–2.620)a
–0.0215 (–3.510)a,f
Industry New Finance
–0.0854 (–1.270)
0.0193 (0.240)
Firm New Finance
–0.0318 (–1.730)c
0.0175 (0.840)
Change in EBITDA
0.0128 (1.250)
–0.0136 (–1.180)
Change in CAPX
–0.0156 (–1.550)
–0.0014 (–0.120)
Observations
19,888
18,372
Panel C: Concentrated High Growth Industries
Industry Relative Valuation
0.0114 (1.310)d
0.0001 (0.010)d
Firm Relative Valuation
0.0005 (0.130)e
–0.0164 (–3.370)a,d
Industry Relative Investment
–0.0101 (–0.430)
–0.0262 (–0.780)
Firm Relative Investment
0.0035 (0.360)
0.0070 (0.620)f
Industry New Finance
–0.0905 (–1.490)
–0.0790 (–0.980)
Firm New Finance
0.0287 (1.190)
0.0443 (1.630)
Change in EBITDA
0.0111 (1.540)
0.0064 (0.770)
Change in CAPX
–0.0102 (–1.370)
–0.0001 (–0.010)
Observations
4,968
4,683
Panel D: High Growth Industries with Declining Concentration
Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Change in EBITDA
Change in CAPX
Observations

–0.0457 (–3.360)a
0.0052 (1.740)c
–0.0632 (–2.320)b
–0.0080 (–1.310)
–0.1325 (–3.150)a,e
–0.0299 (–1.160)
0.0104 (1.420)
–0.0133 (–1.690)c
16,348

–0.0716 (–5.260)a,f
–0.0044 (–1.100)
–0.0706 (–1.820)c
–0.0082 (–1.260)
–0.0546 (–1.030)e
0.0232 (0.950)
–0.0017 (–0.220)
–0.0045 (–0.560)
15,138

Explanation: We report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regressions.
t-statistics are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and are corrected for heteroskedasticity. One
observation is one firm in one year, and the dependent variable is the firm’s change in operating cash flow
(operating income / assets) from year t to year t+1. We restrict the sample to firms in high growth industries,
which are those in the lowest tercile based on industry-average book to market ratios (which are first winsorized at
the 1/99% level prior to taking industry averages). To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model
based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
log( M
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s
relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using characteristics from year t and the above
model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous
fashion, except we also include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the
sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities, industry variables are
the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw
quantities less the industry component. Competitive and concentrated industries are those in the lowest and
highest tercile based on industry concentration (HHI). Change in EBITDA and CAPX are the past year changes in
earnings before interest and taxes plus depreciation and capital expenditures, winsorized at the 1/99% level. * a, b,
and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d, e, and f denote
significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries in Panels B, C, and
decreasing versus increasing concentration in Panel D) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

38

Table VI: Regressions predicting analyst forecast optimism

Variable

All
Competitive
Industries

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Log M/B Ratio
Log Market Value
Lagged Forecast Error
Lagged Forecast Error N/A
Observations

–0.0070 (–0.990)
–0.0006 (–0.290)f
–0.0106 (–0.700)
0.0059 (2.640)a
0.0149 (0.610)
0.0098 (1.950)c,e
0.0015 (0.940)f
–0.0062 (–14.000)a
0.2674 (13.330)a,e
–0.0008 (–0.340)
23,945

Competitive
Growth
Industries

All
Concentrated
Industries

Concentrated
Growth
Industries

Panel A: Analyst Forecast Optimism

39

0.0330 (2.850)a
0.0019 (0.700)
–0.0099 (–0.530)
0.0046 (1.450)
0.0473 (1.270)
0.0098 (1.650)c
0.0019 (0.790)
–0.0059 (–9.780)a,f
0.2835 (8.950)a,e
0.0027 (0.760)
9,548

–0.0051 (–0.510)
0.0082 (1.730)c,f
0.0159 (0.590)
0.0098 (0.930)
0.0558 (1.680)c
0.0515 (2.670)a,e
0.0081 (2.620)a,f
–0.0057 (–7.790)a
0.3713 (8.460)a,e
0.0039 (0.580)
4,129

0.0154 (0.970)
0.0009 (0.110)
0.0016 (0.050)
–0.0059 (–0.410)
0.1025 (1.940)c
0.0394 (1.060)
0.0068 (1.170)
–0.0026 (–1.430)f
0.5116 (5.010)a,e
–0.0044 (–0.310)
813

Explanation: Regressions examine the effect of relative firm- and industry-level valuation, investment and new finance on analyst forecast optimism. We report regression coefficients
and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regression models. t-statistics are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and corrected for heteroskedasticity. One observation is
one firm in one year, and the dependent variable is the analyst forecast optimism. Analyst forecast optimism is defined as the analyst estimate of one year EPS minus the actual
outcome of EPS, scaled by price at the time of the estimate (all measures of EPS are adjusted for splits). To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model based on
Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using
characteristics from year t and the above model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous fashion, except we also
include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities,
industry variables are the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw quantities less the industry component.
Competitive and concentrated industries are those in the lowest and highest tercile based on industry concentration (HHI). Growth industries are those in the lowest tercile based on
industry-average book to market ratios (which are first winsorized at the 1/99% level prior to taking industry averages). * a, b, and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d, e, and f denote significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table VII: Regressions predicting monthly firm-level stock returns
Variable

All
Industries

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

–0.003 (–1.28)
–0.002 (–5.59)a
–0.021 (–3.52)a
–0.003 (–3.93)a
–0.030 (–4.13)a
–0.018 (–6.95)a
1,058,751

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

–0.004 (–1.01)
–0.002 (–4.55)a
–0.024 (–2.81)a
–0.003 (–3.23)a
–0.046 (–3.86)a,f
–0.017 (–5.64)a
575,863

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

0.001 (0.43)
–0.002 (–1.67)c
–0.014 (–1.65)c
–0.004 (–2.00)b
–0.016 (–1.12)f
–0.024 (–4.31)a
135,447

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

–0.007 (–1.81)c
–0.003 (–4.02)a
–0.019 (–1.90)c
–0.002 (–1.45)
–0.032 (–2.94)a
–0.015 (–3.31)a,f
367,279

Growth
Industries
Only

High Value
Industries
Only

High Mkt. Risk
Industries
Only

Panel A: All Firms
–0.013 (–3.58)a
–0.015 (–3.10)a
–0.002 (–3.68)a
–0.001 (–1.92)c
–0.016 (–2.07)b
–0.021 (–1.86)c
–0.003 (–2.66)a
–0.003 (–2.04)b
–0.034 (–2.96)a
–0.034 (–3.15)a
–0.014 (–4.15)a
–0.021 (–5.09)a
390,550
324,813
Panel B: Competitive Industries Only
–0.020 (–3.76)a,d
–0.029 (–3.90)a,d
–0.003 (–3.48)a,f
–0.002 (–1.81)c
–0.013 (–1.18)
–0.019 (–1.32)
–0.003 (–2.24)b,e
–0.002 (–1.20)
–0.067 (–3.77)a,d
–0.054 (–3.09)a,f
–0.014 (–3.66)a
–0.021 (–4.55)a
249,874
181,107
Panel C: Concentrated Industries Only

40

0.003 (0.68)d
0.010 (1.37)d
0.000 (0.27)f
–0.001 (–0.34)
0.007 (0.52)
–0.017 (–1.22)
–0.008 (–3.40)a,e
–0.005 (–1.41)
0.009 (0.49)d
0.001 (0.04)f
–0.014 (–2.31)b
–0.025 (–3.26)a
40,827
36,577
Panel D: Declining Concentration Industries Only)
–0.018 (–2.66)a
–0.003 (–3.00)a
–0.008 (–0.62)
–0.003 (–1.73)c
–0.043 (–2.53)b
–0.011 (–1.90)c,f
169,804

–0.017 (–2.28)b,e
–0.002 (–2.38)b,f
–0.032 (–2.10)b,e
–0.002 (–1.63)
–0.058 (–3.52)a,f
–0.021 (–4.06)a,e
131,061

–0.011 (–3.17)a
–0.002 (–3.60)a
–0.026 (–3.16)a
–0.003 (–3.20)a
–0.053 (–3.85)a
–0.018 (–5.27)a
423,461
–0.018 (–3.51)a,d
–0.003 (–3.78)a,e
–0.024 (–2.26)b
–0.003 (–2.35)b,f
–0.087 (–4.33)a,d
–0.017 (–4.46)a
267,305
0.005 (1.09)d
0.000 (0.35)e
–0.012 (–0.87)
–0.008 (–3.27)a,f
–0.002 (–0.09)d
–0.023 (–3.08)a
57,822
–0.018 (–2.88)a
–0.002 (–2.25)b
–0.014 (–1.08)
–0.003 (–2.10)b
–0.050 (–2.60)a
–0.013 (–2.20)b,e
172,857

Explanation: We report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regressions. t-statistics are from standard errors that are adjusted for clustering over
time and industry, and are corrected for heteroskedasticity. One observation is one firm in one month, and the dependent variable is the firm’s monthly abnormal stock return: equal to
a firm’s raw monthly return less that of a portfolio matched on the basis of NYSE/AMEX breakpoints of size, industry-adjusted book to market, and past year returns as in Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). For monthly abnormal return observations between July of year t+1 and June of year t+2, independent variables are constructed using
accounting data with fiscal years ending in year t. To compute relative valuation, we first fit the following model based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a
year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using
characteristics from year t and the above model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous fashion, except we also
include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities,
industry variables are the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw quantities less the industry component.
Competitive and concentrated industries are those in the lowest and highest tercile based on industry concentration (HHI). The growth, high valuation, and high market risk industry
groupings are based on terciles constructed from industry-average book to market ratios, relative industry valuation, and the industry’s average market beta in the past year. * a, b,
and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d, e, and f denote significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus
concentrated industries in Panels B, C, and decreasing versus increasing concentration in Panel D) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table VIII: Regressions predicting firm R-squared (comovement with market and industry)

Variable

All
Competitive
Industries

Competitive
Growth
Industries

Competitive
High Val.
Industries

All
Concentrated
Industries

Concentrated
Growth
Industries

Concentrated
High Val.
Industries

0.0044 (0.230)d
0.0077 (1.140)d
–0.0105 (–0.200)
–0.0157 (–2.720)a
–0.0322 (–0.460)
0.0192 (0.880)e
3,201

0.0325 (1.430)d
0.0282 (3.970)a
–0.0166 (–0.320)
–0.0141 (–1.700)c
–0.0468 (–0.690)
0.0128 (0.520)
3,201

Panel A: R-squared in Market+Industry Return Model
Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

(6.430)a,d

0.0858
0.0312 (14.850)a,e
0.0244 (0.980)
–0.0067 (–4.480)a
0.0889 (2.510)b,f
–0.0200 (–3.690)a,d
52,054

0.1185 (4.560)a,d
0.0384 (10.330)a,d
0.0073 (0.240)
–0.0066 (–2.820)a
–0.0123 (–0.220)
–0.0325 (–5.270)a,e
21,290

0.1958 (4.680)a,d
0.0381 (9.060)a
0.0680 (1.450)
–0.0042 (–1.720)c
0.0627 (0.810)
–0.0104 (–1.400)
16,209

0.0088 (0.670)d
0.0200 (5.650)a,e
–0.0123 (–0.510)
–0.0060 (–1.340)
–0.0319 (–0.750)f
0.0166 (1.430)d
11,885

41

Explanation: Regressions examine the effect of relative firm- and industry-level valuation, investment and new finance on firm comovement with the market and with its industry.
The dependent variable is the R-squared of a regression of each firm’s daily stock returns in the given calendar year on the value weighted market index and the firm’s value weighted
three-digit SIC industry excluding the firm itself. We report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regression models. t-statistics are from standard
errors that are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and corrected for heteroskedasticity. One observation is one firm in one year. To compute relative valuation, we first fit
the following model based on Pastor and Veronesi (2003) (i denotes a firm and t denotes a year):
log( M
) = a + bAGEi,t + cDDi,t + dLEVi,t + elog(SIZEi,t ) + f V OLPi,t + gROEi,t
B i,t
We fit this model once for each industry in each year using firm observations from year t − 10 to t − 1. A firm’s relative valuation is its log(M/B) in year t less the fitted value using
characteristics from year t and the above model estimated using the previous ten years. A firm’s relative industry investment is computed in an analogous fashion, except we also
include the firm’s lagged Tobin’s Q as an independent variable. A firm’s new finance is the sum of its net debt and equity issuing activity, divided by its assets. For all three quantities,
industry variables are the average of the given quantity for all firms in a SIC-3 industry in year t, and firm variables are set equal to raw quantities less the industry component.
Competitive and concentrated industries are those in the lowest and highest tercile based on industry concentration (HHI). Growth industries are those in the lowest tercile based on
industry-average book to market ratios (which are first winsorized at the 1/99% level prior to taking industry averages). * a, b, and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d, e, and f denote significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table IX: Regressions predicting annual changes in risk

Variable

All
Competitive
Industries

Competitive
Growth
Industries
Only

Competitive
High Value
Industries
Only

Competitive
High Mkt. Risk
Industries
Only

Panel A: Changes in Market Beta

42

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Lagged Market Beta
Observations

0.3216 (5.060)a,d
0.2984 (2.800)a
0.0785 (7.610)a,f
0.0993 (6.320)a
–0.5388 (–4.600)a,d
–0.3769 (–2.550)b
–0.0350 (–3.010)a
–0.0427 (–2.790)a
0.2747 (1.780)c
–0.0496 (–0.230)
0.2692 (7.330)a
0.2278 (5.130)a
–0.5930 (–55.280)a
–0.5930 (–39.680)a
48,878
21,594
Panel B: Changes in Idiosyncratic Risk

0.5247 (2.550)b
0.1094 (6.580)a,f
–0.4075 (–2.070)b
–0.0280 (–1.660)c
0.2268 (0.860)
0.3277 (6.550)a
–0.5714 (–34.440)a
15,461

0.2911 (2.840)a,f
0.1111 (7.390)a
–0.4592 (–3.070)a
–0.0317 (–2.050)b
–0.3059 (–1.270)
0.2129 (4.500)a
–0.5870 (–40.940)a
23,000

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Lagged Idio. Risk
Observations

–0.0052 (–5.240)a
–0.0016 (–5.360)a
0.0015 (0.550)
0.0005 (1.460)
0.0118 (3.270)a
0.0086 (8.560)a
–0.1944 (–9.550)a
48,878

–0.0005 (–0.270)
–0.0016 (–4.400)a
0.0063 (1.800)c
0.0009 (1.550)
0.0182 (3.100)a,f
0.0076 (6.620)a
–0.2388 (–7.740)a
15,461

–0.0052 (–3.470)a
–0.0019 (–4.630)a
0.0016 (0.400)
0.0008 (1.750)c
0.0106 (1.750)c
0.0092 (7.600)a
–0.2524 (–7.910)a
23,000

–0.0038 (–2.580)a
–0.0020 (–4.510)a,e
0.0028 (0.740)
0.0007 (1.520)
0.0109 (1.860)c
0.0088 (7.130)a
–0.2319 (–6.870)a
21,594

Explanation: Regressions examine the effect of relative firm- and industry-level valuation, investment and new financing on yearly changes in risk. We report regression coefficients
t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regressions. t-statistics are from standard errors that are adjusted for clustering over time and industry, and are corrected for
heteroskedasticity. Results in all three panels of this table are restricted to various industry groupings as noted in the column headers. One observation is one firm in one year. For
independent variables collected using data from calendar year t, the dependent variable is the change in risk (ex-post risk minus ex-ante risk). Ex-ante risk is measured using one year
of daily firm level data from July of year t to June of year t+1, and ex-post risk is measured using one year of daily data from July of year t+1 to June of year t+2. Ex-ante and
ex-post risk levels are both estimated using the following model (d denotes one trading day in year y and i denotes a firm):
ri,y,d = αi,y + βi,y,1 M KTd + βi,y,2 HM Ld + βi,y,3 SM Bd + βi,y,4 U M Dd + i,y,d
The dependent variable in Panel A is based on the market beta (βi,y,1 ), and is the ex-post exposure less the ex-ante exposure. Idiosyncratic risk in Panel B is the ex-post standard
deviation of the residuals from the above model less the ex-ante standard deviation. The explanatory variables are discussed in Table III. We only examine market betas and
idiosyncratic risk because the theoretical predictions we examine only relate to these items. * a, b, and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively. d, e, and f denote significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table X: Regressions predicting change-in-risk adjusted monthly firm-level stock returns

Variable

All
Industries

Growth
Industries
Only

High Value
Industries
Only

High Mkt. Risk
Industries
Only

Panel A: All Firms
(2.00)b

43

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

0.004
–0.002 (–4.50)a
–0.018 (–3.17)a
–0.003 (–3.88)a
–0.023 (–3.48)a
–0.018 (–6.88)a
1,005,385

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance
Observations

–0.001 (–0.40)
–0.003 (–5.49)a
–0.023 (–2.74)a
–0.003 (–3.31)a
–0.041 (–3.57)a
–0.019 (–5.68)a
536,315

–0.002 (–0.54)
–0.006 (–1.34)
–0.002 (–3.37)a
–0.001 (–1.47)
–0.010 (–1.45)
–0.024 (–2.10)b
–0.003 (–3.03)a
–0.003 (–2.21)b
–0.026 (–2.50)b
–0.021 (–2.10)b
a
–0.016 (–4.41)
–0.021 (–4.96)a
398,424
307,821
Panel B: Competitive Industries Only
–0.015 (–2.77)a,d
–0.003 (–4.13)a,f
–0.012 (–1.09)f
–0.003 (–2.56)b,f
–0.054 (–3.19)a,e
–0.016 (–3.86)a
231,069

–0.027 (–3.71)a,d
–0.002 (–2.34)b
–0.022 (–1.50)
–0.002 (–1.34)
–0.047 (–2.80)a,f
–0.023 (–4.72)a
167,347

0.000 (–0.08)
–0.002 (–2.74)a
–0.027 (–3.32)a
–0.003 (–3.52)a
–0.036 (–2.97)a
–0.020 (–5.41)a
403,585
–0.010 (–1.86)c
–0.003 (–4.06)a,f
–0.031 (–2.69)a
–0.003 (–2.55)b
–0.067 (–3.72)a,e
–0.020 (–4.74)a
249,803

Explanation: Regressions examine the effect of relative firm- and industry-level valuation, investment and new finance on changes-in-risk-adjusted firm-level monthly abnormal stock
returns. We report regression coefficients and t-statistics (in parentheses) for panel data regressions. t-statistics are from standard errors that are adjusted for clustering over time and
industry, and are corrected for heteroskedasticity. One observation is one firm in one month, and the dependent variable is the firm’s changes-in-risk-adjusted monthly abnormal
return. To compute this variable, we start with the standard abnormal return, which is a firm’s raw monthly return minus the monthly return of a portfolio matched on the basis of
NYSE/AMEX breakpoints of size, industry-adjusted book to market, and past year returns as in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). To adjust for changes in risk, we use
a two-step procedure. Frist, we regress our monthly firm-level style matched abnormal returns on changes in the four risk factors (MKT, HML, SMB, UMD) and idiosyncratic risk
from year t to year t+2. We also include controls for the year t risk levels given that our previous section’s results show that risk exposures are mean reverting. These regressions are
non-predictive, as we examine changes in risk across the same period in which returns are measured. Second, we take the residuals of this first stage regression and regress them on our
usual set of relative valuation, relative investment, and relative financing variables. * a, b, and c denote significant differences from zero at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. d,
e, and f denote significant differences from opposing tercile (competitive versus concentrated industries) at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table XI: Average quintile portfolio abnormal returns
Variable

1

2

Firm Level Returns
3
4

5

1

2

Industry Level Returns
3
4

5

Panel A: Sample-wide results

44

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance

0.467
3.164
3.287
2.562
0.873
3.305

2.245
1.386
1.193
1.880
0.761
2.903

2.161
0.578
0.738
1.398
3.610
2.635

1.262
–2.228
0.439
–0.728
1.238
–2.627
0.125
–1.152
0.554
–2.526
0.439
–4.449
Panel B: Competitive Industries

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance

0.079
4.259
4.827
3.128
1.134
3.661

4.730
2.887
1.751
2.692
1.438
4.225

4.064
1.143
1.686
2.741
6.122
4.450
Panel C:

Industry Relative Valuation
Firm Relative Valuation
Industry Relative Investment
Firm Relative Investment
Industry New Finance
Firm New Finance

6.493
4.595
6.679
3.739
2.455
4.351

6.809
3.707
–1.926
1.703
0.793
3.636

3.012
2.320
6.188
3.427
7.590
5.051

–0.274

–1.041

–0.897

–0.135

–1.339

–0.093

–0.421

–0.630

–0.737

–1.812

–1.123

–0.308

0.239

–0.517

–1.984

2.586
0.995
2.310
0.743
1.349
1.336
Competitive

–4.293
–1.001
–0.277
–4.331
–0.834
–0.306
–3.400
–0.252
–4.293
Growth Industries

–0.359

–0.671

0.187

–2.240

0.734

–0.649

–0.384

–2.857

0.620

–0.205

–0.306

–3.173

–2.073
1.286
–0.366
1.001
2.048
1.862

–8.581
–1.142
–1.076
0.736
–8.690
–3.783

0.154

1.255

–0.055

–4.158

–3.495

–1.317

–1.321

1.374

–1.682

–3.099

–1.129

–0.545

0.484

0.644

–5.514

Explanation: The table presents average risk-adjusted stock returns for various portfolios based on quintiles of key boom and bust variables noted in the first column. Reported
abnormal returns are monthly returns (multiplied by twelve for convenience) reported as percentages. Results are based on the entire sample (1972 to 2004), and we report both
firm-level (one observation is one firm) and industry level (one observation is one industry) average returns. Within each portfolio, one observation is one firm in one month. A firm’s
abnormal return is its raw monthly return minus the monthly return of a portfolio matched on the basis of NYSE/AMEX breakpoints of size, industry-adjusted book to market, and
past year returns as in Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). For monthly abnormal return observations between July of year t+1 and June of year t+2, portfolio
assignments are constructed using accounting data with fiscal years ending in year t. We form quintile portfolios based on industry averages of observed firm-specific relative valuation,
relative investment, and new financing. Panel A includes all industries, Panel B includes competitive industries only (lowest fitted HHI tercile), Panel C includes competitive growth
industries only (lowest fitted HHI tercile and lowest B/M ratio tercile).

