                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE WELFARE IMPACT OF REDUCING CHOICE IN MEDICARE PART D:
               A COMPARISON OF TWO REGULATION STRATEGIES

                                        Claudio Lucarelli
                                         Jeffrey Prince
                                         Kosali Simon

                                       Working Paper 14296
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14296


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2008




This paper previously circulated under the title "Measuring Welfare and the Effects of Regulation
in a Government-Created Market: The Case of Medicare Part D Plans." We would like to thank Mike
Baye , Leemore Dafny, Gautam Gowrisankaran, Brian Januzik, Jonathan Ketcham, Amanda Kowalski,
Dan Miller, Chris Roebuck, Minjae Song and seminar participants at the Federal Trade Commission,
the 7th Annual International Industrial Organization Conference, and the 3rd Biennial Conference
of the American Society of Health Economists (ASHEcon) for many helpful comments. We also thank
the Cornell University Consumer Pharmaceutical Policy Center, funded by an unrestricted educational
grant from the Merck Company Foundation to Cornell University. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Claudio Lucarelli, Jeffrey Prince, and Kosali Simon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Impact of Reducing Choice in Medicare Part D: A Comparison of Two Regulation
Strategies
Claudio Lucarelli, Jeffrey Prince, and Kosali Simon
NBER Working Paper No. 14296
September 2008, Revised October 2011
JEL No. H42,H51,I11,I18,L13,L51,L88

                                           ABSTRACT

Motivated by widely publicized concerns that there are “too many” plans, we structurally estimate
(and validate) an equilibrium model of the Medicare Part D market to study the welfare impacts of
two feasible, similar-sized approaches for reducing choice. One reduces the maximum number of firm
offerings regionally; the other removes plans providing donut hole coverage – consumers’ most valued
dimension. We find welfare losses are far smaller when coupled with elimination of a dimension of
differentiation, as in the latter approach. We illustrate our findings’ relevance under current health
care reforms, and consider the merits of instead imposing ex ante competition for entry.


Claudio Lucarelli                                       Kosali Simon
Assistant Professor                                     School of Public and Environmental Affairs
Department of Policy Analysis                           Indiana University
and Management                                          Rm 359
Cornell University                                      1315 East Tenth Street
MVR Hall                                                Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401                                   and Cornell University
cl443@cornell.edu                                       and also NBER
                                                        simonkos@indiana.edu
Jeffrey Prince
Associate Professor
Department of Business Economics and Public Policy
Kelley School of Business
Indiana University
1309 E. Tenth St.
Bloomington, IN 47405
jeffprin@indiana.edu
1. Introduction
       The Medicare prescription drug program started in January 2006, and constitutes
the largest expansion of Medicare benefits since 1965. There is an immediate need to
understand the functioning of this program to better inform policy as changes have
already been implemented and are continually being debated. A much debated reform is
the reduction in the number of plans. This is in response to the massive number of Part D
plans, which has been argued to create large search costs when the elderly make their
drug insurance decisions. A series of studies (Rice et al., 2008; Cubanski, 2008; Kaiser
Family Foundation, 2006a), advocate for a reduction of Part D plans. These findings
indicate that there is considerable political pressure to limit the number of choices.
       In the absence of search costs, limiting the number of products in a market with
differentiated products could lead to softened price competition, decreased product
variety, or both. In light of the challenges the U.S. government faces in regulating this
market effectively and the regulations currently in place, this paper studies the welfare
impact of two easily implementable, and fundamentally different, approaches toward
limiting the number of Part D plans: reducing the maximum number of plans each firm
can offer per region and removing plans that offer a certain feature, namely donut hole
coverage. Both approaches would result in a similar-sized reduction in the number of
plans (approximately 20%). However, the latter involves eliminating a dimension of
plans’ characteristics, the net consequences of which depend on consumers’ valuation of
that dimension versus firms’ ability to soften competition by differentiating along it.
       We believe the comparison between these two ways to reduce choice is
particularly relevant for several reasons, in terms of providing valuable economic and
policy-oriented insights. First, current regulations dictate that providers can offer no
more than three plans in any given region. Recent law changes have attempted to limit
the choice set further by discouraging seemingly redundant policies provided by a single
firm and requiring firms to pull plans that have too few participants (Federal Register,
2010). Our first method of reducing choice follows the spirit of these changes by
restricting firms to a maximum of two plans per region, and imposing this limitation by
eliminating the least popular plan for firms that were offering three. Second, legislation


                                              2
has already started to take effect to close the donut hole, or gap, in all Part D plans
offered (The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 2010; Shrank, W., 2011).
Consumers currently can purchase plans that provide some gap coverage, but these plans
are priced at a premium. The regulatory change does nothing to limit choice per se;
however, it will eliminate firms’ ability to differentiate along the gap coverage dimension.
Our second method of reducing choice by removing gap covered plans both represents a
fundamentally different alternative for reducing choice by a similar magnitude, and
illustrates the amount by which differentiation along gap coverage is able to soften
competition. This latter aspect can help identify the importance of closing the gap, as it
pertains to preserving competition in the face of fewer offerings. Finally, the impact of
adding (or subtracting) a dimension of product differentiation on consumer welfare is
theoretically ambiguous – it can both improve it by adding a characteristic valued by
consumers, but can worsen it by softening competition (e.g., Lancaster, 1975; Dixit &
Stiglitz, 1977; Hausman, Leonard, & Zona, 1994). Therefore, the effect of interventions
to reduce plan choice is essentially an empirical question, which our analysis addresses
for an important market and a particularly relevant dimension.
       To execute our comparison, we first provide evidence on the relative utility (or
disutility) that the elderly derive from plan design features such as premium, deductible,
gap coverage, etc. By measuring how seniors value these plan characteristics, we can
assess whether they view Part D plans as differentiated products. Then, using our
demand- and supply-side estimates, we assess the effects on equilibrium premiums and
welfare from limiting each firm to its two most popular plans per region (as opposed to
the current three) and from removing plans that offer donut hole coverage. In our analysis,
we assume consumers are aware of all products in the choice set. This approach allows
us to measure, for each regulation strategy, the full potential welfare loss from reducing
choice, i.e., those that would occur if we reduced choice despite consumers being fully
informed. These losses may result from the elimination of plans that consumers value
and/or from higher premiums due to reduced competition. Hence, rather than assuming
search costs in the model, our approach allows us to bound how high search costs must
be in order to justify reducing choice. Importantly, our analysis allows us to determine
whether one approach is clearly superior to the other.



                                              3
        Our empirical strategy utilizes discrete choice methods pioneered by Berry (1994)
and Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) to recover structural estimates of parameters of
the demand and cost functions for the differentiated prescription drug plans (PDP). This
method is especially appealing since it requires only aggregate data at the plan level,
which are publicly available (e.g., plan market shares and characteristics)1. The estimates
from this procedure allow us to measure the value of plan characteristics to consumers,
price elasticities of demand for each plan, and the consumer surplus created by the
market. We combine our demand system with a Nash-Bertrand assumption to generate
equilibrium premiums and quantities, where firms take into account the expected subsidy
they receive from the government. We then back out firms’ marginal costs and ultimately
their producer surplus. The structural nature of the estimates allows us to conduct
counterfactual policy experiments to see how prices and welfare would change if we
made changes in program design.
        Using this approach, we have several key findings. When plans covering the
donut hole are removed, the average premiums for other “enhanced” plans rise by 1.6
percent while average premiums for non-enhanced plans rise by only 0.2 percent.2 We
find that consumer surplus and producer surplus fall by about 5.75 percent and 2.76
percent, respectively. In addition, the number of seniors enrolled in any PDP drops by 2.9
percent. In this case, we find that most of the welfare loss comes from seniors
substituting for a less valuable option or dropping PDP coverage in favor of the outside
option. The premium effect concentrates mostly within the set of closest substitutes, i.e.
the remaining enhanced plans.
        On the other hand, when firms are limited to two plans in each region (as opposed
to three),3 we find more extreme results. In this case, the average premium rises by about
5.5 percent and enrollment in PDP plans drops by about 11.7 percent. Consumer surplus
falls by 15.3 percent and producer surplus falls by 11.34 percent. In this case, most of the
consumer welfare loss happens via premium increases.


1
  No individual-level data is available in the public domain linking individuals to their plan choices.
2
  Enhanced plans are plans that are actuarially more generous than the standard plan design for Part D, and
for which the government does not subsidize the extra premium associated with the enhancement. One kind
of enhancement is to provide donut hole coverage.
3
  We assume the firms drop the plan with the lowest enrollment in 2006.


                                                    4
       The strong contrast in our measurements for these two counterfactuals highlights
how differing methods for reducing the number of plans can have substantially different
effects on equilibrium prices and welfare. Eliminating plans covering the gap and
restricting firms to two plans per region reduces the number of plans by similar amounts:
18 percent and 21 percent, respectively. However, the former approach eliminates a key
mode of product differentiation. This leaves the remaining plans, which are relatively
similar in features, to compete primarily on price. In contrast, restricting firms to two
plans per region still allows for all forms of product differentiation, which better enables
firms to soften price competition. Although consumers do highly value gap coverage as a
plan characteristic, our results strongly suggest that a mandated reduction in the number
of plans will have the least consumer welfare losses if it is coupled with a restriction on
plan features (ultimately restricting product differentiation).
       Before discussing implications, we validate the performance of our model out of
sample by assessing the impact of a recent major merger between two Part D insurers.
We then compare predictions of our model with what actually occurred and find our
model performs quite well.
       The implications of our findings are several. First, they suggest that offering gap
coverage serves as a significant means of differentiation that quite effectively softens
price competition between plans. Along these lines, they also highlight the importance of
coupling any reduction in plan offerings with a limitation on firms’ ability to differentiate
plans. In this market, preservation of price competition is important enough to warrant
elimination of even a very highly valued product characteristic. Finally, we note that
recent legislation has attempted to reduce choice largely along the lines of our first
approach (reducing the cap per region per insurer from three to two plans). As our results
show, this can lead to notable consumer welfare losses and higher prices, as a
significantly smaller number of remaining plans can still differentiate themselves along
the same number of dimensions. However, given this is the approach used to reduce the
number of plans, our results illustrate the possible merits of concurrent legislation
designed to fill the gap for the remaining plans. Filling the gap directly addresses the
problem we identify, namely price competition that is “too soft” among remaining plans
due to differentiation along gap coverage, by equalizing all plans along this dimension.



                                              5
         In supplemental analysis, we consider a completely different method of reducing
choice, where the government sets a cap on total plans for each region and firms compete
to have their plans included in the choice set. Specifically, the plans with the ability to
generate the most consumer surplus are granted access to the market. We find that this
radically different means of reducing choice via a general cap with ex ante competition
can actually increase consumer surplus while reducing the choice set, even absent any
reduction in search costs.
         Our work does not explicitly model adverse selection, dynamic pricing of firms
exploiting switching costs, and the possibility of non-rational choices. These are all
interesting avenues for future research when individual level data become available to
researchers. At various points in the paper we provide insights about these limitations and
their potential impact on our results.
         The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a
description of the Medicare Part D market and Section 3 provides a literature review.
Section 4 details our empirical methods, and Section 5 describes the data. Section 6
presents our results, and Section 7 concludes.


2. Description of the market
         Medicare Part D was signed into law as part of the Medicare Prescription Drug,
Improvement and Modernization Act (MMA) of 2003 and went into effect in January
2006. Unlike the Hospital Insurance (Part A) and the Supplemental Medical Insurance
(Part B), the delivery of the new benefit is entirely through the private sector. Private
companies can provide the new benefit as either stand-alone plans, called Prescription
Drug Plans (PDPs), or they can offer it together with Parts A and B as Medicare
Advantage plans (MA-PDs).4
         Our study focuses just on the PDP market, leaving MA-PDs as part of the outside
option, for several reasons. First, given how fundamentally these options differ, it is
reasonable to think that these are not close competing options for many people. It is likely

4
  Before the enactment of MMA, private plans could also provide the benefits of Parts A and B of Medicare
as Part C, later named Medicare+Choice. However, the benefits of Parts A and B have been delivered
mainly through the traditional fee-for-service Medicare, with private plans accounting for 12 percent of the
total Medicare enrollees in 2005. (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005)


                                                     6
that consumers first choose whether to be in FFS Medicare or MA, and then choose their
drug plans within those confines. Second, prior studies on plan choice have all analyzed
the PDP market as a separate market (e.g., Kling et al, 2008; Abaluck and Gruber, 2010)
since consumers must be willing to forgo the entire Medicare FFS system in order to
enroll in the MA form of drug coverage. Finally, it is also the case that prescription drug
coverage cannot be priced separately from the other features of MA plans (on which data
do not exist) in the MA-PD market.
         Medicare beneficiaries can enroll in PDP plans by paying a 74.5 percent-
subsidized premium. Further price reductions happen according to income and dual
Medicaid status. The first open enrollment took place from November 15th 2005 to May
15th 2006, during which time the beneficiaries could make decisions about participating
in this market. PDP plans enrolled 16.5 million of the 22.5 million Part D enrollees in
2006. In subsequent years, open enrollment takes place from November 15th-December
31st of the previous year. In 2006, a total of 1,429 different insurance plans owned by
approximately 70 different companies were available in 34 regions into which the
country is divided.5 In 2007 even more plans entered, with a new total of 1,875 plans
across all regions, increasing the relevance of the debate about limiting the number of
plans. For 2011, 1,109 plans are available (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010), partly as a
result of regulations limiting the number of plans offered by sponsors starting in 2011.
Dual eligible beneficiaries (those eligible for Medicaid as well as Medicare) are
automatically enrolled in certain low cost plans, but allowed to switch to other plans.
         Although MMA specifies a standard drug benefit, the law allows deviations from
that design as long as the modified plans are actuarially equivalent to the standard benefit.
To the extent that the plan is more generous in actuarial terms than the standard benefit,
the additional premium associated with the extra coverage is not subsidized by CMS.
Most beneficiaries are locked in to their current plan for a full year, but are allowed to
switch plans each open enrollment period at a premium that is community rated. An
exception is made for Medicaid-Medicare dual eligible enrollees who are allowed to

5
  The regions are composed of one or more states, and were set by the government at the beginning of year
2005. The regions were established to meet the MMA requirement of having no fewer than 10 and no more
than 50 regions in all, and to maximize the availability of plans to eligible individuals regardless of health
status, with particular attention to rural areas. Most (25) PDP regions consist of one state, six consist of two
states pooled together, one consists of three states, and one consists of seven states.


                                                       7
switch plans at any point in the year, and who may have to pay a small premium to the
extent that they switch into certain higher priced plans.
         The standard drug benefit design specified in MMA for year 2006 comprises a
deductible of $250 and three coverage zones where the fraction of the additional drug
dollar covered by the insurer varies substantially. Figure 1 shows how out-of-pocket drug
expenses vary with total drug spending in the different coverage zones of the plan. The
straight line has slope equal to 1, and represents the total cost (beneficiary premium plus
total drug cost). The kinked line shows the out-of-pocket costs as a function of total drug
cost. The vertical distance, is therefore the size of the Medicare benefit. After the
deductible is exhausted, the elderly are covered 75 percent for the next $2,000 spent in
total prescription drug expenditure (initial coverage zone, ICZ), 0 percent between $2,250
and $5,100 (so the next $2,850) of total drug expenditure, the donut hole zone, and 95
percent after the $5,100 threshold (catastrophic coverage zone). Thus, at the point that
catastrophic coverage begins, the beneficiary has spent $3,600 out of pocket ($250 in
zone 1, $500 in zone 2, and $2,850 in region 3).
         The plans offered are differentiated along several dimensions, such as premium,
deductibles, gap coverage, number of drugs in the formulary, copay sizes, etc. Insurance
companies can deviate in plan design from the standard benefit described above and offer
a variety of plans as long as they satisfy certain requirements.6 For example, an insurer
can offer plans with lower or no deductibles and higher coinsurance rates for the initial
coverage zone, or offer plans with tiered cost sharing in the initial coverage level as long
as the tiered structure is equivalent to the standard 25 percent coinsurance rate.7 Private
insurers have taken advantage of the ability to offer modified plans and only nine percent
of the 2006 plans (containing 22 percent of PDP enrollees in 2006) followed the standard


6
  These are a) they should provide the same catastrophic coverage as the standard benefit (same cost
sharing rule of 5 percent and same threshold of $3,600 in true out of pocket expenses) b) the deductible
should not be higher than the standard benefit’s deductible of $250 c) assure actuarial equivalency of i) the
value of total coverage (e.g., if they remove the deductible, the cost sharing in the initial coverage zone
should be set higher than 25 percent), ii) cannot increase the threshold at which the 3rd coverage zone ends
(the end of the donut hole) and iii) cannot change the threshold at which the 3rd coverage zone starts (start
of the donut hole). These details are contained in the 2003 MMA. Also see Duggan et al (2008) for a
description of the Medicare Part D program
7
  For example, a company cannot offer a plan with initial coverage limit higher than $2,250 (in 2006) that
has a higher co-insurance rate above the deductible since this would violate condition iii) in the footnote
above.


                                                      8
benefit design. The actuarially equivalent design (same deductible, different cost sharing)
was adopted by 21 percent of plans containing 17.1 percent of enrollees, while the basic
alternative design (smaller deductible with different cost sharing) was selected by 27
percent of plans containing 44.2 percent of PDP enrollees.
         In addition to benefit designs that are identical or actuarially equivalent to the
standard benefit, insurance companies can also offer enhanced plans. These plans become
more generous than the standard benefit by including gap coverage, or lower deductible
and lower cost sharing, or addition of non-Medicare covered drugs).8 Gap coverage of
generic and/or branded drugs in the donut hole was the enhancement that received the
most attention because of the unpopularity of the donut hole in the first place. These
enhancements were included in 43 percent of plans in 2006, containing 16.7 percent of
PDP enrollees. Firms could design up to three benefit packages per region, as long as one
of them was standard or actuarially equivalent to a standard plan (Hoadley et al, 2006).
         Although we do not model selection in our paper, we recognize that the
community rated nature of Medicare plans could lead to adverse selection. One way that
the presence of selection could affect calculation of welfare in the Part D market is that
insurers constrain the plan choices they make available to guard against selection, leading
to reduced welfare. Lustig (2010) finds evidence of this in the case of the Medicare
Advantage market prior to Part D. Room for selection in Part D is much less likely than
in the Medicare Advantage market because plan rules have been created in such a way
that selection incentives are minimized. For example, the risk corridors referred to in
footnote 10 below were particularly narrow in our year of study, 2006. Other aspects of
the design such as rules about covering all drugs in certain classes, and government
provision of 80 percent catastrophic reinsurance past the donut hole, also act to minimize
selection. Even though selection is limited in scope, we comment later in the paper on
ways our analysis may be affected if more selection occurs in the scenario of limiting
insurers to two plans than in removing gap covered plans.



8
 All plan formularies must include at least two drugs in each therapeutic category (see CMS 2007 for
details of categories), and must include substantially all drugs in six key therapeutic classes. Plans are also
forbidden to design formularies that discriminate against those with costly medical conditions (Hoadley
2005); there is no evidence of heavy auditing of these requirements, but the threat remains.


                                                       9
         To participate in the Part D PDP market, the insurance companies submit bids
(separate bids for each region, even if they design just one plan to be offered nationally)
stating their expected cost per beneficiary of providing the basic drug coverage. The
expected cost is calculated with the understanding that CMS, and not the individual
insurer, is responsible for 80 percent of drug costs that are incurred in the catastrophic
zone.9 This is required by MMA 2003, and is referred to as the reinsurance feature of Part
D which lessens fears of adverse selection among private insurers.10 CMS also asks plans
to separately inform them of the cost of covering an individual if CMS were to not
provide this reinsurance, in order to assess the total amount by which CMS subsidizes the
coverage. This reporting is also required by MMA to make sure that CMS’s total subsidy
to Part D (which includes the subsidy through reinsurance and the ‘direct subsidy’ paid
prospectively to the insurer) on average comes to 74.5 percent of the total cost of
providing coverage.
         As an example of the bidding process, suppose that there are three plans in the
nation, coming in with bids (for reinsured coverage) of $93, $100 and $107 per month.
Suppose that the value of reinsurance is 27% (the value assumed in a CBO 2004 report,
CBO 2004), thus their total costs for non reinsured coverage is $127.40, $136.99 and
$146.58, calculated as the earlier cost divided by (1-.27). In order for CMS to satisfy the
rule that the average plan is subsidized 74.5% by them in the form of reinsurance and
beneficiary premium protection, the beneficiary premium must be set at .255*$136.99 =
$34.93. In order for the premium of other plans to be set such that it equals the premium
of the average plan plus or minus the difference between their and the average plan’s
reinsured bid (which amounts to $7), the other plan premiums will be set at $27.93 and
$41.93 per month.

9
  This means that only 15 percent of the catastrophic cost will be paid by the insurance company as the
remaining 5 percent is the beneficiary’s liability by the plan design.
10
   MMA also calls for “risk corridors” to further reduce adverse selection fears and incentives to cream
skim. This means plans that have actual costs that exceeded their expected costs (after accounting for the
reinsurance feature) by a sufficiently large amount, may receive additional payments to compensate for
those losses. In the same way, if plans make larger than expected profits due to actual costs being lower
than the expected ones, the plans would have to return those extra profits to the government. For years
2006 and 2007, the plans will be responsible for all the profits and losses that are within a band of 2.5%
from their expected costs. If the actual costs are bigger (smaller) than the expected costs by more than 2.5%
but less than 5% the government will pay (receive) 75% of the amount in that range. If the actual costs
differ with the expected costs by more than 5% then the government will pay 80% of the amount beyond
5% in the case of losses and receive 80% of the amount beyond 5% in the case of profits.


                                                     10
         Ideally, our model of price competition would incorporate all aspects of the above
mechanism in price calculations and formulation of firm strategies. However, we are
unable to fully replicate this process since we lack data on key components, such as
reinsurance payments and the size of enhancements for enhanced plans. Consequently,
we postulate that firms submit their bids having in mind the premium the beneficiary will
pay as a result of the bidding process, because consumers will make their enrollment
decisions based on this premium and the characteristics of the plan. Implicit here is the
assumption that firms do not submit bids to strategically alter the ultimate subsidy – an
assumption we argue is reasonable in this case due to the large number of plans in each
region, and hence the very limited ability of one firm to notably alter the subsidy. In later
years, firms’ bids were incorporated proportional to enrollment, raising the possibility of
such strategic bidding, but because we analyze the first year of the program these effects
are absent in our supply side model. Consequently, we believe a Bertrand game with
differentiated products, as discussed in Section 5, will capture the relevant features of the
game.
         We conclude this section by detailing some particularly relevant, recent changes
in U.S. healthcare law. In April 2010, CMS issued final rules on regulation #4085-F.
These aim to reduce the extent to which insurers can offer multiple plans that are not
substantively different from each other (as part of the three per insurer per region). This
went into effect in 2010 for plans offered in 2011. If an insurer submits for approval a
benefit structure that is not substantially different from other plans offered by the insurer,
it will not be approved. CMS looks for differences in premiums, cost-sharing, formulary
structure, and benefits offered. When insurers merge, they have 2 years to reduce
redundancies and come under the CMS rule. The aim of this change is to address what
CMS believes is confusion caused by having too many plans that seem similar in the
market (Federal Register, 2010)11. Also, for the first time, CMS states that they may
consider enrollment in the plan a criterion for whether they will approve the plan the next
11
  For example, on p. 19681, the federal register states: “some have suggested that a significant number of
beneficiaries are confused by the array of choices and find it difficult to make enrollment decisions that are
best for them. Moreover, experience has shown that organizations submitting bids under Part C and D to
offer multiple plans have not consistently submitted plan benefit designs that were significantly different
from each other, which can add to beneficiary confusion. In this rule, we finalize a number of proposals to
the way we administer the Part C and D programs to promote beneficiaries making the best plan choice that
suits their needs.”


                                                     11
year. If a plan did not attract “enough” customers in the past, they may not get to offer it
again next year.
       Briefly, some relevant provisions of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 for
Medicare Part D include the following. First, in 2010 a one-time tax exempt subsidy
check of $250 was mailed out to those who hit the donut hole. Second, in 2011 a 50%
discount on eligible brand name drugs when in the donut hole was implemented with the
discounts to be provided by the drug manufacturers. Third, from 2013 to 2020, the
percentage covered by the government of branded drugs in the donut hole will increase
from 0% in 2010, to 2.5% in 2013, and to 25% by 2020. The 50% discount for eligible
branded drugs will be on top of that, so that the total percent reduction in price from the
sticker price for those in the donut hole will be 75%; thus, the donut hole will be “closed”
for branded drugs. The generic drug subsidy by the government will expand from 7% in
2011 to 75% by 2020. Finally, the spending amount that gets one into the donut hole will
also increase incrementally (by approximately $10 per year between 2010 and 2020).


3. Previous literature
       Many recent papers have studied several aspects of Medicare Part D in order to
guide future policy. Lakdawalla and Sood (2007) propose and calibrate a dynamic model
to study the welfare effects of Medicare Part D, focusing on pharmaceutical innovation.
They find that public drug insurance can be welfare enhancing by lowering the static
welfare loss coming from the monopoly power granted by patent protection, and by
encouraging innovation from pharmaceutical firms. Their study provides insights on a
separate important policy issue, which is whether the government should be allowed to
participate in price negotiations. They find that price negotiation by the government
could slightly distort the monopoly price and decrease the deadweight loss from optimal
monopoly pricing, and this would not have a negative effect on innovation as long as
patent lengths are increased. Their result is consistent with the traditional “long and
narrow” dynamic optimal patent. Heiss, McFadden and Winter (2006) surveyed seniors
through WebTV devices to study consumers’ perceptions and choices of Medicare Part D
plans during the open enrollment period. They found that most seniors chose the optimal
action of enrolling. This result was expected since, according to their calculations,



                                             12
enrolling in Medicare Part D was immediately beneficial for 81.7 percent of the
population, and inter-temporally beneficial for 97.5 percent. With respect to their choice
of plan, they found that consumers often chose cheaper plans when more expensive and
comprehensive coverage was actuarially favorable.
       Kling et al (2008) conduct an experiment in which they recruit a sample of seniors
from Wisconsin, find out their current list of medications taken, provide half with
customized information and compare their plan choices to the other half which serve as a
control group. They find that customized information (data on the prices of drugs under
different plans and a recommendation of the cheapest plans for them, based on their
current medications) leads the treatment group to select a plan that is cheaper by $104 a
year for them in predicted terms than the control group. Whether we should expect this to
be zero optimally depends on whether consumers value non-price features like insurer
reputation, as well as whether customers should choose an insurance plan only based on
current information. Domino et al (2008) point out that about ½ of all seniors are likely to
have medication experiences over the next 12 months that would have, in retrospect,
made another plan appear cheaper than the one that is the cheapest based on current
medications.
       Other papers that report results of surveys that include seniors post Part D are
Neuman et al (2007) and Levy and Weir (2007), both confirming the overall percent of
seniors who are uninsured for prescription drugs fell to around 10 percent in 2006.
       Closest in spirit to our work is Town and Liu (2003), who estimate the welfare
impact of Medicare HMOs during the 1993 to 2000 period. They found big increases in
consumer surplus due to the introduction of Medicare HMOs, and a sizable portion of
that surplus in the last year of their study (45 percent) comes from making available
prescription drugs to the elderly through these plans. They study the effect of
counterfactuals such as what would happen to welfare if more plans were added to the
markets, and find increases in consumer surplus, stemming mostly from increased price
competition. In Medicare HMO markets, whose geographic unit is a county, the number
of options available to consumers was quite limited, with the most frequent market
structure being monopoly. This paper provided early evidence that broad prescription
drug coverage for the elderly could be achieved through private managed care plans, and



                                            13
that competition in Medicare HMO markets increased consumer welfare. Our work
complements theirs by showing that competition enhances consumer surplus under a very
different market structure, one with many more competitors. In addition, we show that
product differentiation could play an important role when considering mechanisms for
limiting choices.
        A primary motivation for our work comes from studies that document the
prevailing desire among seniors and other interested parties to see reduced choice in the
Part D market. A Kaiser Family Foundation-Harvard School of Public Health poll
conducted during the open enrollment period 200612 found that seniors favor
simplification,13 removing the donut hole,14 and reducing the number of plans available.15
Only 11 percent strongly favored keeping the program as is. Rice et al (2008) proposes
that CMS “acts as a broker to winnow down the number of choices so that beneficiaries
face a small subset of those judged to be best on several dimensions,” specifically
limiting the number of choices that consumers would face to 10 per region, with 8 being
national plans and 2 being regional or state-only plans. CMS would select these plans
from bids submitted by insurers (up to 3 bids each), so that the 10 choices selected would
provide lower-cost, lower-coverage options as well as higher-cost, higher-coverage
options. The study then goes on to describe the logistics of three cases where the
government has acted as an agent for consumers in selecting the options they face:
pension plans for state employees (New York and Ohio), Arizona’s Medicaid program,
and California’s Medicaid hospital contracting.
        Lab surveys also find seniors expressing preference for reduced choice. Reed,
Mikels and Simon (2008) find that seniors report desiring fewer choices across several
domains than younger adults, and that the gap is larger for health care domains (including
drug plans). Mikels, Reed and Simon (2009) find that seniors report lower willingness to
pay for increasing the number of choices available for drug coverage plans than younger
adults. Both findings are consistent with older adults experiencing decreased decision-
making capacity and high search costs. Cubanski (2008) reports that 49 percent of seniors


12
   Kaiser Family Foundation, 2006b.
13
   51 percent of seniors ‘strongly agree’ that the design of part D is ‘too complicated’.
14
   46 percent ‘strongly favor’ spending more government money to remove the coverage gap.
15
   44 percent of seniors ‘strongly favor’ reducing the number of plans.


                                                  14
enrolled in Part D say in the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey 2006 that there are
‘too many’ drug plans to choose from. Although there are benefits from reduced
cognitive loads /reduced search costs when seniors have fewer choices from which to
choose their drug coverage, our paper’s counterfactual exercises quantify the potential
welfare losses when certain reductions occur. These losses stem from reduced
competition and the fact that eliminating choices risks some consumers losing their most
preferred option.


4. Empirical method


       For our empirical analysis, we estimate the structural parameters of the demand
and supply sides of the market. The approach follows that in previous literature such as
Berry (1994), Berry et al. (1995), Bresnahan et al. (1997), Nevo (2001), Petrin (2002),
and Town and Liu (2003).


Demand Estimation
       For our demand-side analysis, we estimate demand(s) for differentiated PDPs
using aggregate data following the seminal works of Berry (1994) and Berry, et al. (1995),
henceforth BLP. The approach is as follows. First, we write down an expression for the
utility experienced by an individual from purchasing a given Medicare Part D plan as a
function of plan characteristics, premium, and unobservables. Given this utility function,
we next derive a formula (utilizing simulation) for the market share that should result for
a given plan. Market shares represent the outcome of consumer decision-making in the
aggregate.
       Each individual is assumed to maximize her utility by choosing among the Jt + 1
alternatives for prescription drug coverage available to her in the following way:


(1)     0, … ,
       i = 1,…,I       j = 0,…, Jt    t = 1,…,T




                                            15
where p jt is the premium of plan j in market t, Enhjt is a dummy variable indicating

whether plan j is an enhanced plan, X ' jt is a vector of other observable plan

characteristics (e.g., deductible), ξ jt is an unobserved (by the econometrician) product

characteristic, and ε ijt is a random, idiosyncratic utility shock for individual i for plan j in

market t from the distribution                . We normalize the utility for the “outside option” (j
= 0) to zero. The outside option is composed of choosing an MA-PD plan, choosing
employer retirement coverage, or choosing not to enroll in any plan.
        In the above framework, we allow for individual-specific marginal utilities for
price and whether the plan was enhanced (as indicated by the i subscripts on the β’s)16.
We follow the standard random coefficients approach by assuming these β parameters are
independent draws from             ;         – a set of distributions characterized by θ. A key merit
of this approach is that it allows for much more flexible substitution patterns (i.e., cross-
price elasticities) and own-price elasticities than more restrictive models, such as the
simple logit or nested logit.
        Given this formulation for utility, we can derive a formula for each product j’s
market share in a given market t. Conceptually, this formula calculates the probability
that a given individual draws a set of β’s and ε’s such that the utility from choosing
product j is at least as high as the utility of choosing any other product. Formally, this is:


(2)                 ,   , ;         ,    |
                                                                  ;



        If we assume that               has the Type I extreme value distribution, we can
integrate out this component of the above formula analytically, leaving us with:


(3)             ,       , ;                                                  ;
                                        ∑



16
   We have estimated versions with more random coefficients, and the parameter values and hence the
results from our counterfactual exercises are robust to changes in the number of random coefficients. We
prefer the specification with these two random coefficients as this provides more precise estimates, and
allows for heterogeneous responses to changes in premia, the strategic variable in our model of supply, and
on plan enhancements, which provides more flexible substitution patterns than the nested logit model.


                                                      16
           A common approach to solving for the above analytical formula for market shares
is to assume the β’s are draws from independent normal distributions with θ = (µ,σ); an
assumption we make here as well. Unfortunately, this leaves us with no closed form
formula for the analytical market shares. However, we can evaluate the above integral
through simulation. Specifically, we can take ns17 draws from the joint normal
distribution              ;       and simulate the integral using:


                                                              ,       ,
(4)         ̂     ,       , ;               ∑                     ,       ,
                                                    ∑




           Empirically, our objective is to get estimates for the underlying parameters of this
problem, θ, which represent the mean and standard deviation for the distribution of
consumer tastes. The typical BLP approach to solving for these parameters is to first
isolate the implied product-level shocks (               ) by solving the system of equations:


(5)                   ̂       ,       , ;


           where Sjt is the observed market share for product j in market t. This system is
typically solved using a contraction mapping, and for each market t, it can be represented
by the vector                               ;   .
           With the vector of shocks in hand, we can construct a GMM estimator in the usual
way, using appropriately chosen instruments (zjt). Specifically, let h(zjt,xjt) be a vector-
valued function where we assume                               ,               0. Then, having solved for   as
a function of observed market shares and θ, we can create the sample analog of these
moment conditions as:


(6)                               ∑     ∑                 ,




17
     In our estimation the number of simulation draws is 200.


                                                        17
For a given weighting matrix W, the GMM estimator is                  that solves:


(7)


          The above estimation procedure requires one to provide a starting value for θ,
evaluate analytical market shares, use a contraction mapping to solve for                      , evaluate
the GMM objective function, Q(θ), and using an optimization routine, find the values of
     that minimize the GMM objective function..
          To map the above estimation procedure into our framework, we must specify the
instruments we will use to construct our moment conditions, and ultimately                        . The
primary reason we need to find instruments zjt is the concern that price is endogenous in
our model. That is, we fear price is correlated with the unobserved characteristic, . To
this end, we construct our instruments following the insights provided in Berry et al.
(1995) and Bresnahan et al. (1997). Specifically, they illustrate first order conditions
(FOCs) for firms’ pricing decisions, and note that anything shifting these FOCs could
serve as an instrument for price. They go on to note that characteristics of products in a
similar group to product j (such as counts and sums of features) could be potential
candidates, as these would tend to shift and/or rotate the demand curve for product j18.
The key identifying assumption in using these instruments is that the unobserved
characteristic is mean independent of the observed characteristics. The intuition behind
our choice of instruments is that they proxy the degree of competition faced by a plan in
the product space. We explicitly list our instruments below, after describing our data.


Supply and Marginal Costs
          On the supply side, we assume firms partake in Bertrand-Nash competition.
Specifically, each firm maximizes its profit:


(9)       Π          ∑                                         ,   , ;


18
  See Bresnahan et al. (1997), pg. S33 for a more detailed discussion of the merits of these types of
instrument choices.


                                                     18
where M is market size and mc jt is marginal cost for product j in market t and subst is the

subsidy. This leads to the following first-order condition:


                                                               ,   , ;
(10)          ,   , ;      ∑                                             0



       We can invert the system of first-order conditions to solve for marginal costs as
follows:


(11)               ∆ , ;               , , ;


where mc, p, and s are vectors of marginal costs, premia, and market shares, and
Δ( p, X ;θ ) is the appropriately defined matrix of own- and cross- price share derivatives
(Petrin, 2002). Once we have estimates for the demand-side parameters, we can directly
solve for marginal costs using the above equation and the simulation method described
above for calculating market shares and Δ(.).
       Using the estimated parameters of the utility function, we can calculate own- and
cross-price elasticities for each product. Further, combining these demand-side estimates
with our marginal cost estimates, we can calculate welfare measures and conduct
counterfactuals for the choice sets. We describe these procedures, their outcomes, and
the robustness of the results in Section 6.


5. Data
       This paper uses data on enrollment and plan characteristics of stand-alone Part D
plans offered during 2006. Using the first year of data for this analysis has two particular
advantages. First, firms had less knowledge of regional demands for this product,
reducing the likelihood that product characteristics are correlated with unobserved
components of demand, making it less likely the product characteristics in our model are
endogenous. Second, as this is the first time consumers bought this product, there are no




                                               19
switching costs. For subsequent years, these could be relevant (Keating 2007) and would
be difficult to fully capture using aggregate data.
        The CMS Landscape file contains basic characteristics of each plan (premium,
deductible, coverage during the gap, number of top 100 drugs that are on the plan’s
formulary or not, etc.). 19 Enrollment data come from the CMS enrollment file for 2006,
released July 2006. This file shows the number of people enrolled in each of 1,415 plans
on which we have data on all items needed (with enrollment numbers under 10
suppressed by CMS). Certain plans are designated Low Income Subsidy (LIS) eligible,
and were automatically assigned enrollees in the region who were previously qualifying
for full Medicaid coverage. However, these plans are also the lowest cost options in the
region by definition, and thus enjoyed high enrollment from voluntary enrollees, too.
Ignoring that a sizable part of beneficiaries are auto-enrolled in the lower cost plans
would make us overestimate the price sensitivity of consumers. Based on individual-level
data from a national Pharmacy Benefits Manager (PBM), we are able to calculate the
number of auto-enrollees per plan, assuming the auto-enrollment was random, as it is
specified in the legislation. Knowing the number of auto-enrollees for each LIS plan, we
are able to rescale the market shares to include only those who made an active choice.
        In using 2006 data, we capitalize on the advantages from studying a new market.
However, a drawback to using early market data is that there may be systematic
miscalculations on the part of consumers and producers. In the case of consumers, search
costs are possible, but our approach is designed to assess potential welfare losses from
alternative regulations when consumers are fully informed. In the case of producers,
insurers likely examined plan design strategies since the signing of the MMA in 2003. As
one example, they could engage in data collection by participating in the CMS drug
discount card program from 2004-2006. There is still room for systematic intentional
mispricing if firms follow predatory pricing policies the first year. This is a problem that
our models cannot address, and may exist in any setting when insurers perceive a change
(such as when a new firm is contemplating entry, or when donut hole provisions are
known to phase in over future years), not just in the first year. In fact, the problems of


19
 This is available for download from [http://www.medicare.gov/medicarereform/map.asp] (access date
May 2006).


                                                 20
dynamic pricing schemes may be less in the first year because each plan had presumably
the same information set and incentives. In future years, dynamic pricing strategies may
become more complex as plans differ in existing enrollment and take that into account
when responding to new incentives.
       Our data set consists of one observation for each of 1,429 plans (of which
enrollment data are available for 1415 plans as the others enrolled fewer than 10) that
were offered in the PDP market in 2006. Of these, we observe all the relevant variables
for 1,251 plans. We provide variable definitions and summary statistics in Tables 1 and 2,
respectively.
       We conclude this section by listing the variables we use as instruments for price.
When choosing our instruments, we utilize a very basic division of products into
“enhanced” and “not enhanced.” Enhanced plans have added features such as gap
coverage or zero deductible, while “not enhanced” plans are those that are actuarially
equivalent to the basic plan. This basic division can help us better isolate the competitive
circumstances for each plan, following the insights in Bresnahan et al. (1997)
summarized in Section 4. Hence, for a given market, the instruments we utilize for the
price of plan j in group g (enhanced vs. not enhanced) sold by firm f are as follows:
       Count of plans in group g
       Sum of premiums of other plans in group g (other plans means plan j is excluded)
       Count of plans sold by firm f
       Count of plans sold by firm f in group g
       Sum of deductible of other plans in group g
       Sum of form_100 of other plans in group g
       Sum of auth_100 of other plans in group g
       Sum of under_20_100 of other plans in group g
       Sum of gapgen of other plans in group g
6. Results
6.1. Economic Measures

       In the third column of Table 3, we present the parameter estimates for our random
coefficients discrete choice model described in Section 4 (with region and firm fixed



                                             21
effects)20. As noted in Section 4, we introduced two random coefficients, one on
premium, and the other on enhanced. Using these estimates, we see that characteristics
that should add value such as the number of top 100 drugs on the formulary, number of
top 100 drugs with copay under $20, and branded drugs being covered in the gap have
mean β estimates that are positive and significant, which is consistent with them adding
value. Higher deductibles and premiums reduce value as expected. These are all
attributes that are easily observable, and important in choosing an insurance plan. Prior
authorization (Auth_100) has a counterintuitive sign that may be due to the fact that
formularies that include better and more expensive drugs are more likely to require prior
authorization.21 It is also interesting to note that our estimates suggest seniors find little or
no value from coverage of generics in the gap (in stark contrast to coverage of branded
drugs).
          To help illustrate the robustness of our estimates, we also include parameter
estimates from two simpler versions of our model: logit and nested logit (with one nest –
enhanced or not enhanced). The results for these models are in the first two columns,
respectively, of Table 3. Comparing across models, we see a great deal of similarity in
the estimates. For the nested logit specification the parameter on the Enhanced
characteristic corresponds to the within nest correlation (Berry, 1994). Our qualitative
findings are robust to the use of any of these three model specifications. Given the greater
flexibility of the random coefficients model, this is the one on which we focus for our
remaining analysis.
          We begin our analysis by quantifying the value of the plan attributes to consumers,
which is an important exercise given that the design of the plans is heavily influenced by
policy. We find that consumers on average value a $250 decrease in the annual
deductible by approximately $92 per year (250*(0.004/0.130)*12).22 An extra top 100
drug added to the formulary is worth approximately $6.50 on average. The coverage of
branded drugs appears to be what seniors value the most with an estimated annual value
of $380.

20
   We present results from the first stage regression of price on our instruments in the Appendix.
21
   We thank Dan Miller for this insight.
22
   The coefficient on premium is the estimate for a household’s marginal utility from money. Therefore, to
determine the monetary value of a given characteristic, we must divide its coefficient by the coefficient on
premium. Also, our data are monthly, requiring us to multiply by 12 to get annual estimates.


                                                    22
        Using the estimates from our baseline model, we can calculate own- and cross-
price elasticities for the different plans using the following formulas:


(12)                                         1                       if j = k

(13)                                                      if j ≠ k



        The first formula is the own price elasticity; the second is the cross-price elasticity
for plans j and k. Given the large number of plans, we can only present a sample of our
estimated elasticities. We are able to capture the intuitive result that enhanced plans are
closer substitutes to each other than to non-enhanced plans. Table 4 shows a sample of
our estimated elasticities for the players with the largest market shares.23 The elasticities
in the table show that enhanced plans, are closer substitutes to each other than non-
enhanced plans, and vice versa. Our estimates also allow us to calculate important
welfare measures of this market. In particular, we can calculate producer and consumer
surplus for the current market environment, and then recalculate and compare these
measures in our counterfactuals. The formulas for these measures are as follows:


(14)            ∑ ∑


                                     ∑
(15)            ∑ 12



where the integral is calculated by simulation. Here, Mt is the number of potential
customers in market t and subst is the subsidy provided in market t24.
        The first column of Table 5 contains our estimates for these measures for the PDP
market as it was in 2006. Using (14), we find producer surplus was $1.27 billion. Then,
using (15), we find that consumer surplus was $1.98 billion. It is interesting to see that

23
  The table containing all the plans is available upon request.
24
  We calculate the subsidy as (74.5/25.5) times the mean of the premiums (post subsidy) for the non-
enhanced plans. This is because the enhancements are not subsidized by the government. Market size is
defined as the sum of those who are enrolled in PDPs in the region plus those who chose the outside option.


                                                    23
the distribution of surplus between consumers and producers is skewed toward
consumers; however, this is clearly due to the large subsidy in the market. We note that
the consumer welfare calculations contain only those beneficiaries who made an active
choice. The overall welfare provided by PDP plans would be larger if we included the
LIS-eligible beneficiaries and the subsidies they receive.


6.2. Policy Experiments

        Before conducting our two counterfactuals concerning limitation of choice, we
seek to validate our model by simulating the impact of the merger of two important
participants in this market, United and Pacificare, whose effect occurred between the first
year and second year outcomes. The Department of Justice’s Antitrust Division did
challenge this merger, but the focus was on the firm’s commercial health care plans in
Tucson, Arizona, and Boulder, Colorado (Department of Justice, 2005). There were no
stated concerns involving the markets for Medicare Part D. The merger was ultimately
allowed pending divestitures in these two markets.
        In this counterfactual, the bids in 2006 are treated as being submitted by two
separate firms, and after 2006 they are treated as behaving as one firm.25 We implement
this counterfactual by perturbing the ownership matrix Δ( p, X ;θ ) −1 above as in Nevo
(2000) and Town (2001). Implicitly, we are assuming that the firms do not change the
menu of plans offered when they merge, and marginal costs remain the same, which we
believe is a sensible assumption as the possible cost advantages are not materialized
instantaneously. Therefore, the change in ownership structure is the only change to the
choice set. As shown in the second column of Table 5, our model predicts that the
increase in market power due to this merger would result in a 4.7 percent increase in
average premiums for the merged firms and a 0.9 percent increase in premiums for other
firms. Consumer surplus would decline by 1.73 percent while producer surplus would
increase by 1.15 percent.


25
  The merger took place after the 2006 plans bids had been placed and the 2006 offerings decided by CMS.
In announcing the merger, the CEO of Pacificare is quoted as saying: “This merger will enhance our
resources, strengthen our product offerings…” (Press release from UnitedHealth, July 6th 2005). The actual
merger took place late 2005, before the 2007 plan bids were due (Cubanski and Neuman, 2006).


                                                   24
        We then use post-merger data to provide some validation for our predictions
about premium change. This is the only dimension for which actual data exists for
validation. Because our model is static, it is not informative of the nominal premium the
merging firms will charge post-merger, but it does provide information about their
relative premium with respect to the average market premium. We observe from the 2007
equivalent of our CMS landscape file that the actual 2007 premiums show a 4.0 percent
increase of this ratio, whereas our model predicts a 3.2 percent increase. These results not
only illustrate the effects of a merger of this magnitude on this market, but also
demonstrate our model’s ability to produce sensible counterfactual results, consistent
with economic theory and out-of-sample predictions.
        We now present the results for our two policy experiments focusing on the effects
of removing plans from the market. The first of these policy experiments involves the
removal of plans offering gap coverage.26 This policy would reduce the number of plans
by 18 percent. We perform this experiment to assess the welfare losses that would have
occurred, had the government not allowed gap plans to be offered. It also illustrates the
consequences of an intervention that not only limits the number of choices, but also
decreases product differentiation. As shown in column 3 of Table 5, we find that
consumer and producer surplus decrease by 5.75 percent and 2.76 percent respectively.27
We decompose the total effects by premium and product substitution (including the
outside option). We find that, in this counterfactual, the premium response is fairly
limited, and that most of the loss in both consumer and producer surplus comes from
substitution to less preferred plans. This result is consistent with theory. We would expect
limited premium responses when a reduction in competitors is coupled with the
elimination of a dimension along which products can be differentiated. At the bottom of
the table, we show that the effect of this policy on equilibrium premiums is very small for
non-gap and non-enhanced plans (0.8% and 0.2%, respectively), and even rather modest
for remaining enhanced plans (1.5%), which we might think would be most able to
26
   Both of these counterfactuals should be interpreted under the assumptions that firms do not change the
design of their contracts when one of their own or competitors’ product is removed, and further exit or
entry do not occur if a nest becomes more or less competitive.
27
   Our producer surplus calculations do not include fixed costs. Adding estimated fixed costs from an
exercise imposing free entry equilibrium (Bresnahan and Reiss, 1991) only shifts the calculated producer
surplus down by a small constant given that the number of participating firms does not change across
counterfactual scenarios


                                                    25
increase price after removing those covering the gap. Enrollment is also moderately
affected (-2.9 percent).
        The second of these policy experiments explores what would be the effect of a
more universal limitation in the number of options. In particular, we consider the effect of
restricting firms to a maximum of two plan offerings per region. When imposing this rule
in our model, we assume firms keep the plans that had the largest enrollment. This
experiment reduces the number of plans by 21 percent. As shown in column 4 of Table 5,
we find that this counterfactual has a notably larger impact on both consumer and
producer surplus. We find that consumer surplus falls by approximately 15.34 percent
and producer surplus falls by about 11.34 percent. Enrollment falls by 11.7 percent.
Decomposing the effects, we find that most of the consumer welfare loss comes from
premium increases, which on average increased by 5.5 percent (as shown at the bottom of
the table).
        The two policies we consider result in similar-sized reductions in plans, but have
drastically different effects on welfare and premiums. By eliminating a dimension of
product differentiation, the former forces the remaining plans to still compete heavily on
price, resulting in minimal consumer surplus losses due to price changes (-0.63 percent).
In contrast, the latter policy still allows firms to offer plans that cover the gap, preserving
a dimension of product differentiation that allows firms to significantly soften price
competition. Consequently, we observe a significant loss of consumer surplus due to
price changes (13.51 percent). When we calculate the loss in surplus (per capita) for both
policy experiments, the former results in only a reduction of $9.61, while the latter results
in a loss of $25.66 (approximately 2/3 of the average monthly premium). Along with the
loss of participation, these losses must be weighed against the expected gain due to
reduced search costs when evaluating policies that reduce choice. Our findings strongly
suggest that policies designed to reduce the number of plans will have significantly lower
welfare costs if they also restrict firms’ abilities to differentiate their products.


6.3. Robustness of the Results
        In this subsection, we discuss the robustness of our findings, particularly with
regard to our counterfactual results on choice size – the main focus of our analysis. In



                                               26
particular, we address possible concerns about: 1) Our model choice and 2) The validity
of instruments. Regarding our model choice, although the BLP model has become the
standard for analyzing these types of data, we recognize that there may be concern about
welfare measures given the presence of the idiosyncratic error terms (ε’). Specifically, the
presence of these error terms increases the dimensions or product differentiation, and
therefore, ensures that welfare always increases with the size of the choice set, and vice
versa. In response to such a concern, we make two points. First, our analysis is a
comparison of welfare losses, and not a measure of welfare loss per se. Consequently,
for similar-sized reductions in the choice set, welfare losses due to elimination of the
error terms should be roughly comparable and hence have little impact on the difference.
Second, we could, in principle, control for congestion effects along the lines described in
Ackerberg and Rysman (2005). This essentially involves including a control for the
number of products in a given market when it was observed. In our model, such a control
is effectively subsumed in our region fixed effects since the number of products only
varies across region in our data.
       The validity of our instruments may pose a concern since it could be argued that
characteristics of Part D plans (that are used as instruments) are easier to adjust in the
short-run than, say, automobile characteristics. We again make two primary points to
address this concern. First, we note that the reasonable accuracy of our out-of-sample
validation in the merger analysis is consistent with a well-specified model. Beyond just
helping to validate our instruments, this helps increase our confidence that we are
utilizing a well specified model. Second, since 2006 was the first year this market
existed, firms would have had relatively little demand information on which to condition
their product offerings that year. Consequently, more than any other year, we believe the
assumption of exogenous product characteristics is quite plausible in 2006.
       Given that current legislation is designed to both remove unpopular plans and
close the gap, it is tempting for us to try and use our model to make predictions for this
more elaborate counterfactual. However, this counterfactual involves us actually altering
existing plans’ characteristics, and therefore would require us to make adjustments to
plans’ marginal costs. We could simply estimate a regression linking estimated costs to
plan characteristics, but it is reasonable to believe this relationship will vary by region,



                                              27
and likely by firm as well. Consequently, our predicted costs for the adjusted plans will
be either extremely noisy or impossible to estimate, making for an uninformative
counterfactual.
        Finally, we note that we do not model selection in this paper, but it could be that
despite the features of the market that reduce its scope, insurers may still adjust plan
characteristics to avoid perceived adverse selection. If so, welfare may be lower than we
calculate in the scenario with insurers restricted to a two plan maximum, because it
leaves room for more selection due to greater product variety than when plan choice is
reduced by removing gap covered plans.


6.4 Discussion and a Possible Alternative
        The above analysis generates insights about recent American healthcare
legislation and some important economics underlying a major healthcare market. Recent
legislation has attempted to reduce choice in a manner similar to our counterfactual of
reducing the cap per region from three to two plans. Our results indicate that this change,
in isolation, can lead to notable consumer welfare losses and higher prices. The insight
here is that, after the change, the market is left with a significantly smaller number of
plans that are still differentiated along the same number of dimensions. Given the
American government chose an approach similar to this to reduce the number of plans,
our results show the possible merits of its attempt to concurrently fill the gap for the
remaining plans. By closing the gap, the government effectively equalizes all plans along
this dimension of differentiation. This directly addresses the problem of price
competition being “too soft” among remaining plans due to differentiation along gap
coverage.
        On a broader economic level, our results show that offering gap coverage serves
as a significant means of differentiation that quite effectively softens price competition
between plans. Interestingly, we find that preservation of price competition is important
enough in this market to warrant elimination of even a very highly valued product
characteristic when reducing the size of the choice set. As a result, any regulation
seeking to reduce plan offerings is likely best served if it is coupled with a limitation on
firms’ ability to differentiate.



                                             28
           Of course, there are many other ways that the American government can reduce
choice in the Part D market, and it is certainly possible that there exist far superior
alternatives. We conclude this subsection by briefly considering what might be an
ostensibly better approach, but that requires substantially more information from the
regulator.28 In particular, the American government could limit choice by setting a
certain cap, X, on the number of plans allowed in each region, and then have firms
compete to have their plans included in that set. In an ideal scenario, the government
would accept the top X plans as measured by consumer surplus. Firms would choose
plan characteristics and prices to submit for government evaluation, recognizing that their
plans will only have access to consumers if they rank well in generating consumer
surplus.
           Our model is equipped to evaluate such a counterfactual if we treat the set of
potential plans as given. That is, we fix the characteristics (both observed and
unobserved) and the number of plans firms are willing to submit, and simply allow them
to adjust their prices as they compete to be among the top X plans in a region. A
complication of this approach to limiting choice is that there are billions of market
structures to be evaluated, as consumer surplus will depend on the combination of plans
that is selected.29 We simplify the problem by observing that the consumer surplus in
equation (15) can be calculated ex ante if the regulator knows the demand for each
product and consumers’ heterogeneity. Also, if the regulator knows the marginal costs for
each plan, the products can be ranked in terms of their potential to generate surplus if
they priced at marginal cost. If X plans are selected, the last plan selected should provide
at least as much surplus as the surplus that the X+1th plan would provide by pricing at
marginal cost (call this value Sx+1). Proceeding in this way, the regulator can let the
selected firms choose their prices with the requirement that at least Sx+1 is provided by
each firm, otherwise firm X+1 would have been selected to enter.
           In Table 6, we report the consumer surplus, producer surplus and enrollment for
varying levels of X, starting with 20. As X declines, consumers lose surplus because they
have fewer plans from which to choose but those losses are initially outweighed by the


28
     We thank a referee for suggesting this counterfactual exercise.
29
     The average number of plans in 2006 is 36.7 plans. If X=20 there are 7.3 billion combinations of plans.


                                                       29
gains in surplus because firms must compete harder on price to have their plan included.
We see that under this mechanism, 20 plans provide as much surplus as the baseline of
36.7 plans on average per region. As X decreases from 20, the competition effect
dominates at first, resulting in increased consumer surplus. However, at about X=10, it
appears the value of the marginal plan lost is equal to the benefit from the increase in
price competition. After X=10, the loss of consumer surplus from losing plans dominates,
and so consumer surplus begins to fall overall.
       This third alternative method of reducing choice suggests that, when combined
with ex ante competition to be among the included plans, reducing choice could actually
increase consumer welfare regardless of any reduction in search costs.


7. Conclusions
       This paper studied the impact of reducing choice in the Medicare prescription
drug insurance program. We used discrete choice methods for aggregate data to estimate
the demand for stand-alone PDP plans, where each plan is a bundle of attributes to which
consumers attach value. We provided evidence of the relative value of various features of
the plan’s design. Assuming a Bertrand game with differentiated products, we were able
to identify marginal costs for each plan, and provide welfare calculations. Our primary
analysis focused on two easily implementable and fundamentally different policy
experiments concerning reductions in the number of Part D plans, the results of which
may help guide current and future policy in the area of choice limitation. The first policy
experiment removes plans covering the gap, and the second lowers the maximum number
of plans per firm per regions from three to two.
       We found that regulating down the number of plans could have a large impact on
consumer (and producer) surplus, depending on how the reduction of plans is made. We
found that reducing choice will have a notably smaller welfare cost if it is coupled with a
decrease in product differentiation. We also demonstrate that our model performs well in
an externally verifiable counterfactual exercise, the merger of two insurers in this market.
       Each of the policy simulations in our paper is relevant for efforts currently
underway to reform the Part D program. In one recent development, the number of plans
in the Part D market is now reduced because CMS regulations issued in 2010 affecting


                                             30
plans offered in 2011 prevent insurers from offering plans that are not substantially
different from that firm’s other offerings. Also starting in 2010 are provisions to
eventually remove the donut hole. Our work demonstrates the likely importance that this
second change occurs concurrently with the first. Beyond the head to head comparison of
these two ways of reducing choice, we also comment on the welfare implications of a
third way that, to our knowledge, is not in the currently advanced policy efforts. Under
this scenario, policy makers would restrict the number of choices available in a region to
some specified level, and select only that many of the top plans submitted, based on
expected welfare from models such as ours. Our calculations display how welfare
changes according to the number selected, and imply that using this regulatory design
would increase consumer welfare even if there were no search-cost induced welfare
improvements to reduced choice.
       As policy makers look for alternatives to reduce the number of plan choices,
further research is needed to explore the available alternatives more thoroughly. In
particular, further analysis of the benefits and costs of imposing a general limit on choice
and having firms compete for the right to enter markets, and/or data that better allow for
measurement of welfare effects when all plans provide donut hole coverage may be
especially compelling.




                                             31
References
Abaluck, J., Gruber, J.. 2009. Choice Inconsistencies Among the Elderly: Evidence from
Plan Choice in the Medicare Part D Program. NBER Working paper 14759.

Ackerberg, D., Rysman, M., 2005. Unobservable Product Differentiation in Discrete-
choice Models: Estimating Price Elasticities and Welfare Effects. The RAND Journal of
Economics 36, 771-788.

Berry, S., 1994. Estimating discrete-choice models of product differentiation. The RAND
Journal of Economics 25, 242-262

Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., Pakes, A., 1995. Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
Econometrica 63, 841-890.

Bresnahan, T., Reiss, P., 1991. Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets. Journal
of Political Economy 99, 977-1009.

Bresnahan,T., Stern, S., Trajtenberg, M., 1997. Market segmentation and the sources of
rents from innovation: personal computers in the late 1980s. The RAND Journal of
Economics 28, S17-S44.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), 2007. Medicare Prescription Drug
Benefit Manual, Chapter 6. Available at
https://www.cms.gov/PrescriptionDrugCovContra/Downloads/Chapter6.pdf

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2004. A Detailed Description of CBO’s Cost
Estimates for the Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit. Technical Report.

Cubanski, J., Neuman, P., 2006. Status report of Medicare Part D enrollment in 2006:
analysis of plan specific marketshare and coverage. Health Affairs Datawatch, 21.

Cubanski, J., 2008. Knowledge of the Medicare prescription drug benefit: do
beneficiaries really know as much as they think they do? Available at
http://www.academyhealth.org/2008/monday/virginiaab/6_9_2008_4_45/cubanskij.pdf
Last accessed August 1, 2008.

Department of Justice, 2005. Justice Department Requires Divestitures in Unitedhealth
Group’s Acquisition of Pacificare Health Systems.
http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/press_releases/2005/213814.htm

Dixit, A., Stiglitz, J. 1977. Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diverstiy.
American Economic Review 67, 297-308.

Domino, M. E., Stearns, S. C., Norton, E. C., Yeh, W. Why Using Current
Medications to Select a Medicare Part D Plan May Lead to Higher Out-of-Pocket
Payments. Medical Care Research and Review 65:1 (February 2008), 114-126.


                                           32
Duggan, M., Healy, P., Morton, F.S., 2008. Providing Prescription Drug Coverage to the
Elderly: America’ Experiment with Medicare Part D. Journal of Economic Perspectives
22, 69-92.

Federal Register, 2010. Available at http://edocket.access.gpo.gov/2010/pdf/2010-
7966.pdf.

Hausman, J., Leonard, G., Zona, J.D. 1994. Competitive Analysis with Differentiated
Products. Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 34, 159-180.

Heiss, F., McFadden, D., Winter, J., 2006. Who failed to enroll in Medicare Part D, and
why? Early results. Health Affairs 25, w344–w354.

Hoadley, J., 2005. The effect of formularies and other cost management tools on access
to medications: an analysis of the MMA and the final rule. Kaiser Family Foundation
Report. http://www.kff.org/medicare/7299.cfm.

Hoadley J., Hargrave E., Cubanski, J., Neuman, T., 2006. An in-depth examination of
formularies and other features of Medicare drug plans. Kaiser Family Foundation Report.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2005. Medicare Advantage Factsheet. April 2005. available at
http://www.kff.org/medicare/upload/Medicare-Advantage-April-2005-Fact-Sheet.pdf

Kaiser Family Foundation, 2006a. "Voices of Beneficiaries: Medicare Part D Insights and
ObservationsOne Year Later" December, prepared by Michael Perry and Adrianne Dulio,
Lake Research Partners and Juliette Cubanski, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
available at http://www.kff.org/medicare/upload/7605.pdf

Kaiser Family Foundation, 2006b "Chart Pack: Seniors and the Medicare Prescription
Drug", available at www.kff.org/kaiserpolls/upload/7604.pdf

*Kaiser Family Foundation, 2010. Sheet available at
http://www.kff.org/medicare/upload/8107.pdf

Keating, B., 2007. Switching costs in an evolving industry: assessing beneficiary and
firm behavior in the Medicare prescription drug program. Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford
University.

Kling, J. S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. Vermeulen, M. Wrobel. 2008.
Misperceptions in Choosing Medicare Drug Plans, mimeo, The Brookings Institution.

Lancaster, K. 1975. Socially Optimal Product Differentiation. American Economic
Review 65, 567-585.




                                           33
Lakdawalla, D., Sood, N., 2007. The welfare effects of public drug insurance. NBER
Working Paper No. 13501.

Levy, H., Weir, D., 2007. Take-up of Medicare part D and the SSA subsidy: early results
from the Health and Retirement Study. SSRN working paper.

Lustig, J. 2010. Measuring Welfare Losses from Adverse Selection and Imperfect
Competition in Privatized Medicare. Boston University working paper.
http://people.bu.edu/jlustig/lustig_Jan2010_new.pdf

Mikels, J., Reed, A., Simon, K., 2009. Older adults place lower value on choice relative
to young adults. Journal of Gerontology B. June, 64B (4), pp.443-446.

Neuman, P., Strollo, M., Guterman, S., Rogers, W., Li, A., Rodday, A., Safran, D., 2007.
Marketwatch: Medicare prescription drug benefit progress report: findings from a 2006
national survey of seniors. Health Affairs 26, w630-w643

Nevo, A., 2000. Mergers with differentiated products: the case of the ready-to-eat cereal
industry. The RAND Journal of Economics 31, 395-421.

Nevo, A., 2001. Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry.
Econometrica 69, 307-342.

Petrin, A., 2002. Quantifying the benefits of new products: the case of the minivan.
Journal of Political Economy 110, 705-729.

Reed, A., Mikels, J., Simon, K. 2008. Older Adults Prefer Less Choice than Young
Adults. Psychology and Aging 23, 671-675.

Rice, T., Cummings, J., Kao, D., 2008. Reducing the number of drug plans for seniors: a
proposal and analysis of three case studies.
http://www.academyhealth.org/2008/monday/virginiaab/6_9_2008_4_45/RiceT.pdf. Last
accessed August 1, 2008.

Town, R., 2001. The welfare effects of HMO mergers. Journal of Health Economics 20,
733-753.

Town, R., Liu, S., 2003. The welfare impact of Medicare HMOs. The RAND Journal of
Economics 34, 719-736.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. 2010. PL 111-148. 3-23-2010.

Shrank, W., Choudhry, N. 2011. Time to Fill the Donuts. New England Journal of
Medicine. v364, p.598-601, February 17th.




                                            34
Figure 1: The Design of Part D Drug Coverage




                                                               Catastrophic coverage




                                         Doughnut hole

       Deductible
                     Initial Coverage




Note:
The graph above shows how the insurance benefit translates prescription drug costs to
total out-of-pocket costs for a beneficiary. The straight line is total cost (premium + drug
costs) as a function of drug costs. Therefore, it has slope of one and intercept equal to the
premium. The kinked line is out-of-pocket cost as a function of drug costs. The kinks
represent points where Medicare coverage changes. The difference between these two
lines is the Medicare benefit. Source: Authors depiction of standard plan details
announced by CMS.




                                               35
                      Table 1: Variable Definitions


Variable              Definition

Premium               Measured in dollars per month
Deductible            Measured in dollars per year (annual deductible)
Form 100              Measures the number of drugs, of the top 100
                      drugs taken by seniors, that are on the plans for-
                      mulary
Auth 100              Measures the number of drugs, of the top 100
                      drugs for seniors, for which the plan requires prior
                      authorization*
Under20 100           Measures the number of drugs in the top 100 list
                      that have copays of under $20 during the initial
                      coverage zone of the plan
Gapgen                Means that the plan covers generics in the donut-
                      hole portion of the plan
Gapgenb               Means that the plan covers generics and brand
                      name drugs in the donuthole portion of the plan
*Prior authorization is a utilization hurdle whereby the physician must call
the plan for prior approval before prescribing that drug for the senior. The
number of drugs with these requirements rising means less generous coverage.
              Table 2: Summary Statistics

Variable            Mean         Stdev      Min         Max

Enrollment        9,462.9    23,560.58        10    327,541
Market share        0.015        0.029     0.000      0.245
Premium             38.46        12.25      4.91      73.17
Deductible           74.4        108.8         0        250
Form 100            93.21         6.78        75        100
Auth 100             9.64         9.38         0         44
Under20 100         61.37        13.18        20         95
Gapgen               .148          .36         0          1
Gapgenb              .025          .15         0          1
Note: Sample size is 1251 when limited to plans that report
all the variables above.
                     Table 3: Parameter estimates of demand models

                           OLS Logit         IV Nested Logit                   BLP
                                                                        Mean               S.D.
Constant                  −9.26      ***     −11.075        ***    −8.94       ***
                         (1.256)             (1.175)              (1.847)
Premium                    −.12      ***       −.13         ***     −.13        **         .02
                          (.007)              (.014)               (.065)                (.065)
Deductible                −.005      ***      −.002         **     −.004       ***
                         (.0008)             (.0009)               (.001)
Form 100                    .07      ***       .110         ***      .07       ***
                          (.012)              (.012)               (.026)
Auth 100                    .08      ***       .062         ***      .08       ***
                          (.009)              (.010)               (.017)
Under20 100                .002               −.002                 .002
                          (.004)              (.003)               (.004)
Gapgen                      .03               0.029                  .04
                          (.140)              (.124)               (.172)
Gapgenb                    4.07      ***      4.802         ***     4.12       ***
                          (.396)              (.572)               (.979)
Enhanced                   −.75      ***      0.246         ***     −.75                   .27
                          (.171)              (.089)               (.534)                (2.279)


GMM Obj. Func.                                                              67.95
All specifications include firm and region fixed effects.
We denote *, **, and *** statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.
                                                  Table 4: Average price elasticities
                                 1        2        3        4        5        6        7        8        9       10       11       12       13

1. United AARP                 -2.778   0.548    0.562    0.711    0.775    1.026    0.296     0.433   0.571    0.759    0.801    0.488    0.731
2. United MedAdvance           0.051    -3.568   0.060    0.077    0.084    0.106    0.029     0.046    0.061    0.083   0.089    0.054    0.081
3. Memberhealth Basic          0.159    0.180    -3.516   0.232    0.253     0.355    0.101    0.143    0.190    0.256   0.282     0.172    0.257
4. Memberhealth Choice         0.015    0.017    0.017    -4.508   0.025    0.042    0.010     0.013    0.018    0.026    0.029    0.017    0.026
5. Memberhealth Gold           0.011    0.013    0.013    0.017    -4.889   0.035    0.008     0.010    0.015    0.022   0.024     0.012    0.020
6. Humana Complete             0.072    0.084    0.085    0.119    0.146    -6.071   0.040     0.063    0.095    0.145   0.168    0.076    0.135
7. Humana Enhanced             0.172    0.190    0.190    0.232    0.266     0.331   -1.999    0.155    0.205    0.260   0.285    0.177    0.249
8. Unicare Rewards             0.076    0.086    0.088    0.111    0.121     0.150    0.045   -2.874    0.092   0.122    0.125    0.078    0.114
9. Unicare Plus                0.002    0.003    0.003    0.004    0.004     0.006    0.001    0.002   -3.781   0.004    0.005    0.002    0.004
10. Unicare Premium            0.002    0.002    0.002    0.003    0.003     0.005    0.001    0.001    0.002   -4.829   0.004    0.002    0.003
11. Pacificare Comprehensive   0.006    0.007    0.007    0.009    0.011    0.019    0.004     0.005    0.008    0.011   -5.107    0.006    0.010
12. Pacificare Saver           0.104    0.117    0.120    0.152    0.165     0.219    0.064    0.092    0.122    0.163   0.174    -3.208    0.159
13. Pacificare Select          0.004    0.005    0.006    0.008    0.008     0.009    0.002    0.004    0.006    0.008   0.008    0.004    -4.691
                                       Table 5: Welfare and Policy Experiments

                                                   Baseline            Merger         Gap Plans Policy   Two Plan Maximum

Consumer Surplus
Surplus                                         1,980,343,388.68   1,945,955,388.24   1,866,531,012.44    1,676,575,822.91
Diff from Baseline                                                     −1.73%             −5.75%              −15.34%
Diff from Baseline — premium fixed                                                        −5.12%              −1.83%
Diff from Baseline — due to new eqm. premia                                               −0.63%              −13.51%

Producer    Surplus
Surplus                                         1,277,592,635.18   1,292,299,536.11   1,242,258,114.46    1,132,617,178.45
Diff from   Baseline                                                   −1.15%             −2.76%              −11.34%
Diff from   Baseline — premium fixed                                                      −3.20%              −23.36%
Diff from   Baseline — due to new eqm. premia                                             +0.43%              +12.02%

Enrollment                                        11,838,069         11,686,956          11,485,345         10,452,922

Premium Effects
Avg. Non-gap Premium                                 36.20                                 36.49
Avg. Premium Enhanced                                39.60                                 40.23
Avg. Premium Non-enhanced                            34.18                                 34.27
Avg. Premium                                         38.46                                                     40.58
Avg. Premium Merging Firms                           33.43              35.02
Avg. Premium Non-merging Firms                       39.26              39.64
            Table 6: Allowing Only Plans with Highest Surplus

Number of Plans         Consumer Surplus   Producer Surplus     Enrollment
                            (billion)          (billion)         (million)
Baseline (36.7 Plans)         1.98               1.27             11.83

20 Plans                      1.98               1.24             11.84

15 Plans                      2.00               1.17             11.96

11 Plans                      2.09               0.98             12.42

10 Plans                      2.10               0.92             12.49

9 Plans                       2.07               0.90             12.42

5 Plans                       1.86               0.76             11.65
Appendix

                       Table A-1: First stage regression (Dependent variable is premium)

                                                                          Parameter estimate        S.E.
           Count of plans in same group                                        10.446               2.345   ***
           Sum of premiums of other plans in same group                        -0.159               0.012   ***
           Count of plans sold by focal firm                                    0.659               0.911
           Count of plans sold by focal firm in same group                      0.015               0.455
           Sum of deductible of other plans in same group                      -0.010               0.001   ***
           Sum of Form 100 of other plans in same group                        -0.040               0.022    *
           Sum of Auth 100 of other plans in same group                        -0.117               0.019   ***
           Sum of Under 20 100 of other plans in same group                     0.032               0.009   ***
           Sum of Gapgen of other plans in same group                          -1.493               0.567   ***
           F-stat: 21.8 (p-value < 0.01)
           N = 1251
           We denote *, **, and *** statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% respectively.
