                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         CURRENT ACCOUNT SUSTAINABILITY AND RELATIVE RELIABILITY

                                        Stephanie E. Curcuru
                                         Charles P. Thomas
                                         Francis E. Warnock

                                        Working Paper 14295
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14295


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




This paper, which is forthcoming in the NBER’s International Seminar 2008, is also being released
as Federal Reserve International Finance Discussion Paper 947. The authors are indebted to Jeff Frankel
for suggesting the topic and to Trevor Reeve for particularly helpful discussions. We thank James
Albertus for excellent research assistance and Mike Dooley, Daniel Gros, Philip Lane, Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti, and participants at the Wisconsin Conference on Current Account Sustainability and
the NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics Conference in Slovenia for helpful comments.
Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous support. The views in this paper are solely
the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, any other person
associated with the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Current Account Sustainability and Relative Reliability
Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 14295
September 2008
JEL No. F3

                                                ABSTRACT

The sustainability of the large and persistent U.S. current account deficits is one of the biggest issues
currently being confronted by international macroeconomists. Some very plausible theories suggest
that the substantial global imbalances can continue in a benign manner, other equally plausible theories
predict a disorderly resolution, and in general it is very difficult to discern between competing theories.
To inform the debates, we view competing theories through the perspective of the relative reliability
of the data the theories rely on. Our analysis of the dark matter theory is cursory; from a relative reliability
perspective, it fails as it is built on the assumption that an item that is largely unmeasured is the most
accurate component of the entire set of international accounts. Similarly, the best data currently available
suggest that U.S. returns differentials are much smaller than implied by the exorbitant privilege theory.
Our analysis opens up questions about potential inconsistencies in the international accounts, which
we address by providing rough estimates of various holes in the accounts.


Stephanie E. Curcuru                                   Francis E. Warnock
Board of Governors                                     Darden Business School
of the Federal Reserve System                          University of Virginia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW                Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Washington DC 20551                                    and NBER
stephanie.e.curcuru@frb.gov                            warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

Charles P. Thomas
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington DC 20551
thomasc@frb.gov
1. Introduction

        One of the biggest issues confronting international macroeconomists is whether or not the large

and persistent U.S. current account deficits are sustainable.1 There are varied views about how the current

situation of global imbalances—in which the United States has a sizeable current account deficit of over

five percent of GDP and, to a first approximation, the rest of the world has a sizeable current account

surplus—might resolve itself. In a simplistic way these views can be divided into those who believe these

imbalances will evolve in a benign manner and those who worry that their resolution will involve

substantial disruptions to the global economy, disruptions that could include, among other things, a sharp

decline in the dollar, a sharp increase in U.S. interest rates, and substantial negative spillovers to other

economies.

        The problem, from a lay person’s perspective, is that it is extremely difficult to determine which

of the competing views of U.S. current account sustainability are valid. From a distance, they all seem

plausible. Take, for example, the “exorbitant privilege” view that the United States can earn its way to

current account sustainability because U.S. claims on foreigners earn a much higher rate of return than

foreign claims on the United States. Such a return differential would indeed loosen the U.S. budget

constraint and make it easier to run continued large current account deficits. As theoretical work such as

Cavallo and Tille (2006) shows, a positive returns differential would decrease the likelihood of a

disorderly adjustment in the U.S. current account and the dollar; were the exorbitant privilege view true,

the U.S. current account would be more sustainable than otherwise. Complicating matters is that while

some—such as Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti

(2005), and Meissner and Taylor (2006)—have computed a returns differential that can be described as

exorbitant, others (Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock 2008a,b; Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2008) provide

evidence suggesting such estimates might be biased upward. Another example is the “dark matter” view

of Hausmann and Sturzenegger (2007), henceforth HS. HS propose an alternative method to computing


1
 On this, see, among others, Hausmann and Sturzenegger (2007), Kitchen (2007), Pavlova and Rigobon (2008),
Edwards (2005), Frankel (2006), Roubini and Setser (2004), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2007), and Meredith (2007).
net international positions and current accounts. With their method, global net asset positions are stable,

suggesting that the current global imbalances are sustainable and that neither a major adjustment in the

exchange value of the dollar nor a large rebalancing of the global economy is necessary. In contrast, Gros

(2006) concludes that the U.S. net IIP is more negative than reported after examining the same data. So

which is it? Is the actual U.S. net international position more stable than suggested by the published data

(the HS view) or more negative (the Gros view)?

        One way to discern between competing views of current account sustainability is to examine the

data upon which they rely. That is, as we will show in this paper, many competing views on whether the

U.S. current account deficit is sustainable or not hinge importantly on beliefs about the relative reliability

of various components of the international accounts.2

        Questions about the relative reliability of entries in the international accounts are not new:

                 “Clearly, if our investments abroad are yielding a positive return, their
                 capital value must be positive not negative. Is this a defect of the figures
                 on current flows, or is it a defect of the balance-sheet figures? The only
                 obvious reconciliation is to assign the whole of the statistical discrepancy
                 as an unrecorded negative net investment income, but even that does not
                 seem satisfactory…” (Milton Friedman, 1987)3

Over 20 years later, these issues are still open and the question of relative reliability remains a useful

perspective through which to view theories on current account sustainability.

        Our results can be summarized as follows. First, from a relative reliability perspective the dark

matter view can be quickly dispensed with. HS suggest that the external position for all asset types should

be estimated by capitalizing income at a common discount rate. They then compute the net position from

these capitalized values, and form the current account as the year-to-year change in their constructed net

position. This explicitly assumes that investment income, a subcomponent of the current account, is the

most reliable portion of the entire set of international accounts, and that it is appropriate to construct

positions in this manner. Given that approximately two-thirds of published investment income data are


2
  By international accounts we are referring to the balance of payments (BOP) and the international investment
position (IIP).
3
  Personal correspondence with Charles Thomas, June 1987.

                                                         2
not measured, but are formed by applying estimates (of yields) to estimates (of positions), from a relative

reliability perspective dark matter fails. Moreover, while we have sympathy for some parts of the

hypothesis, we find the methodology of capitalizing income streams to be questionable. Even if the

investment income numbers are entirely reliable, we doubt this method of constructing the current

account or position is an improvement over the published estimates.

         Second, the view that the United States can earn its way to current account sustainability rests on

the continued existence of an exorbitant privilege, which rests in turn on a view of relative reliability in

which position and flow data form a cohesive dataset. But Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (henceforth

CDW) (2008a) argue convincingly that, for the purpose of calculating returns, positions and flows data do

not form an internally consistent dataset and show that the returns differential—the difference between

the rate that the United States earns on its foreign claims and the rate it pays on its foreign liabilities—is

not as sizable as previously assumed.4

         To weigh in on this, we first form returns differentials in the most accurate way currently

possible. For one asset class—direct investment (DI)—we cannot confidently form what we would

consider accurate returns, so there we present a range. But with either high or low DI returns, in aggregate

we produce returns differentials that are consistent with those from CDW (2008a) and much smaller than

the exorbitant privilege view suggests. There is no evidence from carefully constructed returns

differentials that the United States can count on earning high international returns.

         The analysis of returns differentials, as in CDW (2008a) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008),

opens up a puzzle. Specifically, it exposes a substantial “gap” in the international accounts that implies

mismeasurements in some combination of our preferred valuation adjustments, reported balance of

payments data, and reported international investment positions data. To weigh in on this, we address

known weaknesses in the accounts by forming adjustments for (i) assets not currently captured in the

4
  CDW’s view can be interpreted as one in which improvements to the data collection system make information on
relatively recent positions (taken from the IIP) more reliable than information on past positions (also in the IIP) and
that position data is generally more reliable than that on financial flows (presented in the IIP, but originating in the
BOP) which are seldom revised even after errors are identified.


                                                           3
historical financial accounts data (residential real estate, which should be in the direct investment data,

and financial derivatives, introduced only in 2006), (ii) items that have known shortcomings in the

transactions data in the current and financial accounts but have no known accompanying flaws in the

positions data (IPOs, asset-backed repayments, goods exports), and (iii) items that have known

shortcomings in the positions data but for which the associated transactions data are thought to be sound

(short positions, direct investment in intangibles). We develop reasonable plugs to these holes and

construct revised estimates of the remaining unexplained difference between the cumulated current

account deficit and the net IIP.

        In the end, after accounting for weaknesses in the international accounts, the gap is quite small

and entirely consistent with small CDW-type valuation adjustments. Moreover, our best estimate

indicates that the current account deficit is somewhat smaller than has been reported (on average 0.35%

of GDP per year), net financial inflows are smaller than reported (on average 0.7% of GDP per year), and

the end-2007 net IIP is $500 billion more negative than reported.

        In the next section we examine the dark matter hypothesis. In Section 3 we weigh in on the

exorbitant privilege view, discuss the relative reliability of various items in the international accounts, and

provide adjustments to plug known holes in the accounts. In Section 4 we take a step back and think more

broadly about current account sustainability, discussing the implications of our results and, just as

importantly, suggesting avenues that are potentially more informative. Section 5 concludes. Drier material

on forming our preferred returns and the details of our adjustments to the international accounts are

relegated to appendices. We provide annual data on our adjustments, as well as some underlying data, at

http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w14295.



2. Dark Matter

        At least in its original incarnation, the dark matter of HS rested on a very severe notion of relative

reliability. In particular, HS explicitly assume that investment income, a subcomponent of the current

account, is the most reliable portion of the entire set of international accounts. Given this view of the

                                                      4
relative reliability of various components of the international accounts—in this case that information on

investment income is more reliable than information on the IIP and the current account—a view of

current account sustainability follows. If investment income is the most accurate component of the entire

set of accounts, then the HS suggestion that the net IIP should be estimated by capitalizing net investment

income is reasonable, and so might be estimating net financial flows as the changes in the capitalized-net-

income measure of the net IIP.5 Doing so produces global net asset positions that appear to be relatively

stable, leading to the HS view that global imbalances are sustainable and that neither a major adjustment

in the exchange value of the dollar nor a large rebalancing of the global economy is necessary.

        Kozlow (2006) presents a cogent critique of this dark matter hypothesis.6 Here we will raise only

one point about the leg on which it stands. The notion that income streams are the most accurate aspect of

the account is patently false. In gross valuation terms, more than two-thirds of the income streams—those

arising from non-DI positions—are derived by taking an estimate of the position, picking a reasonable

yield, and applying that yield to positions to estimate income streams. In 2007, combined gross income

payments and receipts totaled a bit less than $1.5 trillion; of this more than $1 trillion was non-DI and

hence was estimated by applying an estimated rate of return to estimated positions.7 Our view is that from

a relative reliability perspective this theory, which relies on largely on data constructed by applying

estimates to estimates, is fairly weak.

        Since HS first applied the term dark matter to international accounting, it has become associated

with the difficulty in accounting for cross-border transactions in intellectual property (IP) such as patents,

trademarks, and other intangibles. We have some sympathy for this view. In the U.S. National Income

and Product Accounts (NIPA) all trade in IP (whether for the use of the IP or ownership rights to it) is




5
  HS actually suggest that the current account balance, not net financial flows, be measured in this way. However,
estimating the current account in this way ignores the potentially large (if currently unmeasured) contribution of
capital account transactions and introduces inconsistencies into the NIPA measurement of product.
6
  See also Willem Buiter’s critique, “Dark Matter or Cold Fusion?” (http://www.nber.org/~wbuiter/dark.pdf).
7
  Thus, when positions data are revised when more accurate information becomes available, so too are income
streams. This explains why starting in the late 1990s the United States repeatedly became a net debtor in the income
balance only to have revisions to positions push it back into the black.

                                                         5
included in the current account under services.8 This is true for trade between unaffiliated parties as well

as trade within a DI relationship. BEA has recognized that its coverage of these transactions has been

incomplete and recently revised its forms and reporting panels.9 Although these efforts will likely

increase coverage, and perhaps increase recorded services trade, they will likely do little to address the

issue of how firms value the IP transferred between affiliates. One hypothesis to reconcile the high

income rate of return earned on U.S. direct investment abroad and the low income rate of return earned on

foreign direct investment in the United States is that U.S. firms undervalue the IP transferred to their

foreign affiliates while foreign parents overvalue the IP transferred to their U.S. affiliates.

         We are not going to address this issue beyond making two points: First, the current cost valuation

of DI used throughout this paper excludes intangibles, including IP. Second, the fundamental issues

associated with sustainability depend on the willingness of cross-border investors to continue investing

and the servicing burden of the investment positions. The particular values that compilers attach to DI

positions in the IIP are irrelevant. For example, foreign parents may be quite happy with the fact that their

U.S. affiliates earn low (profit) rates of return so long as they pay large royalty payments back to the

parent. From the standpoint of the current account (and hence financial flows), it does not matter if the

debit entry is recorded as investment income payments or royalty payments.10



8
  This treatment is out of sync with the System of National Accounts, 1993, (SNA93) and causes an inconsistency in
the NIPA measurement of product. Within SNA93, transactions in the ownership rights to IP are to be recorded in
the capital account unless the IP is the result of research and development (R&D). Trade in the ownership rights to
IP that results from R&D is to be recorded in the current account as “research and development services.” However,
trade in the rights to use IP are to be recorded in the current account under services as “royalties,” regardless of
whether R&D was an input to the IP. In the draft edition of the update to the Balance of Payments Manuel, BPM6,
the term “royalties” has been replaced by “Fees for franchises and other property rights.”
9
  The new form, BE-125, first collected data for 2006. Estimates based on these data will be folded into the annual
revisions to the IT accounts published in June 2008.
10
   We can be more precise on this point. Consider, for example, a foreign subsidiary (the sub) that does not pay
royalties to its U.S. parent and instead books a high profit and pays taxes to its host country, which, in a host country
like Ireland, would be at a low rate. The U.S. parent pays no taxes until the sub repatriates the income; if the sub
does pay royalties to its parent, the sub's profits are lower and the sub pays (a little) lower taxes to its host country.
In that case the U.S. parent has the higher royalty income which, all else equal, flows directly into pre-tax profits;
U.S. tax must now be paid on this, presumably at a higher rate than in the host country. As long as the sub has
something reasonable to do with the funds abroad, then it makes sense to not pay royalties. If and when there comes
a time when the parent needs the funds back home, the sub pays the parent a dividend and at that time the parent
pays taxes to the U.S. government equal to the difference between what it would normally pay and what the sub has
already paid to the sub's host country. Note that the accounting treatment of these earnings may, however, violate

                                                            6
3. Exorbitant Privilege

        The exorbitant privilege view that the United States might be able to earn its way to current

account sustainability also hinges on relative reliability. Proponents of this view point to the large returns

differential the United States enjoys—the idea that the United States can persistently earn sizably more on

its foreign portfolio than it pays foreigners on their U.S. portfolios—that has been reported in Gourinchas

and Rey (2007a), Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005), Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005), and Meissner and Taylor

(2006). Subsequent work—CDW (2008a,b) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008)—has found that early

estimates of the U.S. returns differentials were biased upward.

        Why is there a discrepancy between estimates of the returns differential? From a relative

reliability perspective, the large U.S. returns differential and, hence, the empirical cornerstone of the

exorbitant privilege view, rests on the implicit but ultimately incorrect assumption that the various

components of the U.S. international accounts form a cohesive dataset (CDW 2008a). The CDW view can

be interpreted as one in which information on relatively recent positions (taken from the IIP) is more

reliable than information on past positions (also in the IIP) and financial flows (presented in the IIP, but

originating in the BOP).

        In this section we put forward what we believe to be the best quality information on returns

differentials currently available. Our analysis exposes a substantial gap in the international accounts—an

inconsistency between our preferred valuation adjustments, reported balance of payments data, and

reported international investment positions data—that we then address. We end by summarizing the

implications of our analysis for the exorbitant privilege view. Data availability limits our analysis to the

period from 1990 to 2007.




IRS transfer-pricing guidelines and can result in significant tax penalties such as those recently levied on
pharmaceutical companies Merck & Company and Glaxo SmithKline. See “Merck Tax Settlement Carries $2.3B
Tab”, WebCPA, Feb. 15, 2007, available at http://www.webcpa.com/article.cfm?articleid=23366.

                                                       7
3.1 Estimating Returns Differentials

         Returns on international investment positions are never directly measured and thus must be

inferred from other data. As shown in CDW (2008a), there are essentially three methods for estimating

cross-border returns. Two methods use IIP data—one as-reported data from each year’s IIP release, the

other the current vintage of revised data—on flows and positions to back out implied returns. The third

uses a combination of market-based returns data where possible and original IIP data where market-based

data are not readily available. In this section we discuss and compare the three methods.



3.1.1 Original IIP Method

         The “Original IIP” approach estimates capital gain returns for a particular asset class using:

                          AtO − AtO−1 − FLOWt O − OAtO
                  rtO =                                                                             (1)
                                        1
                                AtO−1 + FLOWt O
                                        2

where A, FLOW, and OA denote positions, flows, and “other adjustments” and the O superscript denotes

that all are as reported in the original year t IIP release.11

         From a relative reliability perspective, the Original IIP method presumes that originally reported

positions and flows form a cohesive dataset and that originally reported “other adjustments” are not

valuation adjustments. These “other adjustments” are one item in the IIP presentation: In each annual IIP

release, for both claims and liabilities positions and for each asset class, BEA provides a reconciliation

between start- and end-of-the-year positions, attributing movements over the year to net flows, valuation

changes due to price or exchange-rate movements, and “other adjustments.” BEA defines “other

adjustments” as (i) changes in coverage, (ii) capital gains and losses of direct investment affiliates, and

(iii) other adjustments to the value of assets and liabilities. Large contributors to “other adjustments” are


11
  Throughout, DI is valued using the current-cost method. Alternatively, these positions could be reported based on
their historical cost, or based on an estimate of the current market value. BEA shifted their emphasis to the current-
cost method starting in 2006. In general, the value of DI is extremely difficult to determine because it typically
involves illiquid ownership interest.


                                                          8
the addition of new reporters to the panels, identified reporting errors, and reclassification of assets

among categories, but—except for the banking and nonbanking categories—the “other adjustments”

reported in the original IIP releases are very minor.

        Column (A) of Table 1 shows capital gains returns differentials computed using the Original IIP

method. The overall differential is quite small at 0.7 percent per year for the period from 1990 to 2007.

The source of this modest differential is the different compositions of U.S. assets and liabilities, first

pointed out by Gourinchas and Rey (2007a); U.S. assets are weighted toward equities and DI, while U.S.

liabilities are weighted toward lower yielding debt securities.



3.1.2 Revised IIP Method

        The second method, the “Revised IIP” method, uses the following formula to calculate implied

capital gains returns:

                       AtR − AtR−1 − FLOWt R
                  rt =
                   R
                                                                                                (2)
                                 1
                         AtR−1 + FLOWt R
                                 2

where the R superscript denotes that these variables are formed using the most recently revised data (that

is, the current vintage of revised data).12

        Note that an implicit assumption behind (2) is that the current vintage of revised positions and

flows data form a consistent data set from which implied returns can be computed. While one would

expect revisions to generally enhance the accuracy of reported data, when computing implied returns

from position and flow data it is relative reliability that matters. In fact, Figure 1, reproduced from CDW

(2008a), shows that over time positions data have been systematically revised upward from a U.S.

perspective,13 while flows are little revised. Large upward revisions to positions with essentially no


12
   Equations (1) and (2) differ slightly from those presented CDW (2008a) because the denominator includes a term
for one-half of the year’s flows, and the numerator in equation (1) also subtracts the contribution of “other
adjustments.” The differences in the resulting valuation adjustments are minor.
13
   This upward revision in U.S. positions is a combination of upward revisions to U.S. assets abroad and downward
revisions to foreigners’ positions in the United States.

                                                        9
corresponding revisions to flows produce—when returns are computed using (2)—large returns

differentials.14 This is evident in Column (B) of Table 1: In aggregate the Revised IIP method produces a

substantial capital gains returns differential of 2.4 percent per year, owing to large differentials favoring

the United States for bonds, equities, and direct investment.



3.1.3 Our Preferred Method

         Our preferred method takes the following approach. For portfolio bonds and equities, as in CDW

(2008a,b) we use a market-based approach that assumes that holdings data are the most accurate aspect of

the international accounts and applies reasonable returns indices to the measured positions to form

estimated returns. For asset classes where capital gains are minor and little additional information

becomes available over time, such as the banking/nonbanking/other categories, we assume the Original

IIP releases provide a reasonably accurate picture. The most difficult asset class for which to estimate

returns differentials is direct investment. There is a long literature on puzzling aspects of returns on direct

investment in the United States and abroad.15 From our perspective, the difficulty in calculating accurate

returns differentials for DI stems from three factors: (i) BEA only publishes revised valuation and other

adjustments for aggregate claims and liabilities, without a breakdown by asset class, so there is no

reported estimate of adjustments in revised data, (ii) there are no market-based indices that are

appropriate, and (iii) in contrast to other asset classes, “other adjustments” in the current vintage of

revised data likely contains some information on valuation adjustments. To address the first factor, we

infer DI other adjustments as what remains after we subtract the “other adjustments” associated with non-

DI assets from the reported aggregate. With regard to the last two factors, we calculate implied DI returns

from the current vintage of data by assuming that either all revised DI “other adjustments” are indeed

valuation adjustments or, alternatively, that they are associated with intangibles and should remain “other

14
   To be more precise, this statement is true only if previous-period positions are not fully revised. They are not; see
CDW (2008a).
15
   There is a long-standing, positive total returns differential for direct investment, the bulk of which arises from
relatively higher income yields. The capital gains differential reported in Table 1 ranges from 0.8 to 2.3 percent per
year, depending on how other adjustments are treated.

                                                           10
adjustments”. This approach means that we have a range of returns for DI, which, while not entirely

satisfactory, at least accurately depicts our lack of knowledge of underlying DI returns.16

           Complete details of the calculations behind our preferred method—from our choices of returns

indices to the way we estimate DI other adjustments—are provided in Appendix A. The resulting returns

are in Column (C) of Table 1. Returns differentials computed using our preferred method are quite small,

with an aggregate differential of 0.9-1.1 percent per year, depending on whether DI “other adjustments”

are considered valuation adjustments.



3.1.4 Comparison of the Three Methods

           The aggregate differential from our preferred method is only slightly higher than that from the

Original IIP method, but much smaller than the differential from revised data. The asset classes that

produce the large discrepancy between our preferred returns and those from the Revised IIP method are

equities and bonds. Our preferred capital gains rates on equity claims are significantly smaller than those

computed by the Revised IIP method (8.2 percent vs. 13.2 percent). Also dramatic are the differences in

the capital gains on bonds, with Revised IIP annual returns being 2.5 percent higher for claims and almost

two percent lower for liabilities, both of which inflate the overall differential.

           The main difference between the large differentials from the Revised IIP method and the smaller

ones from our preferred method is that the revised method assumes all “other adjustments” are in fact

valuation adjustments. From a relative reliability perspective, we find that assumption untenable, as for

asset classes like bonds and equities there is little additional information on returns in the revised releases;

returns are not measured in the original release, nor are they measured in subsequent ones.



3.2 The Gap in the International Accounts

           From a relative reliability perspective, returns differentials from our preferred method are the

most accurate. Yes, they can be improved upon in the future, in particular by forming even finer returns

16
     This treatment of DI “other adjustments” is similar to that in Lane and Milesi-Feretti (2008).

                                                            11
indices for cross-border portfolio bond and equity positions, but for each asset class they are based on

assessments of the best available information for computing returns. That said, as can be seen in Table 2,

they expose a “gap” in the international accounts that, computed over the 1990 to 2007 period, totals

between $1,358 billion and $1,752 billion (depending on how revised DI “other adjustments” are

treated).17 Conceptually, this gap—which is equal to the net of “other adjustments” for claims and

liabilities shown in Table 2—is the difference between the position recorded in 2007 and the position that

would be estimated by adding flows and valuation adjustments to the initial (end-1989, in this exercise)

position.18 A positive gap indicates that 2007 positions are greater than implied by past flows and

valuation adjustments.

         Specifically, the gap is defined as:

         GAPT = NIIPTR − EstimatedNIIPT                                                                       (3)

where NIIP is the net international investment position, T is the end-date (in this case, 2007), the R

superscript indicates that these are the recorded values, and EstimatedNIIP is the NIIP estimated by

adding cumulated flows and valuation adjustments to the initial NIIP, NIIP0. Let CA denote the current

account, FA the financial account, KA the capital account, VA valuation adjustments, and SD the

statistical discrepancy. Then, expressed another way, the gap is:

                                           T           T
         GAPT = NIIPTR − ( NIIP0R − ∑ FA R + ∑ VA R )                                                         (4)
                                           t =1        t =1


or, since the financial account is equal to the negative of the sum of the current account, capital account,

and statistical discrepancy:




17
   A look at cumulative “other adjustments” by asset class (equivalent to the by-asset-class “gaps” in Table 2) shows
that assuming they are all valuation changes is incorrect. For example, large “other adjustments” appear in the
banking and non-banking categories in part because of a reclassification of deposits at securities brokers from the
non-banking to banking category, as occurred in the 2003 IIP (Abaroa 2004, p. 32); at the asset level, including all
the reported “other adjustments” as capital gains is clearly incorrect. For securities positions, revisions typically
come in response to securities claims and liabilities holdings surveys that are collected and released at a long lag to
the initial IIP publication, and, as discussed in detail in CDW (2008a), are often the result of sizable errors in the
Treasury flow data supplied to BEA which are difficult to revise.
18
   In this section, we build on the detailed analyses of the gap in CDW (2008a) and Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2008).

                                                              12
                                           T                     T                   T                 T
         GAPT = NIIPTR − ( NIIP0R − ∑ CA R − ∑ KA R − ∑ SD R + ∑ VA R )                                        (5)
                                           t =1                 t =1                 t =1              t =1


Note, too, the relationship between changes in the NIIP and the financial account:19

                                                  T                    T                    T
         ΔNIIP R = NIIPTR − NIIP0R = −∑ FA R + ∑VA R + ∑ OA R                                                  (6)
                                                  t =1                 t =1              t =1


where OA are “other adjustments” attributable to items like series breaks that create inconsistencies in the

data series and the inconsistency that arises from recording DI positions at their current-cost value while

DI transactions occur at market value. Note that equations (4) and (6) combined indicate that the gap is

also the sum of “other adjustments”:

                                           T                    T
         GAPT = ( NIIPTR − NIIP0R ) + ∑ FA R − ∑ VA R
                                           t =1                 t =1
                                                                                                               (7)
               T          T          T                   T                    T                 T
         = (−∑ FA + ∑ VA + ∑ OA ) + ∑ FA − ∑ VA = ∑ OA
                     R          R                 R                    R                 R                 R

              t =1       t =1       t =1                 t =1                 t =1              t =1


        Using our preferred valuation adjustment estimates, Figure 2 provides a representation of the

$1.75 trillion gap for 1989 to 2007, assuming that no “other adjustments” are valuation adjustments. The

current account, capital account, statistical discrepancy and NIIP are taken from the most recently

released (April 2008) BEA data. The individual components of the gap are shown in the embedded table.



3.3 The Gap from a Relative Reliability Perspective

        A gap of $1.75 trillion suggests some combination of two things: our preferred valuation

adjustments are incorrect or there are inaccuracies in the international accounts. While our preferred

valuation adjustments are surely not perfect, we calculated them using the best quality data currently

available. From a relative reliability perspective, the substantial gap—assuming that our preferred

valuation adjustments are roughly accurate—suggests inconsistencies between items in the international

accounts. At the asset class level, reclassifications can lead to a gap; for example, the large gap in the


19
  We assume that the financial account flows are signed according to the BOP convention, which is the opposite of
how they appear in the BEA NIIP presentation and is why they have a negative sign in equations (4) and (6).

                                                                       13
banking and non-banking data was created when deposits were reclassified between categories. But, more

generally, the gap can be the result of errors in flows or problems with the initial or final position that

could result from series breaks such as the reclassification of data between asset types or the introduction

of new reporters or assets. To better understand the gap, we must investigate these inconsistencies by

examining (and providing estimates for) potential holes in the international accounts. We divide our

analysis into three categories of adjustments. Note that to conserve space we provide annual data on all of

our adjustments, including some of the underlying data used to create the adjustments, at

http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w14295.

        The first category of adjustments, presented in detail in Appendix B, is entire asset classes

missing from both the transactions accounts and IIP, such as financial derivatives (which were introduced

in 2006) and residential real estate claims and liabilities (which should be included as part of direct

investment). For financial derivatives, we form estimates based on the growth rate of transactions and

holdings reported to the IMF by other countries. For residential real estate, which should be part of DI, we

construct estimates of foreign purchases of U.S. real estate using recent National Association of Realtors

survey data and estimates of U.S. purchases of foreign real estate by following the Flick and Yun (2007)

construction of estimates using State Department data. While such missing flows and assets have no

impact on the visible gap (by construction, since we assume there are no “other adjustments”), their

inclusion will have an impact on the statistical discrepancy and the IIP. Our analysis suggests that there

are additional substantial net unrecorded inflows from these assets, and that residential real estate

substantially increases the net IIP liability position.

        The second category of adjustments, presented in Appendix C, is shortcomings in the transactions

data in the current and financial accounts that are not accompanied by known problems with positions

data. Examples of these include initial public offerings and asset-backed repayments in the financial

account (both measured well in the positions data but not in the financial account) and goods exports in

the current account. There is substantial evidence that financial account net outflows are undercounted;

we also identify research that has identified under-reporting of net exports.

                                                          14
        The third category of adjustments, presented in detail in Appendix D, consists of items for which

there are problems with IIP positions but for which the associated transactions data are thought to be

sound. Examples of these include short positions and direct investment in intangible assets such as

research and development. For short positions, the U.S. surveys used to collect position data do not admit

the reporting of negative positions and, as a result, both the equity and bond positions are likely

overstated. To estimate the impact of the omission of short equity positions, we construct estimates of the

fraction of cross-border equity claims and liabilities that have negative positions using representative

short sales as a percentage of float, and the corresponding impact on net dividend income. We construct

an adjustment for short positions in U.S. Treasuries based on short Treasury positions reported by U.S.

broker/dealers. We find that adjusting for equity short sales makes the net IIP slightly more negative, but

this is more than offset by adjustments for short bond liabilities positions (which make the IIP more

positive). For DI in intangible assets, we use BEA estimates of the impact of intangibles such as research

and development, which also move the net IIP into a more negative position.

        Our adjustments to the international accounts are summarized in Table 3. Panel A shows our

adjustments to transactions. The net effect is that our estimated adjustments to recorded net outflows into

bonds, banking and nonbanking deposits, equities, and DI are only partially offset by adjustments to

inflows from financial derivatives, real estate, income, and goods exports; in sum our adjustments

increase cumulative net outflows by $501 billion. Panels B and C show our adjustments to claims and

liabilities positions. The estimated net IIP adjustment is shown in the final column of Table 3 Panel C; our

adjustments indicate that the net IIP in 2007 was $512 billion more negative than what was recorded.

        After making adjustments to plug known holes in the accounts, we can reevaluate the gap.

Specifically, to construct revised estimates of the gap we utilize the transactions and positions

adjustments summarized in Table 3 to form revised estimates of the gap for a number of adjustment

scenarios (Table 4). The original estimate of the gap totaling $1.75 trillion is shown in the first column;

the subsequent columns add combinations of adjustments from Table 3. Column (A) includes all

adjustments with an impact on the financial account, which average 0.7 percent of U.S. GDP per year,

                                                    15
and offsetting current account adjustments for goods exports, income and R&D, which combined average

0.35 percent of U.S. GDP per year. It also includes the corresponding valuation adjustment for financial

derivatives and real estate implied from equation (4) under the assumption that “other adjustments” are

zero, and an estimate of the change in securities valuation adjustments if the positions are adjusted for

short sales. The resulting gap falls dramatically to $369 billion; it is the sum of “other adjustments” for DI

and other assets, and an amount needed to reconcile the new R&D positions.

        As a secondary check we verify that after the BOP adjustments the statistical discrepancy is

reasonable. The year-by-year recorded statistical discrepancy is shown in Panel B, with the total shown in

the final memo line of Panel A. Under Scenario (A) the cumulated discrepancy increases substantially to

$533 billion, as the more than $1.0 trillion decrease in financial account transaction adjustments is only

partially offset by current account adjustments. This remaining discrepancy may be the result of known

issues that we are unable to estimate, such as unrecorded services and intellectual property exports.

        As discussed earlier, some of the “other adjustments” in DI adjustments reflects the difference

between the market value and book value of a transaction or are capital gains and losses of affiliates, but

it is unclear how much should be allocated to each. The original and column (A) scenarios assume that all

these “other adjustments” are attributable to differences between the market value and book value –

essentially the marking down of the transaction value by the amount of intangibles and goodwill. These

are legitimate “other adjustments” that remain in the gap. In all scenarios we also left the $8 billion of

“other adjustments” associated with other assets and the $18 billion needed to reconcile the new R&D

positions as “other adjustments”, because it is unclear if these should be allocated to valuation

adjustments, transactions, or positions. In column (B) we treat all DI “other adjustments” as capital gains.

Moving all these “other adjustments” to capital gains almost eliminates the gap and is equivalent to

increasing the returns differential on DI from 0.8 percent to 2.3 percent (as in the Revised IIP estimate

from Table 1), and the aggregate returns differential from 0.9 percent to 1.1 percent, shown at the bottom

of Table 1.



                                                     16
        In column (C) we remove our estimates for financial derivatives and real estate, as these were

based on relatively thin information. There is a notable increase in the discrepancy because the real estate

inflows had offset a good deal of the additional securities outflows.

        Figure 3 depicts Scenario (A) graphically. When compared with Figure 2, the most substantial

differences are that in Figure 3 the 2007 Net IIP is more negative, and the lines associated with the

cumulated financial and current accounts are less negative. There is still a gap, but it is mainly an amount

associated with DI and may be a legitimate “other adjustment” to the position. There is also a noticeable

increase in the statistical discrepancy. We note, however, that most of the discrepancy arises in the

1990’s; the cumulated discrepancy from 2000-2007 is only $95 billion, which suggests that the missing

net inflows occurred in the early part of our sample.



3.4 An Assessment of the Exorbitant Privilege

        A reasonable counterargument to CDW (2008a) is that the sizeable valuation adjustments and the

remaining $1.75 trillion gap shown in Figure 2 call into question the assertion that cross-border returns

differentials have been overestimated in favor of the United States. What we have shown is that to get to

an exorbitant privilege one would have to assume that the gap from Figure 2—the bulk of which owes to

“other adjustments”—is really unmeasured capital gains. However, by recognizing that the gap more

plausibly owes to inconsistencies in the international accounts and plugging some known holes in those

accounts, we have shown that using the small returns differentials of CDW (2008a) produces a reasonably

small end-2007 gap of $369 billion depicted in Figure 3. Thus, by harvesting some low hanging fruit in a

conservative manner, we have shown that a small returns differential can be consistent with the patterns

of cumulated (adjusted) current account deficits and (adjusted) IIP figures. After applying the best

estimates of returns currently available and addressing known inconsistencies in the international

accounts, we find no evidence supporting the exorbitant privilege view.

        That said, we note, as CDW (2008a) did, that a returns differential, however small, does exist.

This is in large part because of the venture capitalist nature of U.S. cross-border positions, first noted in

                                                      17
Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), with liabilities primarily in debt-like instruments that generate only modest

capital gains and assets having a greater weight on equities. We note also that a small average returns

differential does not imply that valuation adjustments are insignificant: Even small returns differentials,

when applied to large gross positions, can significantly impact the evolution of the current account and

net investment position. Although the net return of 0.9-1.1 percent per year is not exorbitant, it is still

capable of generating valuation adjustments that account for half of the difference between the net IIP and

the cumulated current account. Nonetheless, the positive differential enjoyed by the United States is

neither exorbitant nor large enough to fundamentally alter the dynamics underlying sustainability

analysis.20



4. On Current Account Sustainability

           We have shown that the dark matter and exorbitant privilege theories that have been used to

suggest that the U.S. current account deficits are sustainable do not hold up to scrutiny of the data they

rely on. Our work also suggests that the net investment position is more negative and somewhat less

stable than recorded. Does this mean the U.S. current account is not sustainable at the current level?

           To answer this, it is useful to first step back and ask if, even putting aside measurement issues, we

should expect there to be a tight or stable relationship between the current account and whatever one

might mean by sustainability? In our view, the answer is “maybe, but not too tight.” There are many

reasons for this. Several of them stem from the fact that the current account is a System of National

Accounts (SNA) concept designed to capture transactions in produced goods and services. As such, there

is a step between the transactions recorded in the current account and the transactions recorded in the

financial account. This step involves the capital account which captures, among other things, transactions

in nonproduced, nonfinancial assets. As recorded in the U.S. accounts, the capital account is a minor

annoyance in the identities. But in principle it captures many transfers of intellectual property, which one



20
     For more on this, see Bertaut, Kamin, and Thomas (2008).

                                                         18
would expect to be quite important for the United States.21 Next there is the step between the transactions

in the financial account and the changes in the IIP. This step includes the familiar valuation changes

owing to price and exchange rate changes. But it also includes “other changes in the volume,” which do

not arise from revaluations. As recorded in the U.S. accounts, these other changes are huge and much of

the work of this paper explores the extent to which they are capturing more than they should. Finally,

there are many steps between the IIP and what one might consider important in the determination of

future investment flows. In particular, there are wide gaps between the IIP and a country’s ability to

service its international obligations or the credit and price exposure of its creditors. All told, the links

from the current account to the financial account to changes in the IIP to the determinants of future

investment flows are tenuous enough to question whether this line of investigation will ever bear

meaningful fruit.

         Perhaps a more productive way to examine current account sustainability is to assume that while

the United States should be able to service its international debt, the question is at what prices. A

reasonable way to attack that would be not from BOP and IIP identities but from the perspective of

international portfolio allocation. For example, Forbes (2008) asks a relevant question: Why do foreigners

invest in the United States? Additionally, one could ask why in the United States and not elsewhere.

Further work along this line will likely be fruitful.


5. Conclusion

         In this paper we provided a brief summary of some of the theories of U.S. current account

sustainability and viewed them through the lens of the relative reliability of various items in the

international accounts. From the perspective of relative reliability, the dark matter view fails, as it rests on

an assumption that income streams are the most accurate items in the entire set of international accounts.

Given that the bulk of income streams are not measured but are formed by applying estimates to

estimates, this assumption is false. The exorbitant privilege view also fails. In its original form it rested on

21
  The treatment of intellectual property is changing with BPM6 as now drafted with the transfer of intellectual
property moving to an expanded category under services in the current account.

                                                         19
the assumptions that the current vintage of revised positions and flows form a consistent dataset and that

all “other adjustments” are best thought of as valuation adjustments. In this paper we show that this is not

true, in part by calculating “other adjustments” by asset class and filling some known holes in the

international accounts. The set of accounts we produce by doing so are entirely consistent with a small

cross-border returns differential, suggesting that there is no evidence that the United States can earn its

way to current account sustainability.

         We caution the reader on two possible interpretations of our findings. One, some may be inclined

to steer clear of these data, troubled by the fact that we have identified issues with items in the

international accounts. We advise against that strategy. As with any reported data series, the researcher

armed with knowledge of its strengths and limitations is better suited to analyze the data. Assuming all

data are pristine is not useful, nor is being paralyzed by knowledge of warts. Our view is that data should

be used, but that a healthy understanding of potential limitations can help inform the researcher. Two,

some will think that the CDW (2008a) finding that early computations of the returns differential were

biased upward—reinforced by the additional findings presented here—calls into question recent findings

on exchange rate predictability (in particular, Gourinchas and Rey 2007b) that are based on an earlier

dataset. While we firmly believe that early measures of the average returns differentials were biased

upward, in any dataset period-to-period changes in the differentials—which is what gets traction in

regressions—will be driven by exchange rate changes. That is, while different datasets will produce

different mean returns differentials, the correlation between any two measures of differentials should be

extremely high because period-to-period changes are always driven by the same thing (exchange rate

changes). As such, it is not clear a priori that different datasets of returns differentials would produce

substantially different regression results on exchange rate predictability.22



22
  To be more precise, returns differentials from Original IIP, Revised IIP, and our preferred methods should be very
highly correlated even if they have different means. We cannot say anything exact about the Gourinchas and Rey
(2007a,b) dataset because, while similar in some respects to the Revised IIP approach, it is not strictly in line with
any of the methods we describe as they interpolate to quarterly data and make many adjustments (all detailed in
Gourinchas and Rey 2007a).

                                                         20
        As we have noted repeatedly, in addressing some holes in the international accounts we only

harvested low hanging fruit. There are, of course other aspects of the accounts that should, in the future,

be addressed. We implemented an adjustment for goods exports, but the mis-measurement of trade in

services is likely even greater; unfortunately, we have no information with which to adjust service trade

data. The income generated by invisibles such as intellectual property is another area worthwhile of

further study.




                                                     21
References

Abaroa, Patricia E. (2004), “The International Investment Position of the United States at Yearend 2003,”
      Survey of Current Business, July 1994, 30-39.
Albertus, James, Carol C. Bertaut and Stephanie E. Curcuru (2008), “Estimating the Returns on Foreign
      Holdings of U.S. Securities,” unpublished working paper.
Ammer, John, Sara B. Holland, David C. Smith, and Francis E. Warnock (2006), “Look At Me Now: The
      Role of Cross-Listings in Attracting U.S. Shareholders,” NBER Working Paper 12500.
Au, Andrea A., John A. Doukas and Zhan Onayev (2007), “Daily Short Interest, Idiosyncratic Risk, and
      Stock Returns”, unpublished working paper.
Bach, Christopher L. (1997), “U.S. International Transactions Revised Estimates for 1974–1996,” Survey
      of Current Business, July 1997, 43-55.
_________ (2000), “U.S. International Transactions Revised Estimates for 1982–99,” Survey of Current
      Business, July 2000, 70-77.
_________ (2002), “Annual Revision of the U.S. International Accounts, 1993–2001,” Survey of Current
      Business, July 2002, 33-40.
Bertaut, Carol C., William L. Griever, and Ralph W. Tryon (2006), “Understanding U.S. Cross-Border
      Securities Data,” Federal Reserve Bulletin 92, 59-75.
Bertaut, Carol C., and Ralph W. Tryon (2007), “Monthly Estimates of U.S. Cross-Border Securities
      Positions,” FRB International Finance Discussion Paper No. 910.
Bertaut, Carol C., Steven Kamin, and Charles Thomas (2008), “How Long Can the Unsustainable U.S.
      Current Account Deficit Be Sustained?” unpublished paper.
Burger, John D., and Francis E. Warnock (2007), “Foreign Participation in Local-Currency Bond
      Markets,” Review of Financial Economics 16: 291-304.
Burger, John D., Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock (2008). “A Virtuous Cycle in Local
      Currency Bond Markets?” GEMLOC working paper.
Cavallo, Michele, and Cedric Tille (2006), “Could Capital Gains Smooth a Current Account
      Rebalancing?,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports No. 237.
Curcuru, Stephanie E. (2007), ''U.S. Cross-Border Derivatives Data: A User's Guide,'' Federal Reserve
      Bulletin vol. 93 (May).
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock (2008a), “Cross-Border Returns
      Differentials,” forthcoming, The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Curcuru, Stephanie E., Tomas Dvorak, and Francis E. Warnock (2008b), “The Decomposition of the U.S.
      External Returns Differential,” unpublished working paper.


                                                   22
Department of the Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the Federal
     Reserve System (2007), Report on U.S. Portfolio Holdings of Foreign Securities as of December
     31, 2006.
Edwards, Sebastian (2005), “Is the U.S. Current Account Deficit Sustainable? And, If Not, How Costly Is
      Adjustment Likely To Be?” NBER Working Paper 11541.
Endo, Tadashi and S. Ghon Ree (2006), “Margin Purchases and Short Sales in Emerging Markets: Their
      Rationales and Design Variables”, World Bank Financial Sector Discussion Series.
Flick, Federick E. and Lawrence Yun (2007), “Americans Buying Homes Abroad: Trend Indicators and
      Some Initial Estimates”, Available at
      http://www.realtor.org/Research.nsf/files/07AmericansAbroad.pdf/$FILE/07AmericansAbroad.pdf.
Forbes, Kristin J. (2008), “Why Do Foreigners Invest in the US?” NBER Working Paper 13908.
Frankel, Jeffrey (2006), “Global Imbalances and Low Interest Rates: An Equilibrium Model vs. a
      Disequilibrium Reality,” working paper, Harvard University.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Helene Rey (2007a), “From World Banker to World Venture Capitalist:
     The U.S. External Adjustment and the Exorbitant Privilege,” in R. Clarida (ed.) G7 Current
     Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago, University of Chicago Press), 11-55.
_____________________ (2007b), “International Financial Adjustment,” Journal of Political Economy
     115, 665-703.
Gros, Daniel (2006). “Foreign Investment in the US (I): Disappearing in a Black Hole?” CEPS Working
     Document 242.
Hausmann, Ricardo, and Federico Sturzenegger (2007), “The Missing Dark Matter in the Wealth of
     Nations, and Its Implications for Global Imbalances,” Economic Policy 22, 469-518.
International Monetary Fund (2007), Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook 2007.
Kester, Anne Y. Editor, National Research Council (1992), “Behind the numbers: U.S. Trade in the
      World Economy” National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
Kitchen, John (2007), “Sharecroppers or Shrewd Capitalists? Projections of the US Current Account,
      International Income Flows, and Net International Debt.” Review of International Economics 15(5),
      1036-61.
Kozlow, R. (2006), “Statistical Issues Related to Global Economic Imbalances: Perspectives on ‘Dark
      Matter’”. Paper for 19th Meeting of the IMF Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics.
Lamont, Owen A. and Jeremy C. Stein (2004) “Aggregate Short Interest and Market Valuations”
      American Economic Review, 94(2), 29-32.
Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2005), “Financial Globalization and Exchange Rates,”
     IMF Working Paper WP/ 05/3.

                                                  23
Lane, Philip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2008), “Where Did All the Borrowing Go? A Forensic
      Analysis of the U.S. External Position,” IMF Working Paper WP/08/28.
Meredith, Guy (2007), “Debt Dynamics and Global Imbalance: Some Conventional Views
      Reconsidered,” IMF Working Paper WP/07/4.
National Association of Realtors (2007a), “The 2007 National Association of Realtors Profile of
      International Home Buyers in Florida,” Available at http://www.realtor.org/Research.nsf/
      files/2007IntlProfileFloridafinal.pdf/$FILE/ 2007IntlProfileFloridafinal.pdf
National Association of Realtors (2007b), “The 2007 National Association of Realtors Profile of
      International Home Buying Activity,” available at
      http://www.realtor.org/Research.nsf/files/07IntlSurveyProflie-final-07-
      2707.pdf/$FILE/07IntlSurveyProflie-final-07-27-07.pdf
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2005), “Global Current Account Imbalances and Exchange
      Rate Adjustments,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 67-123.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff (2007),”The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account Position
      Revisted,” in R. Clarida (ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment
      (Chicago, University of Chicago Press).
Office of National Statistics (2007), “United Kingdom Balance of Payments: The Pink Book 2007,”
      Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
OICV-IOSCO (2003) “Report on the Transparency of Short Selling,” Technical Committee of IOSCO.
Pavlova, Anna, and Roberto Rigobon (2008), “An Asset-Pricing View of External Adjustment,” mimeo.
Robbins, Carol A. and Carol E. Moylan (2007) “Research and Development Satellite Account Update,”
      Survey of Current Business, October 2007, 49-64.
Roubini, Nouriel, and Brad Setser (2004), “The U.S. as a Net Debtor: The Sustainability of the U.S.
      External Imbalances,” working paper, New York University.
Taub, Leon (2008), “Borrowed securities: implications for measuring cross-border portfolio investment”,
      IFC Bulletin 28.
U.S. Census Bureau (1998), “Understatement of Export Merchandise Trade Data,” Available at
      www.census.gov/foreign-trade/aip/expunder2.html.
U.S. Census Bureau (2002), “U.S. Merchandise Trade Statistics: A Quality Profile,” Available at
      http://www.census.gov/foreign-trade/aip/quality_profile01142003.pdf




                                                   24
Appendix A. Estimating Our Preferred Returns and “Other Adjustments” By Asset Class

        In this appendix we detail how we form our preferred estimates of returns. To conserve space, all

tables for this and the subsequent appendices, as well as some underlying data, are available at

http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w14295.

        Portfolio Bond and Equity Returns

        For portfolio bonds and equities, as noted in CDW (2008a,b), there are high quality security-level

benchmark surveys of holdings that can inform the calculation of returns; returns must be calculated (i.e.,

not measured), but at least the security-level holdings data can guide those calculations. The holdings data

are the estimates of monthly bilateral securities positions constructed in Bertaut and Tryon (2007). Armed

with monthly bilateral positions data, we apply representative returns indices to calculate the monthly

portfolio returns of U.S. investors abroad and of foreigners in the United States.

        The choice of representative returns indices is crucial. To inform these choices, we rely on

research that has examined the security-by-security data on U.S. cross-border bond and equity positions.

•   For U.S. investors’ returns on foreign equities, research on 1997 data shows that MSCI firms

    represent almost 80 percent of U.S. investors’ foreign equity investment and that, across the

    Worldscope universe of 12,000 non-U.S. firms, the correlation between firm weights in U.S.

    portfolios and in the MSCI World (ex U.S.) index is 0.77 (Ammer et al. 2006). Accordingly, we use

    dollar returns on each country’s MSCI equity price index to calculate the returns on U.S. investors’

    foreign equities positions.

•   For foreigners’ returns on U.S. equities, we use the MSCI U.S. index, a market-capitalization-

    weighted index comprised of roughly 300 large and liquid U.S. equities. Albertus, Bertaut, and

    Curcuru (2008) shows that the MSCI U.S. index is a good approximation of the actual U.S. equity

    holdings of foreign investors.




                                                     25
•    For foreign bonds, to a large extent U.S. investors tend to hold local currency bonds in developed

     countries and dollar-denominated bonds in emerging markets (Burger and Warnock, 2007).23 Thus,

     we use the following approach for calculating U.S. investors’ foreign bond returns. For developing

     countries we use J.P. Morgan’s EMBI+ indices (which are comprised of dollar-denominated bonds).

     For those developed countries in which U.S. holdings of local currency bonds are predominant, we

     use the MSCI bond index (which is an index of local-currency-denominated bonds). In those

     developed countries where U.S. holdings of dollar-denominated bonds are significant, we calculate

     returns as the weighted average of the MSCI bond index and MSCI Eurodollar Credit index (which is

     an index of dollar-denominated bonds), with the weight on the Eurodollar index being the share of

     dollar-denominated bonds in U.S. holdings of each country’s bonds.24,25

•    For foreign holdings of U.S. debt, we use a weighted average of Lehman Brothers U.S. Treasury,

     corporate and agency bond indices, with the weights being the portfolio weights in each respective

     bond type as given by the benchmark surveys.



     To compute valuation adjustments we apply these market-based returns rtM to the sum of the revised

position at the end of the previous period and half of the recorded transactions:

                             ⎡        1        ⎤
                  VAt = rt M ⎢ AtR−1 + FLOWt R ⎥ .                                                 (A1)
                             ⎣        2        ⎦

Next, we compute the “other adjustments” as the difference between the change in the recorded position,

flows, and valuation adjustments:

                  OAt = NIIPt R − NIIPt −1 − FAt − VAt .
                                        R            R
                                                                                                   (A2)

The resulting time series of “other adjustments” for equities and bonds is shown in Table A.1.

23
   U.S. investors have recently shifted their international bond portfolios towards local currency emerging market
bonds (Burger, Warnock, and Warnock 2008), but such holdings are still miniscule.
24
   The developed countries where U.S. holdings of dollar-denominated bonds are significant include Australia,
Belgium, Canada, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.
25
   Of course, country allocations as given in the Bertaut and Tryon (2007) holdings data govern our country
weighting schemes: When calculating returns on the aggregate foreign bond and foreign equities portfolios, we
weight each country according to U.S. bond (or equity) holdings in that country.

                                                         26
   Deposits, Currency, and Other Government Assets

        The sizable claims reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns and U.S. banks primarily consist of

interest-bearing deposits and very short-term securities, such as certificates of deposits, which are hold-to-

maturity securities that do not trade in the secondary market. The return from these types of securities

consists only of interest payments, which are recorded in the current account, with no valuation

adjustments other than those from exchange-rate movements. The majority of these deposits, however,

are dollar-denominated even though they are on deposit in foreign banks, so the impact of exchange-rate

changes is minimal. Similarly, for the corresponding liabilities there are only minor exchange-rate

movements because there is a small quantity of non-dollar denominated deposits held by foreigners in

U.S. banks and non-banking concerns. Other U.S. government claims are fairly small, and the only

valuation adjustments are those due to exchange-rate changes, primarily from holdings of foreign

currencies, and changes in the value of gold. For each of these categories, our view is that the original IIP

releases provide the most accurate picture of returns, so we estimate the capital gains based upon the rate

of return shown in each annual IIP, equation (1). For deposits, this assumption is reasonable as long as the

currency composition is largely unchanged between the initial and final data revision. For these categories

the valuation adjustments are computed using:

                           ⎡        1        ⎤
                 VAt = rtO ⎢ AtR−1 + FLOWt R ⎥ .                                             (A3)
                           ⎣        2        ⎦

and “other adjustments” follow from Equation (A2).

   Derivatives

        Derivatives were first included in the IIP in 2006. The limited information collected on

derivatives is not sufficient for BEA to break down valuation adjustments into the contributions due to

price and exchange-rate changes. Only net derivatives flow data are collected, so separate estimation of

returns on claims and liabilities is not possible. We assume that there are no “other adjustments”

associated with derivatives and the capital gains follow directly from the revised positions and flows:



                                                     27
                    VAt = NIIPt R − NIIPt −1 − FAt .
                                          R         R
                                                                                    (A4)

      Direct Investment

           As noted in the main text, the valuation adjustments associated with direct investment present the

greatest difficulty. Our strategy to estimate DI returns is to first estimate the amount of DI “other

adjustments” and then back out implied returns with and without treating “other adjustments” as returns.

This task would be easier if the updated IIP for each year separated the revised series into flows,

valuation, and “other adjustments.” BEA does not publish this information by asset class, but it does

publish it for aggregate claims and aggregate liabilities.26 This allows us to estimate the revised “other

adjustments” for direct investment by subtracting our estimate of “other adjustments” for the other asset

classes from the total.

           A breakdown of “other adjustments” by asset class is shown in Appendix Table A.1, with claims

in Panel A and liabilities in Panel B. The last column shows an estimate of “other adjustments” for direct

investment implied by subtracting “other adjustments” for the rest of the asset classes from the revised

total “other adjustments” published by BEA. For DI claims the implied “other adjustments” are fairly

small relative to that estimated for other assets, while for liabilities they are quite large. Using these

“other adjustments” we infer the corresponding valuation adjustments for DI by rearranging equation (4).

           There are three interpretations of DI “other adjustments”: (1) the inconsistency that arises from

recording DI positions at their current-cost value, (2) the capital gains and losses of direct investment

affiliates, and (3) errors in the transactions or series breaks. Interpretation (1) is unique to DI. As noted

earlier, the current-cost estimate of DI is an estimate of the value of tangible assets; the value of

intangible assets is excluded. Recorded DI transactions, however, reflect the value of both tangible and

intangible assets. This necessitates an “other adjustment” entry in the IIP presentation that reflects the

difference between the total transaction value and the estimated value of intangible assets to account for

the intangible piece. For example, in the purchase of an intangible-heavy firm such as an internet startup,


26
     http://www.bea.gov/international/xls/intinv07_t3.xls

                                                            28
there will be a substantial difference between the value of the firm paid by the acquirer and the current-

cost value of the firm included in the IIP. This type of transaction will require a negative “other

adjustment” which effectively backs out the value of intangible assets. There is evidence of this type of

transaction in Panel B of Table A.1. There are sizable negative DI “other adjustments” in 1998 and 1999,

reflecting foreign investment in U.S. internet firms with significant amounts of intangible assets. When

these DI positions are sold there should be additional “other adjustment” entries, which may largely offset

the previous ones; any remaining amount is equal to the capital gains associated with the intangible piece

of the DI. Thus, much of the cumulative sum of DI “other adjustment” entries will be equal to the value of

intangible assets for DI where the position is still held, plus capital gains associated with intangible assets

for positions that have been sold.




                                                      29
Appendix B. Missing Asset Classes

         In this appendix we estimate flows and positions for asset classes missing from the IIP and BOP

accounts. These include financial derivatives, introduced in 2006, and residential real estate.

     Financial Derivatives

         The introduction of the financial derivatives asset class in the 2006 IIP provides an example of

how the addition of new asset classes or reporters leads to incorrect capital gains estimates when the

revised BEA data are used. Because we know their impact on the 2006 financial account and IIP we

excluded them from our analysis. In BEA’s revised aggregate IIP the initial 2005 derivatives claims

position of $1,190 billion and liabilities position of $1,132 billion are included in “other adjustments” in

that year; because there is no correction for these “other adjustments” in the revised returns estimates,

using equation (1) would overstate capital gains for both claims and liabilities, and would further

overstate the favorable U.S. returns differential.27

         Estimates for net derivatives transactions will have an impact on the statistical discrepancy, and

thus impact our BOP reconciliation. The BOP recorded a net financial derivatives inflow of $29 billion

for 2006 and $6 billion for 2007. We construct flow estimates for earlier years based on the growth rate of

transactions and holdings reported to the IMF by other countries, shown in Panel A of Appendix Table

B.1.28 Prior to 2000 we assume that transactions increased by 50 percent each year, after that at an annual

rate of 30 percent. As discussed in Curcuru (2007) the sum of net transactions across all countries should

equal zero, as the flows out of each country should be reported as inflows by another country. However,

since some countries do not report data to the IMF the sum will likely differ from zero; while our

estimated world flows are not zero (the last column of Appendix Table B.1 Panel A), they are small. We

construct estimates of holdings using the same growth rates for claims and liabilities; the historical

estimates are shown in Panel B of Appendix Table B.1. The inflows are modest and range from $0 to $29

billion, and the net claims position is up to $84 billion.

27
   We assume that there are no “other adjustments” associated with financial derivatives, and back out the associated
entries from column (A) of Table A.1.
28
   Underlying data are from IMF (2007) and Office of National Statistics (2007).

                                                         30
Residential Real Estate

           In principle, cross-border transactions and holdings of residential real estate should be included as

part of direct investment, as is currently the case for commercial real estate. In practice, individual home-

owners are not surveyed and hence these data are omitted from the recorded DI figures. To the extent that

foreign activity in the U.S. residential real estate market is of the same magnitude as the level of activity

of U.S. residents in the foreign real estate markets, there is no net impact on the international transactions

accounts. However, recent surveys conducted by the National Association of Realtors (NAR) suggest that

this may not be the case.

           We construct estimates of foreign purchases of U.S. real estate using recent NAR survey data.

According to NAR (2007a), a survey of members indicated that 7.3 percent of home sales in Florida in

2006 were purchased by foreign buyers. Since total existing home sales in Florida in 2006 were 395,300

units, this implies that there were about 29,000 purchases of Florida homes and condos by foreigners in

2006.29      Assuming that foreigners purchased the same percentage of new homes adds about 6,000

additional homes, bringing the total to 35,000 Florida homes purchased by foreigners. From April 2006 to

April 2007 NAR (2007b) estimates that 26 percent of international purchases were in Florida, implying

there were around 135,000 total purchases of U.S. homes by foreign residents. Multiplying the total

number of purchases with the median sales price U.S. homes purchased by foreigners in that period of

$299,500 translates to roughly $40.4 billion in sales to foreigners in 2006.

           To construct historical estimates of foreign purchases of U.S. real estate, we assume that the

foreign purchases have remained a constant 2.34 percent (= $40.4 / $1,730.6 billion) of total sales of U.S.

real estate; the resulting estimated U.S. real estate liabilities inflows is shown in Appendix Table B.2.

This might be a somewhat conservative assumption as NAR (2007b) suggested that 2006 activity by

foreign investors was relatively weak as compared to earlier years.

           To construct holdings estimates, we started by looking at net inflows into other private financial

liabilities in 2006 as a function of 2005 holdings. Total flows in 2006 ranged from a slight outflow from

29
     Real estate transactions and price data are available at http://www.realtor.org/.

                                                             31
U.S. Treasuries in 2005 to a 20 percent inflow into corporate and agency bonds. As a compromise we

assume that the 2006 flows constituted a 5 percent increase in stock over the 2005 levels to construct an

estimate of the 2005 stock. We constructed the remainder of the liabilities stock series using the

transactions estimates and price appreciation reported by NAR, also shown in Appendix Table B.2.

        We face similar issues in trying to construct historical real estate transactions and holdings

estimates on the claims side. While there are no available official figures for the number of homes or

vacation properties Americans have purchased in foreign countries, Flick and Yun (2007) construct an

estimate using State Department data. Based upon the number of U.S. residents living abroad in 1999,

and a rate of homeownership equivalent to that observed in the United States (40%), they estimate that in

1999 U.S. residents owned 500-600 thousand residential real estate properties located in other countries.

Unfortunately, the State Department has not updated this information because of security concerns. Using

the same mean price of U.S. homes in that year ($171K), this equates to $94 billion in foreign residential

real estate holdings by U.S. residents. From this 1999 holdings estimate we assume that it changed at the

same rate as total residential liabilities holdings. We then inferred transactions by assuming foreign

holdings appreciated at the same rate as U.S. holdings.

        Based on the Appendix Table B.2 estimates, there have been more foreign purchases of U.S. real

estate than U.S. purchases of foreign real estate. When compared to other asset classes, however, net

transactions and gross holdings are modest. In 2007 we estimate a $25 billion net inflow, shown in Panel

A of Table 3, and a sizable net liabilities position of $565 billion (from Panels B and C).




                                                     32
Appendix C. Problems with Current and Financial Account Transactions

        In this appendix we estimate problems with the recorded transactions in the current and financial

accounts. These include issues with goods exports, intangibles, foreign equity and bond claims and

liabilities, and deposit claims and liabilities.

   Goods Exports

        The data on merchandise trade is often considered one of the most reliable pieces of the

international transactions accounts. The data are compiled from official import and export documents

prepared by firms for the U.S. Customs Service, which are then classified and recorded by the U.S.

Bureau of the Census. These data list goods by value, commodity, country of origin or destination,

dutiable status, tariff rate (import), quantity, shipping weight, location of exit or entry, and method of

transportation.

        But the import data is likely of much higher quality than the export data. Because import

documents are the basis upon which tariffs are collected, they are scrutinized much more closely and

there is a larger share of manpower dedicated to their verification. This is in stark contrast to exports,

which have much fewer resources dedicated to enforcement efforts, have higher reporting thresholds, and

about which much less detail is recorded. There are several reasons why there might be a downward bias

in the export figures. For instance, exporting firms have incentives to understate sales to reduce their

taxable income and to pay lower import duties to importing countries. Also, the commercial carriers that

consolidate freight for shipment file the paperwork for the exporters. In order to obtain the lowest freight

for exporters, they often report the whole batch of goods that may have varying rates as if it consists of

goods at the lowest rate.

        Several studies have quantified the magnitude of under-reporting of U.S. exports. For example, a

detailed comparison with Canada import data showed $16 billion in unrecorded U.S. exports to Canada in

1989, approximately 20 percent of all U.S. exports to Canada. This problem is not limited to cross-border

trade with Canada. An analysis in Kester (1992) found that for the period 1980-1989 a bilateral

comparison of U.S. export and foreign import data suggested an undercount of about 7 percent per year of

                                                    33
U.S. exports to Japan, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Further reconciliation studies with Japan,

Korea, Australia, and the European community, summarized in U.S. Bureau of the Census (1998, 2002),

found that while automated systems introduced to collect export data had improved data quality, the

combined effect of proven non-reporting, underestimation of low value trade, and unresolved

discrepancies ranged from 3-7 percent of reported U.S. export value. Reconciliations with Mexico

estimated the discrepancy between 1991-1994 was between 8 to 12 percent per year, and for 1995-1997

15 to 19 percent per year. The introduction of a new electronic reporting system in 2000 is thought to

have reduced these discrepancies significantly, but as yet Census has not published updated analyses.

Despite these findings, there is so much variability in underreporting that no effort is made by Census or

BEA to adjust the values of goods exports.

        Because exports are recorded as an inflow in the balance of payments, the under-reporting of

exports results in an under-reporting of current account inflows - a necessary counterpart to our under-

reporting of outflows in the financial account. In Appendix Table C.1 we estimate the potential impact on

the current account for an understatement of 9.1 percent to Mexico of and 5.1 percent for U.S. exports to

other countries, excluding Canada. Starting in 2000 we cut the adjustment in half (e.g., 4.6% for Mexico

and 2.6% for other countries) to reflect improvements in the collection system. These estimates result in

understatement of inflows on the order of 4-6 percent of all exports.

  Intangibles

        Cross-border trade in intangibles creates difficult issues for both accounting methodology and

data collection. With respect to methodology, the difficulties arise because the System of National

Accounts (or in the United States case the NIPA) needs to distinguish between those nonfinancial assets

that are created by the production process and those that arise by other means. A good example of a

nonproduced, nonfinancial asset is broadcast spectrum rights. The electromagnetic spectrum is not the

result of any productive activity; nonetheless, the rights to use it have value. When such assets are sold

abroad, the transaction must be excluded from the current account. Otherwise, the GDP accounting

identity (GDP=C+I+G+X-M) would not hold, with the disposition of product (right hand side) exceeding

                                                    34
what the economy produced (left hand side). However it is not sufficient to simply exclude the transaction

from the current account because the sale to a foreigner gives rise to a financial flow. To deal with this,

and a few other issues such as debt forgiveness, the capital account (KA) was introduced and added to the

balance of payments identity (0=CA+KA+FA).

        With respect to data collection, it is particularly hard to measure trade in intangibles, especially

when the trade is between affiliated parties and the intangible represents intellectual property (IP) that

may have only firm-specific value. As noted earlier in the discussion of dark matter, BEA has been

making efforts to improve its data collection in this area, but the most recent changes to the collection

system are not yet incorporated into the published IT accounts.

        We do not make any attempt to estimate how much trade in intangibles is missing from the

accounts. We simply note that it could be one source of the statistical discrepancy we are left with and a

possible explanation for some of the ‘other adjustments’ found for DI.

   U.S. Net Purchases of Foreign Equities and Bonds

        As discussed in substantial detail in CDW (2008a), over our sample period there have been many

significant revisions to U.S. holdings of foreign equity and bonds that have implications for our

understanding of transactions in these assets. The first major revision occurred after the incorporation of

the first security-level measurement of U.S. holdings of foreign securities abroad (from the Treasury

Department’s 1994 benchmark survey), which resulted in large upward revisions to holdings of around 90

percent per year from 1990 to 1995. Prior to the 1994 benchmark survey the last claims survey was done

in 1946, and positions were not measured but were estimated from capital flows data and approximations

of capital gains - a method highly prone to error since there was no sense of the magnitude of initial

holdings. The enormous revisions that were prompted by the benchmark survey were described by BEA

in Bach (1997, p. 47) as follows:

        “The differences between the two estimates can be attributed both to incomplete coverage of
        these transactions in the Treasury source data upon which BEA's position estimates are based and
        to inexact valuation of price and exchange rate adjustments applied to BEA's estimated positions.
        However, it is not possible to determine the amount of underestimation attributable to each part
        of the estimation process.” (emphasis added)

                                                    35
Because of the inability to definitively attribute the newly discovered claims to flows or valuation

adjustments, BEA made no revisions to flows (the “transactions in the Treasury source data”)—financial

flows are completely absent from Table 2 in Bach (1997), which shows all revisions for the balance of

payments and international investment positions—and put the difference between estimated and measured

positions in the residual “other adjustments” category. The same was the case in response to the 1997

benchmark, at which time BEA stated:

           “When BEA adjusted its international investment positions estimates last year using preliminary
           benchmark results, it attributed all of the discrepancy to valuation changes and none to the less
           than complete coverage of transactions…BEA is now changing that practice and attributing a
           large part of the discrepancy to transactions.”30


As transactions adjustments attributed to the 1997 benchmark survey are absent from Table 2 in Bach

(2000), it is clear that the practice of adjusting transactions was implemented at a future date.

           There were also significant revisions to U.S. holdings of foreign securities that dated back to

1998 after the 2001 and 2003 Treasury surveys, but these revisions were accompanied by modest

revisions to transactions estimates. As reported in Bertaut et. al. (2006), an in-depth investigation revealed

under-reporting of U.S. investors’ purchases of newly issued foreign securities. While this reporting

problem was resolved starting in 2004, BEA made only modest revisions to the recorded transactions

because there were only modest revisions to underlying TIC data.

           The final notable revision to U.S. holdings of foreign securities occurred in response to the 2005

Treasury survey, which resulted in a revision to U.S. equity claims totaling $231 billion. This was

recorded in the 2005 position with no identified revisions to historical transactions.

           Because the transactions were never adjusted for 1990-1997 even though they were suspected to

be erroneous, and there were only modest transactions adjustments to the data from 1998-2003, we

attribute much of the estimated “other adjustments” in equity and bond claims shown in Appendix Table

A.1 to missing transactions. The other transactions associated with bonds are included in Table 3 Panel A.

30
     Bach (2000, p. 71-72).

                                                      36
We defer our final estimates of how much of these “other adjustments” for equity should be attributed to

unrecorded transactions until we also include the impact of omitting short positions, discussed below.

   U.S. Equity and Bond Liabilities to Foreign Investors

         The tendency not to fully revise corresponding flows when revisions to positions are made also

holds for U.S. liabilities. Regarding U.S. liabilities, Bach (2002, p. 37) writes:

         “In past benchmark years, BEA has assigned nearly all of the differences between the two
         estimates of the positions to either the price change or the ‘change in statistical coverage’
         components of the investment position accounts, leaving data on financial flows as reported by
         the transactions reporting system little changed”


In contrast to U.S. claims, the revisions to liabilities positions were relatively small and, for some asset

categories such as bonds, negative. Downward revisions in liabilities positions without a corresponding

downward revision in flows imply low capital gains. According to Bach (2002, p. 38-39), BEA had

tended to overestimate U.S. liabilities because the transaction reporting system underestimates

redemptions and paydowns of principle on mortgage-backed securities. These redemptions should be

recorded as outflows but are not recorded by the existing transactions reporting system because they do

not involve the typical data reporters (brokers and dealers). As the above quote indicates, as a matter of

practice BEA tended to revise positions but not flows, implying low or negative capital gains on U.S.

liabilities.

         As with claims, there were no adjustments to transactions in response to changes in recorded

holdings for the early years of our sample period. In 1998 there were significant downward revisions to

U.S. non-treasury liabilities for the years 1990-1996, in response to the 1994 survey. The position

adjustments were as high as $42 billion in 1996 with no corresponding revisions to transactions. In 2002

BEA made some revisions to transactions in debt liabilities in response to the problems with redemptions

and paydowns identified in the 2000 survey. However, these revisions only went back to 1995;

transactions for that year were adjusted downward by $27 billion, and there were no revisions to

transactions in earlier years. So as with claims, we assume that much of the “other adjustments” for

securities liabilities are unrecorded transactions. The other transactions associated with bonds are

                                                      37
included in Table 3, but we defer our final estimates of how much to include for equity until Appendix D,

where we include the impact of omitting short positions.

   Banking and Nonbanking Assets

        There is little ambiguity surrounding the calculation of valuation adjustments for this category, as

they consist of interest-bearing deposits and short-term securities held-to-maturity, with only slight

valuation effects due to exchange rate changes. On the banking side, the data are collected by monthly

reports of outstanding balances – transactions are estimated as the change in the positions. Deposits

reported by nonbanking concerns are mainly implied from bilateral and BIS data. The source of the “other

adjustments” in these data are series breaks as new reporters are added to the panel. Revisions for both

claims and liabilities go in the same direction – cumulative “other adjustments” for claims is $338 billion

and for liabilities is $189 billion, so on net this category contributes a relatively modest $150 billion to the

gap. We attribute all the “other adjustments” in these categories to missing transactions, shown in Table 3

Panel A.




                                                      38
Appendix D. Issues with Recorded Positions

        There are two assets for which there are known problems with recorded positions, for which

transactions are thought to be correctly recorded. The first is the recording of equities that have been sold

“short”; that is, borrowed from one party and then sold to another. The other is the omission of positions

in intangible DI investments such as research and development.

   Negative Positions Arising from Short Sales

        As is the case in most countries, the reporting of portfolio investment positions is based on data

provided by custodians. The U.S. surveys used to collect position data do not admit the reporting of

negative positions, which is not currently an international reporting standard but will likely become one in

the future (Taub 2008). This omission leads to the overstatement of both claims and liabilities. For

example, if a foreign resident sells a U.S. security short to a U.S. resident, the transactions accounts will

correctly capture the decrease in liabilities to foreigners, but the negative position of the foreigner will not

show up in the holdings survey. The result is that the total liabilities position is the sum of positive

holdings only, not short positions. A similar problem is realized on the U.S. claims side. Both result in the

overstatement of positions relative to the transactions and would lead to positive “other adjustments.”

        To estimate the impact of the omission of equity short sales, we construct estimates of the

fraction of cross-border equity claims and liabilities that have negative positions using representative

short sales as a percentage of float. Because U.S. restrictions on short sales are stringent compared to

those in other developed nations, U.S. short positions are relatively small. Lamont and Stein (2004)

estimate that short sales as a percentage of float for the NASDAQ ranged between 2 percent and 4 percent

of total market capitalization over the period 1995-2002, while estimates of short-selling on the New

York Stock Exchange are even lower at 1.5 percent in 2003 (OICV-IOSCO 2003). However, since

foreign investors tend to hold large-cap equities these ratios are likely biased downward because for some

equities there is no short-selling at all. Therefore we computed average short sales as a percentage of float

for the equities in the S&P 500 as that is more likely representative of the average short-selling in the

equities owned by foreign investors. For the end of 2006 the average for the equities in the S&P 500 was

                                                      39
just over 3 percent. As total U.S. equity liabilities in 2006 were $2,791 billion, the estimated

overstatement is $84 billion, included in Table 3 Panel C, and we assume the same share through history.

        On the equity claims side, the largest share of U.S. residents’ holdings is in U.K. equity, with

large holdings also in Japan, Canada, France, Switzerland, and Germany. In most emerging market

countries, market development lags developed economies and short sales of securities are generally

prohibited or the required infrastructure for borrowing securities does not exist. Table 7 in Endo and Ree

(2006) provides a list of countries that allow short-selling and in which short-sales are practiced. For these

countries, we take U.S. holdings of those countries’ equities from Table 18 in Dept. of Treasury et al.

(2007) for all of the U.S. holdings surveys; the combination is shown in Appendix Table D.1.

        An estimate for short interest on FTSE 350 equities trading on the London Stock Exchange

constructed by Au et. al. (2007) ranged between 2.5 percent in 2003 to 4 percent in 2006, and it is thought

to be higher in other markets (Endo and Ree (2006)). We assume that U.S. holdings of equities in the

U.K. are overstated by 4 percent and holdings overstated by 5 percent in other countries that allow short-

selling; the resulting position adjustment is shown in the final line of Appendix Table D.1.

        We use these position adjustments to construct short-adjusted equity returns. Adjusting the time

series of equity liabilities positions downward by 3 percent each year and computing the revised capital

gains returns results in a decrease in the returns from 11 percent over our sample period (Table 1) to 10.8

percent, in the correct direction but still higher than our market-based estimate of 10.1 percent. This

moves the total “other adjustments” implied for equity liabilities to $181 billion, a narrowing of $36

billion. With the short adjustment, revised U.S. claims returns fall from an average of 13 percent over our

sample period (Table 1) to 12.2 percent, still much greater than the market-based estimate of 7.7 percent.

This narrows the total implied “other adjustments” for equity claims by $76 billion to $596 billion. We

include the net impact of these adjusted “other adjustments” in Table 3 Panel A, and the revised position

estimates are shown in Panels B and C.

        Estimating short bond positions is more difficult because we have not been able to identify any

studies that estimate the size of this market. It is likely that some classes of investors do not take short

                                                     40
positions, while others have large short positions. For example, a large fraction of debt liabilities are U.S.

Treasuries held by foreign officials as part of foreign-exchange reserves; it is unlikely that these investors

have large offsetting short positions. In contrast, the balance sheets of several large U.S. broker/dealers

list short U.S. Treasury and agency bond positions as large as their long positions.31 One way to construct

an estimate that deals with this heterogeneity is to assume that a subset of foreign investors behave like

U.S. broker/dealers, and assume that they have short positions equal in size to their reported holdings.

One candidate is investors from the Caribbean financial centers because most of these are hedge funds.

The share of bond liabilities vis-à-vis Caribbean financial centers ranges from 3 percent of total debt

liabilities in 2007 to 4.1 percent in 2004. This is close to the 3 percent we used as an estimate of the

fraction of short positions in equity liabilities, so for consistency we decided to also use 3 percent for debt

liabilities. The resulting estimate of the overstatement due to omitted short positions ranges between $17

and $185 billion. Since the same broker/dealer balance sheet data indicates that corporate debt trading

liabilities are relatively small, we made no adjustment for short positions in corporate bonds.32

         These adjustments to positions have corresponding adjustments to current account income

receipts and payments. For equity we use the dividend yields on claims and receipts from CDW, and for

Treasuries we use the yield on a 2-year constant maturity Treasury.33 The impact on income receipts and

payments is reported in Appendix Table D.2. The net impact, included in the income column in Panel A

of Table 3, is cumulative $41 billion increase in receipts.

     Direct Investment Intangibles

         BEA follows the standards published in the International Monetary Fund’s Balance of Payments

Manual in compiling the BOP and IIP. According to these standards financial flows and positions are

based on market prices, when observable. The market prices of intangible assets are rarely observable,

31
   For example, the November 2007 consolidated balance sheet of Goldman Sachs lists U.S. Government and
agency trading assets totaling $36.9 billion and liabilities totaling $34.5 billion; the values reported by Lehman are
assets of $40.8 billion and liabilities of $71.8 billion.
32
   For Goldman Sachs in November 2007 corporate debt trading assets totaled $15.7 billion and liabilities totaled
$3.5 billion; the values reported by Lehman are assets of $54.1 billion and liabilities of $6.8 billion.
33
   From the Federal Reserve H.15 “Selected Interest Rates” release available at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/data.htm.

                                                          41
and as such BEA revalues book values to current-period prices using two indicator series: equity indexes

and the replacement value of tangible assets. Recognizing the importance of measuring the impact of

intangible assets such as research and development (R&D) and other intellectual capital, BEA publishes a

satellite account that estimates the effects of R&D spending as investment rather than an expense. We

assume that financial account transactions in intangibles are correctly recorded, but include a current

account adjustment for BEA estimates of the change in investment income. Our estimates are shown in

Table 3. For 1995-2004 we take the estimates shown in Robbins and Moylan (2007) Table G and base our

estimated adjustments to the positions for earlier and later years in the sample period based on the growth

rates, and for the current account impact we hold constant. The effects on these accounts are minor. The

largest current account impact is a decrease of $8 billion in 1998; the largest net IIP impact is a decrease

of $29 billion in 2003.




                                                    42
Table 1: Estimating Capital Gains Rates

Estimates are for 1990-2007. Details of how these estimates were constructed are given in the text. Our preferred
measure (in column C) utilizes market-based returns for portfolio equity and debt, a range of inferred returns for DI
based on whether DI other adjustments are treated as capital gains or not, and original IIP returns for banking,
nonbanking, and other assets. Other assets includes U.S. official reserve and other U.S. Government assets, U.S.
Government liabilities associated with military sales contracts and other transactions arranged with or through
foreign official agencies, and foreign holdings of U.S. currency. DI positions are valued using the current-cost
method. Financial derivatives are not included.




                                                        Original IIP      Revised IIP       Preferred
                                                            (A)              (B)               (C)

Equity                              Claims                8.6%              13.2%            8.2%
                                    Liabilities           9.5%              10.9%            9.7%

Bonds                               Claims                0.7%               4.5%            2.0%
                                    Liabilities           0.7%              -1.3%            0.6%

DI                                  Claims                0.7%               0.3%         0.3-1.3%
                                    Liabilities           0.4%              -2.0%         -2.0-0.5%

Banking and Non-Banking             Claims                0.1%               0.0%            0.1%
                                    Liabilities           0.1%               0.5%            0.1%

                   Banking          Claims                0.1%               4.5%            0.1%
                                    Liabilities           0.0%              -0.8%            0.0%

                                    Claims                0.1%              -5.6%            0.1%
                   Nonbanking       Liabilities           0.3%              -4.1%            0.3%

Other Assets                        Claims                2.8%               2.7%            2.8%
                                    Liabilities           0.0%               0.1%            0.0%

Aggregate                           Claims               2.2%               3.3%           2.3-2.5%
                                    Liabilities          1.5%               0.9%           1.1-1.6%
                                    Difference           0.7%               2.4%           0.9-1.1%




                                                         43
Table 2: A First Pass at Reconciling Positions, Flows and Valuation Adjustments

Flows and positions are from the current vintage of revised BEA data. Valuation adjustments are computed using
our preferred rates of return as discussed in the text. DI and, hence, Total are presented both with and without DI
“other adjustments” counted as valuation adjustments. Other assets includes U.S. official reserve and other U.S.
Government assets, U.S. Government liabilities associated with military sales contracts and other transactions
arranged with or through foreign official agencies, and foreign holdings of U.S. currency. DI positions are valued
using the current-cost method. Financial derivatives are not included. The gap is positive if recorded 2007 positions
are larger than flows and our preferred valuation adjustments would suggest.



                                                    1989                                         2007
                                                  Recorded                     Valuation       Recorded
 US $ Billions                                    Position        Flows       Adjustments      Position         Gap
                                                     (A)           (B)            (C)             (D)        (D-A-B-C)

 Equity                             Claims               197         1,481         2,786           5,171           707
                                    Liabilities          276         1,175         1,323           3,108           352
 Bonds                              Claims               117           983           124           1,478           255
                                    Liabilities          663         6,314            81           6,667          -391

 DI w/o OA                          Claims               553         2,483           569           3,333          -273
                                    Liabilities          468         2,282           340           2,423          -667

 DI w/ OA                           Claims               553         2,483           297           3,333                 0
                                    Liabilities          468         2,282          -327           2,423                 0
 Banking and Nonbanking             Claims               948         3,428             75          5,002           550
                                    Liabilities          841         4,243             59          5,387           244
                                    Claims               714         2,382             47          3,826           684
                   Banking          Liabilities          674         2,783             25          4,428           946
                              Claims                     234         1,047             29          1,176          -133
                   Nonbanking Liabilities                167         1,460             34            960          -702
 Other Assets                       Claims               255           -14           132             372                -2
                                    Liabilities           63           228             0             296                 6
 Derivatives                        Claims                  0          -36             62              84               58

 Total w/o DI OA                    Claims             2,071        8,325          3,748          15,439         1,296
                                    Liabilities        2,311       14,223          1,804          17,881          -457
                                    Difference          -240       -5,899          1,944          -2,442         1,752

 Total w/ DI OA                     Claims             2,071        8,325          3,475          15,439         1,568
                                    Liabilities        2,311       14,223          1,137          17,881           210
                                    Difference          -240       -5,899          2,338          -2,442         1,358



                                                         44
Table 3: Consolidated Adjustments

The adjustments are described in detail in Appendices B, C, and D. Data underlying the adjustments are presented in
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w14295, which contains various supplementary tables.




   Panel A: Net Transactions Adjustments

                                         Banking
             Fin.    Real  Goods           and
            Derivs. Estate Exports Bonds Nonbank                   Equity      Income      R&D       Total
    1990          0      6     23    -12        4                      -23           2       -4          -5
    1991          0      6     25    -34        3                      -42           1       -4        -45
    1992          0      7     26    -32       -4                        -7          1       -4        -13
    1993          0      8     27    -48      -40                      -56           1       -4       -113
    1994          0      8     30     -4      -30                        -1          1       -4           1
    1995          1      8     34    -63        3                      -43           2       -4        -63
    1996          1    10      36      0      -16                      -52           2       -4        -22
    1997          2    11      40    -87       25                      -66           2       -4        -77
    1998          2    13      40    -68       17                      -16           2       -8        -18
    1999          3    14      40     17      -10                      -33           2       -6         28
    2000          5    15      29    -82      -28                       33           3       -5        -30
    2001          8    16      27    -18       24                        -1          3       -5         54
    2002        10     19      26   -191      -17                       64           1       -3        -91
    2003        13     22      27   -118     -125                       60           1       -4       -124
    2004        17     27      30    -35       -2                       48           2        1         88
    2005        22     31      33   -141     -255                     -139           4        1       -443
    2006          0    29      39     35      119                      -43           6        1        186
    2007          0    25      44     71       26                       15           5        1        187
    Total       85    276     575   -812     -306                     -302          41      -59       -501




                                                        45
Table 3 (continued)
            Panel B: Claims Holdings Adjustments
                      Financial     Real         Short
                       Derivs.     Estate      Securities    R&D     Total
            1989               3        32           -8      48       75
            1990               5        35           -8      50       82
            1991               7        41         -12       53       89
            1992             11         44         -13       57       98
            1993             16         48         -23       60      101
            1994             24         53         -27       64      115
            1995             37         58         -28       67      134
            1996             55         64         -35       72      156
            1997             82         73         -50       75      180
            1998            123         82         -61       80      224
            1999            185         94         -68       87      298
            2000            278        104         -61       92      413
            2001            417        117         -63       98      568
            2002            542        136         -54      103      727
            2003            704        155         -82      112      890
            2004            915        182         -99      125    1,124
            2005          1,190        212        -129      139    1,411
            2006                       225        -166      154      213
            2007                       233        -217      171      187

            Panel C: Liabilities Holdings Adjustments
                    Financial      Real          Short                       Net (Claims
                     Derivs.      Estate       Securities   R&D     Total    - Liabilities)
            1989             3        111            -25     37      126       -51
            1990             5        120            -25     41      141       -59
            1991             7        139            -28     45      162       -73
            1992            10        151            -31     50      180       -82
            1993            15        165            -35     55      200       -99
            1994            23        182            -38     60      228      -114
            1995            35        197            -50     66      249      -115
            1996            52        220            -61     73      283      -127
            1997            78        248            -77     79      328      -148
            1998          117         281            -90     92      399      -175
            1999          176         322          -102     103      499      -201
            2000          264         357          -111     116      626      -213
            2001          396         399          -117     125      804      -235
            2002          515         464          -121     132      990      -263
            2003          670         532          -149     141    1,194      -304
            2004          871         624          -174     149    1,469      -345
            2005        1,132         724          -198     159    1,817      -406
            2006                      769          -243     169      695      -482
            2007                      798          -278     180      699      -512



                                                 46
Table 4: Alternative Estimates of the Gap

This table shows the original estimate of the gap based on the revised BEA data and three alternative scenarios.
Scenario (A) adds to our original estimate of the gap all adjustments from Table 3 that impact the financial and
current accounts except for DI “other adjustments”, which we leave in the gap. Scenario (B) is the same as (A)
except it treats all DI “other adjustments” as valuation adjustments. Scenario (C) is the same as (B) except it omits
adjustments to derivatives and real estate.

  Panel A
                                                                         Adjustment Scenario

                                                   Original             (A)             (B)            (C)

       1. 1989 NIIP                                    -240            -291           -291            -213
                  Financial Derivatives                                   0              0
                  Real Estate                                           -78            -78
                  Short Sales Adj.                                       17             17              17
                  R&D Adj.                                               10             10              10

       2. Σ Financial Account             5,899                       4,840          4,840          4,479
                  Financial Derivatives                                  85             85
                  Real Estate                                           276            276
                  Equity Adj.                                          -302           -302            -302
                  Bonds Adj.                                           -812           -812            -812
                  Banking and Nonbanking Adj.                          -306           -306            -306

       3. Σ Valuation and Other Adjs.                 1,944           1,809          2,203          2,270
                  Financial Derivatives                                 143            143
                  Real Estate                                          -210           -210
                  Short Sales                                           -68            -68            -68
                  DI “Other Adjustments”                                               394            394

       4. 2007 NIIP                                  -2,442          -2,954         -2,954         -2,389
                  Real Estate                                          -565           -565
                  Equity Short Sales Adj.                                61             61              61
                  R&D Adj.                                               -8             -8              -8

       5. GAP (4+2-3-1)                               1,752             369             -26             32


            Memo: Cumulated CA                       -5,888          -5,331         -5,331         -5,331

            Memo: Cumulated SD                           32             533            533            895




                                                          47
Panel B: Time Series of the Statistical Discrepancy




                                     Adjustment Scenario

                    Recorded         (A)        (B)         (C)
            1990        27            33         33          39
            1991       -42             3          3           9
            1992       -43           -30        -30         -23
            1993         7           120        120         128
            1994        -1            -2         -2           7
            1995        32            94         94         104
            1996        -9            13         13          24
            1997       -77             0          0          12
            1998      149            167        167         182
            1999        68            40         40          58
            2000       -59           -29        -29          -9
            2001       -14           -68        -68         -44
            2002       -38            53         53          82
            2003        -6           118        118         153
            2004        95             7          7          51
            2005        32           476        476         529
            2006       -47          -233       -233        -204
            2007       -41          -228       -228        -203
            Total       32           533        533        895




                                                      48
Figure 1. Revisions to Net Positions and Net Financial Flows
This figure, from CDW (2008a), depicts the net international investment position (solid lines), calculated as U.S.
positions abroad less foreigners’ positions in the United States, and net financial outflows (dashed lines), calculated
as U.S. flows abroad less foreign flows into the United States. For both, thin lines denote the current vintage of
revised data and thick lines denote the originally released data. All data are in billions of U.S. dollars.


     0
          1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997    1998      1999    2000     2001      2002   2003   2004   2005

                                                                                Revised Flows
                                                            Original Flows

   -500




  -1000

                                              Original                              Revised Positions
                                              Positions


  -1500




  -2000




  -2500




  -3000




                                                                  49
Figure 2: The Net IIP, Cumulated Current Account and Valuation Adjustments: Current Vintage
The figure uses our preferred rates of return and the current vintage of international accounts data. NIIP=U.S. net international investment
position, CA=current account, FA=financial account, KA=capital account, VA=valuation adjustments, and SD=statistical discrepancy.




                                                                         50
Figure 3: The Net IIP, Cumulated Current Account and Valuation Adjustments: Adjusted Data
The figure uses our preferred rates of return and our adjusted international accounts data. NIIP= U.S. net international investment position,
CA=current account, FA=financial account, KA=capital account, VA=valuation adjustments, and SD=statistical discrepancy.




                                                                         51
