NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDISTRIBUTION AND TAX EXPENDITURES:
THE EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT
Nada Eissa
Hilary Hoynes
Working Paper 14307
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14307

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

This paper was prepared for the conference on "Incentive and Distributional Consequences of Tax
Expenditures" held on March 27-29, 2008 in Bonita Springs, Florida. We wish to thank Emmanuel
Saez for helpful comments, Dan Feenberg for special tabulations from TAXSIM, Ankur Patel for excellent
research assistance, conference participants, and Henrik Kleven for useful discussions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Nada Eissa and Hilary Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Redistribution and Tax Expenditures: The Earned Income Tax Credit
Nada Eissa and Hilary Hoynes
NBER Working Paper No. 14307
September 2008
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the distributional and behavioral effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC).
We chart the growth of the program over time, and argue several expansions show that real responses
to taxes are important. We use tax data to show the distribution of benefits by income and family
size, and examine the impacts of hypothetical reforms (expansions and contractions) to the credit.
Finally, we calculate the efficiency effects of marginal changes to EITC parameters. Targeting the
EITC to lower-income families by raising the phase-out rate generates a welfare loss for single mothers,
primarily because of the disincentive to enter the labor market and not the traditional hours-of-work
distortion.

Nada Eissa
The Car Barn, 418
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20007
and NBER
noe@georgetown.edu
Hilary Hoynes
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616-8578
and NBER
hwhoynes@ucdavis.edu

“…[J]ust as it is impossible to understand life without considering death, it is impossible to understand
economic redistribution through social spending without considering taxation. This is especially true for
tax "expenditures," commonly known as loopholes or breaks, which reside in the depths of the tax
code.”1

1. Introduction
The primary means of providing cash assistance to lower‐income families with children in the United
States is now the federal income tax system. A series of tax acts starting with the 1986 Tax Reform
Act—and running parallel to the erosion of the traditional welfare system—have increased assistance to
the working poor through expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). In 2007, an estimated 22
million families are estimated to benefit from the tax credit, at a total cost to the federal government of
more than 43 billion dollars (U.S. Office of Management and Budget 2008). Total federal spending on
cash assistance for poor families in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), however, is
projected to be only 16.5 billion dollars.

The increased reliance on the tax system to transfer money to needy families raises many issues
related to efficiency and equity. The most glaring issue with the tax system as a transfer mechanism for
the poor is arguably distributional: by transferring money only to working families, it fails to cover the
poorest families. On the other hand, it rewards work and family. It is widely accepted that the EITC has
raised the employment of eligible women with children. Empirical evidence consistent with economic
theory suggests that the EITC has been especially successful at promoting employment among eligible
unmarried women with children (Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000). In fact, the
labor force participation rate of single mothers increased by an astounding 14 percentage points
between 1989 and 2002, a period of substantial expansions in the size of the EITC. It is also generally
accepted that the credit has been successful in reducing poverty (see Hotz and Scholz 2003). Census
data indicate that the EITC removed almost five million people (over half of whom were children) from
poverty in 2002, more than any other government program (Llobrera and Zahradnik 2004). These
estimates reflect the intent of the 1993 EITC expansion to lift full‐time workers earning the minimum
wage out of poverty

This paper examines the distributional impacts of tax expenditures to lower‐income families

1

Edwin Amenta (1998), review of The Hidden Welfare State: Tax Expenditures and Social Policy in the United
States.

1

through the Earned Income Tax Credit. We review the design of the EITC and trace its growth over time,
as well as the evidence on the behavioral responses. Using tax data, we show the distributional patterns
of EITC expenditures and examine how these patterns change with hypothetical reforms to the credit.
We then use survey data from the Current Population Survey to calculate the efficiency effects of the
EITC under marginal reforms.

2. Operation and History of the EITC
The EITC is a refundable tax credit that was introduced in the tax code in 1975. The credit is targeted at
low to moderate income working families, and eligibility for the credit depends on the taxpayer’s earned
income (or in some cases adjusted gross income), and the number of qualifying children who meet
certain age, relationship and residency tests. The taxpayer must have positive earned income, defined
as wage and salary income, business self‐employment income, and farm self‐employment income.
Further, the taxpayer must have adjusted gross income and earned income below a specified amount (in
2007, the maximum allowable income for a taxpayer with two or more children is $37,783). There are
separate tax schedules by family size—a small credit for childless taxpayers, one for taxpayers with one
child, and another (more generous payment) for taxpayers with two more children.2

The total tax cost of the EITC consists of two components. The pure tax expenditure is the
amount by which the EITC reduces the amount of taxes owed. Because the EITC is refundable, however,
there is also the outlay component—taxpayers receive a tax refund when the EITC exceeds their taxes
owed. The outlay component is large: in 2004 the total tax cost of the EITC was $40 billon with a pure
tax expenditure of $5 billion and an outlay of $35 billion. For the purposes of this paper and the analysis
of the EITC, we are considering the total tax cost (tax expenditure plus outlay) as the relevant object of
study.

Each of the credit schedules (for no children, one child, two or more children) consists of three
regions. At the lowest levels of earnings, in the phase‐in region, the EITC is equal to earnings times the
subsidy (or phase‐in) rate. In tax year 2007, the subsidy rate of the EITC is 34 percent for taxpayers with
one child, 40 percent for taxpayers with two or more children, and 7.65 percent for childless taxpayers.
Following the phase‐in, there is a relatively small range of earnings—in the flat region—where the family

2

A "qualifying child" for the EITC must be under age 19 (or 24 if a full‐time student) or permanently disabled and residing with
the taxpayer for more than half the year.

2

receives the maximum credit. In 2007, the maximum credit is $2,853 for one child, $4,716 for two or
more children, and $428 for childless filers. Finally, for earnings above the flat region—in the phase‐out
region—the credit is reduced at the phase‐out rate (about 16 for one child, 21 percent for two or more
children, and 7.65 for childless). The flat and phase‐out regions of the EITC are extended by $2,000 for
married filers in 2007; this is the only aspect of the credit schedule which varies by filing status. Overall,
the 2007 EITC schedule is traced out in Figure 1. This illustrates the quite modest size (relatively) of the
credit for childless taxpayers, and the large range of the phase‐out region covering earnings well beyond
the lowest income taxpayers. For comparison, 2006 median family income (not earnings) was $48,201
for all households and $31,818 among female headed households (DeNavas‐Walt et al 2007).

Table 1 summarizes the parameters of the EITC over the history of the program. Originally, in
1975, the EITC was a modest program aimed at offsetting the social security payroll tax for low‐income
families with children. It was the outcome of a vigorous policy debate surrounding the efficacy of a
Negative Income Tax (NIT) as a means of reducing poverty. The concern was that the NIT—which
guarantees a minimum standard of living to everyone—would discourage labor market activity as it is
gradually phased out. Ultimately the EITC was born out of a desire to reward work. Subsequently, the
EITC expanded substantially through tax acts in 1986, 1990 and 1993. As part of the Tax Reform Act of
1986 (TRA86), by 1988 taxpayers with incomes between $11,000 and $18,576 became eligible for the
credit and faced its phase‐out marginal tax rate for the first time. The largest single expansion, as part of
the Omnibus Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA93), led to a large increase in the subsidy rate (and
maximum credit) along with a modest increase in the phase‐out rate. OBRA93 also introduced the credit
for childless filers. Figure 2 shows the EITC credit in real terms before and after each of the three key tax
acts (for families with children) and highlights the dramatic expansion of the credit over time, as well as
its effects on the families of different sizes.

These expansions have led to a dramatic increase in the total cost of the EITC. Figure 3 shows
the total real outlay (refundable portion) and the total real tax cost of the EITC from 1975 to 2004, with
the difference being the pure tax expenditure. The figure clearly shows the rising expenditures
associated with the 1986, 1990, and 1993 tax acts. Importantly, between 1990 and 1996 the program
more than doubled in real terms. Figure 4 shows that much of this increase in costs is driven by the
increase in the number of recipients—in 1995, 19 million filers received the EITC, 160% more than ten

3

years earlier.3 Figure 3 also shows that the vast majority of the total tax cost—throughout the history of
the EITC—derives from the refundable portion of the credit rather than the pure tax expenditure.

Given that the EITC primarily takes the form of a direct outlay, it is useful to outline the tradeoffs
involved in transferring dollars through the tax system. The main advantage of redistribution through
the tax system is the low administrative costs enabled by the use of income information already
collected for tax purposes. This argument was made as early as 1962 by Milton Friedman in arguing for
a negative income tax as the means of assisting low‐income people (see also the discussion in Liebman
1998). Indeed, administrative costs amount to an estimated 0.5 percent of EITC benefits (IRS 2003).
This compares to about 16 percent of the budget for traditional transfer programs (Green Book 2004).
Further, there is less "stigma" associated with benefits received through the tax system than through
welfare agencies, due to the lack of a separate application and “inquisition” by caseworkers. The net
effect of the lower stigma is to increase take‐up and well‐being of those eligible for assistance. A
disadvantage of administering benefits through the tax system is that the IRS is not as well suited to
monitor compliance with the eligibility criteria other than income—such as verifying qualifying children,
especially with intergenerational families and non‐custodial parents. In addition, the “lump sum” nature
of the EITC may require costly consumption smoothing for families. Finally, current year EITC is tied to
prior year income, which may lead to inefficiencies given that employment and living arrangements
change frequently for the low income population.

3. Who Gets the EITC? Distributional Analysis under Current Law
To profile the EITC population, we use data from the Statistics of Income Public Use Tax File, a nationally
representative sample of all individual tax returns filed in a given tax year (IRS 2004). Our main analysis
is based on 2004 tax‐year data, though for historical analyses, we use 20 years of data spanning 1984
through 2004 data. The 2004 tax file includes 150,047 observations (drawn from about 130 million
income tax returns filed). All our tabulations use the weights provided in the file.

In 2004, there were a total of 22.1 million EITC recipients with a total tax cost of 40.1 billion
dollars. In Table 2, we show the distribution of recipients by the number of EITC qualified children, filing
3

At the same time as the federal EITC was expanding, many states introduced "add on" credits as part of their state income tax
schedule. As of January 2006, a total of nineteen states and the District of Columbia have state EITC’s, typically structuring their
credits as a share of the federal credit, varying between 5 percent in Illinois to more than 40 percent in Minnesota and
Wisconsin (Nagle and Johnson 2006). The cost of the state EITCs is estimated to be $1.5 billion (Okwuje and Johnson 2006).

4

status, and EITC credit range. The number of EITC returns is about evenly split between those with one
child versus two or more children (8.4 million with one child and 9.2 million with two or more children).
Owing to the more generous credit for larger families, however, filers with two or more children receive
62 percent of the total tax cost while those with one child receive 36 percent of expenditures. Childless
recipients represent 21 percent of all EITC recipients—numbering 4.7 million in 2004—but only 2
percent of the total tax cost. Table 2 also shows that head of household filers (unmarried with children)
represent 53 percent of EITC returns and 65 percent of tax expenditures. Married couples filing jointly
make up a quarter of recipients and tax costs; the remaining quarter of recipients and 10 percent of tax
costs go to single filers. This disproportionate share of unmarried filers among the EITC population
reflects the higher eligibility rates—due to lower earnings and income—of single women with children.
The average EITC benefit (refundable and nonrefundable) per recipient is $218 for those with no EITC
qualified children, $1,715 for those with one child, and $2,693 for those with two or more children.

The distribution the credit dollars and recipients by EITC region—phase‐in, flat, and phase‐out—
is also presented in Table 2. This distribution effectively determines the net labor supply effect of the
EITC. About one quarter of EITC returns and expenditures go to filers in the phase‐in or subsidy region.
About 19 percent of recipients and 29 percent of the total tax cost is for recipients in the flat region, and
fully 54 percent of recipients and 48 percent of the total tax cost is for recipients in the phase‐out
region. This shows that more than three‐quarters of recipients have earnings in the flat and phase‐out
range where negative hours of work incentives are predicted (work incentives are discussed more fully
in the next section). Married couple filers are even more likely to have income outside the phase‐in
range: tabulations by filing status and credit region (not in Table 2) show that about 84 percent of
married EITC recipients have income in the flat or phase‐out regions compared to 70 percent among
head of household filers.

We extend this profile of EITC recipients by examining the distribution of tax filers and EITC
recipients by ranges and deciles of cash income, in Table 3.4 By design, the benefits of the EITC are
concentrated at the bottom of the income distribution. About 35 percent of the EITC total tax cost goes
to filers in the 3rd cash income decile ($11,163 to $17,100 in 2004). About a quarter of the tax cost is in
4

Cash income is constructed as AGI less state and local tax refunds, plus deductions for IRA, student loan interest, alimony paid,
tuition & fees, health savings account, one‐half of self‐employment tax, penalty on early withdrawal of saving, self‐employed
health insurance, medical savings account, Keogh, tax‐exempt interest, non‐taxable social security benefits, and other income
(if positive). Note that this excludes non‐taxable income such as public assistance benefits. Finally, we follow the common
practice of dropping those with negative income when presenting means of the bottom decile (but they are included in the
totals). Those with negative income account for less than 1 percent of returns (weighted).

5

the each of the 2nd and 4th cash income deciles (with $5,302‐$11,162 and $17,101‐$23,570 respectively).
Notably, a somewhat smaller amount, 5 percent, goes to the very lowest cash income decile (below
$5,301) where there are fewer eligible filers. The remaining 12 percent of the tax cost is above the 4th
decile (almost all of that is in the 5th decile).

These distributional impacts across income deciles are highlighted in Figure 5. The top panel of
the figure presents the distribution of EITC costs and recipients by income decline, as previously shown
in Table 3. Overall, it may be surprising that the EITC benefits taxfilers all the way into the fifth decile of
the income distribution where incomes range from $23,570 to $31,650 (and does not benefit taxpayers
in the bottom income decile). In Panel B, we define the income deciles based on “family size
equivalent” income measures. In particular, we follow the practice of CBO by dividing family income by
the square root of family size for the purpose of ranking families. Using this alternative definition of
income deciles, we find that the EITC tax cost to be more concentrated in the lowest deciles—almost
three‐quarters of the tax cost are in deciles two and three. For the remainder of the paper, we return to
our original income deciles (unadjusted for family size).

The distribution of the EITC tax cost by income decile for tax years 1984 through 2004 (figure 6)
shows the benefits have shifted from the bottom decile further up the income distribution to the 4th
decile and above. Interestingly, most of the change occurs around the expansions in TRA86, with less
dramatic effects of OBRA90 and OBRA93.

Finally, we find a distinct geographic pattern in the distribution of EITC tax expenditures (Figure
7). This figure plots EITC expenditures per state tax‐filer for each of the 50 states (and the District of
Columbia).5 As one might expect, the per‐filer EITC tax cost is highest in the poorest states (Louisiana
$617, Mississippi $616, District of Columbia $570, Alabama $505, Georgia $504). The tax cost per filer
tends to be lowest in richer states (Vermont $121, Hawaii $139, Massachusetts $159, Connecticut $161,
Maryland $168) as well as states that have fewer filing units with children (Wyoming $102, North Dakota
$152).

4. Behavioral Effects of the EITC

5

Note that this is a measure of the tax benefits per state not state tax burdens. The burden is faced by all taxpayers, not just
state residents.

6

A primary motivation for recent expansions of the EITC is to reward the values of “work and family.” In
this section, we discuss the incentives created by the credit for work and family formation, and review
the empirical evidence.

Labor Supply Incentives
A key design feature of the EITC and what distinguishes is from traditional income support programs, is
that the EITC is only provided to working families and in so doing promotes work. However, the
additional tax from the phase‐out rate is expected to reduce work among those already in the labor
force. Thus the overall prediction is an increase in the extensive margin and a reduction in the intensive
margin of labor supply.

Consider first families with one parent or one potential earner. Figure 8 presents a stylized
budget constraint, plotting hours worked on the horizontal axis against after tax income on the vertical
axis, ignoring for simplicity all other features of the tax‐transfer system outside the EITC. In the absence
of the EITC, the taxpayer earns a gross wage w for each hour worked—hence the no‐EITC budget
constraint is given by segment AD, with slope w. The EITC alters the budget constraint to ABCD. In the
phase‐in region (AB), the EITC acts as a pure wage subsidy and increases the net wage from w to

w(1 + τ S ) where τ S is the subsidy rate (34 percent for one child, 40 percent for two or more). In the flat
region of the credit (BC), the taxpayer’s budget constraint is shifted out an amount equal to the
maximum credit and her gross (and net of tax) hourly wage is w. Each dollar earned in the phase‐out
region of the EITC (CD) reduces the credit by a phase‐out rate of τ p (about 21 percent) leading to a net
of tax wage of w(1 − τ p ) . The net of tax wage in the phase‐out will be lowered further once the taxpayer
starts paying federal tax.

The figure shows that the well‐being of a taxpayer who is not working is not affected by the
EITC. Any taxpayer who preferred working before will still prefer working, and some taxpayers may find
that the additional after‐tax income from the EITC makes it worth entering the labor force. Therefore,
the impact of introducing or expanding the EITC on the labor force participation of unmarried taxpayers
is unambiguously positive—a positive extensive margin effect.

The impact of the EITC on the hours worked by a single working taxpayer, however, is generally
expected to be negative but depends on which region of the credit the woman is in before the credit is
7

expanded or introduced. If she is in the phase‐in region, the EITC leads to an ambiguous impact on
hours worked due to the negative income effect and positive substitution effect. In the flat region and
phase‐out regions, however, the EITC is expected to reduce hours through a negative income effect, and
additionally in the phase‐out, a negative substitution effect. Moreover, the phase‐out of the credit alters
the budget set in such a way that some taxpayers with incomes beyond the phase‐out region may
choose to reduce their hours of work and take advantage of the credit. In practice most EITC recipients
have income beyond the phase‐in: for example in 2004 about 70 percent of single filers and 84 of
married filers receiving the EITC have earnings in the flat or phase‐out region of the credit (more on this
below). Thus the expectation is that the EITC will reduce the number of hours worked by most eligible
single taxpayers already in the labor force.

These labor supply incentives are substantial. Eissa and Hoynes (2006b) show that in 2004 a
single filer with one child earning $10 per hour considering part‐time work faces a average tax rate of
negative 10 percent (a subsidy), compared to a tax rate of 15 percent without the EITC—a reduction in
the participation tax of 25 percentage points. Further, recipients with incomes in the phase‐out range
face marginal tax rates that are high by federal income tax standards. NBER TAXSIM‐simulated marginal
tax rates on 2004 earnings for a single filer with two children are shown in Figure 9. For these
simulations, we assume that the family only has earned income, takes the standard deduction, and the
tax calculation ignores state income taxes, the AMT, and the payroll tax. This figure shows that the
marginal tax rates in the phase‐out are higher than those experienced by taxpayers at far greater
earnings.

In contrast to the predictions for single women, the EITC is expected to reduce the participation
and hours worked of most eligible married women. This occurs also because the credit is based on
family earnings and income. Suppose family labor supply follows a sequential model, with the husband
as the primary earner and the wife as the secondary earner. In this model, the effect of the credit on
the labor supply of primary earners is the same as that of single taxpayers—incentives to participate in
the labor market strengthen unambiguously while hours of work incentives are ambiguous, though likely
negative given the distribution of taxpayer income along the EITC schedule.

The impact of the EITC on secondary earners is more complicated because it depends on the
earnings of the primary earner. Assume for simplicity that the husband is the primary earner, and
further that his earnings place the family in the phase‐out range. The family receives the credit if the
8

wife remains out of the labor force, but the credit amount will decrease with each dollar earned if she
enters the labor market. In the phase‐out range, therefore, the EITC unambiguously reduces hours
worked and participation, by raising family after‐tax income and reducing the net‐of‐tax wage. If the
husband’s earnings place the family in the flat region, the credit unambiguously lowers labor‐market
participation and hours worked by married women (through a pure income effect). Of course, it is also
possible for the wife’s work effort to increase the family’s credit if the husband’s earnings are in the
subsidy region (up to $8,390 or $11,790 in 2007 depending on the number of children), but very few
married couples are likely to have incomes in this range. Given the distribution of income, it is unlikely
the EITC will have any positive effect on the intensive or extensive margins of labor supply of married
women.

Empirical Evidence on Labor Supply
A large body of work has examined the behavioral responses to the EITC. Here we touch on the major
findings in the literature; those interested in a more comprehensive review should see Hotz and Scholz
(2003) and Eissa and Hoynes (2006b).

Much of the empirical literature focuses on estimating the incentive effects on labor supply for
single mothers. That work shows consistently that the EITC leads to significant increases in employment
(extensive margin) but there is little evidence that the EITC leads to a reduction in labor supply for those
in the labor market (intensive margin). Perhaps most striking about these findings is their consistency
across different empirical methods—including quasi‐experimental methods (Eissa and Liebman 1996,
Ellwood 2000, Hotz et al 2002, Meyer and Rosenbaum 2000, and Rothstein 2007) and more structural
methods (Dickert et al 1995 and Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001)—as well as different EITC expansions.

Evaluations of the large federal expansions in the credit in 1986, 1990, and 1993 typically use
difference‐in‐difference models and compare changes for a treated group (e.g. single mothers with
children) to a control group (e.g. single mothers without children). The control group is introduced to
control for other factors that may be contemporaneous with the policy changes. The EITC design and
expansions suggest a number of possible strategies—such as comparing women with different family
sizes (presence and number of children), marital status, earnings or education levels—for identifying
labor supply responses. These models seem to work well and provide robust estimates for the impact of
the EITC on participation, but may be less well suited for estimating the impacts on hours worked.
Analyzing the determinants of hours worked is more complicated due to the changes in the composition
9

of the working sample and selection into work more generally.

To illustrate the findings from the difference‐in‐difference literature, Figure 10 presents annual
employment rates for women by marital status and presence of children for 1983‐2006.6 The figure
shows the dramatic increase in employment rates for single women with children compared to single
women without children. Most of this change occurred between 1992 and 1999 where employment
rates for single women with children increased by 16 percentage points. This is during the period of the
largest expansion in the EITC due to OBRA 1993. Over this same period, there was little change in
employment rates of single women without children. Others have shown that the groups with the most
to gain from EITC expansions (e.g, women with lower wages, lower education levels, more children, and
single women) experienced larger gains in employment rates (Ellwood 2000, Meyer and Rosenbaum
2000, Rothstein 2007).

Eissa and Liebman (1996) find that the 1986 expansion of the EITC led to a 2.8 percentage point
increase in employment rates (relative to the base of 74.2) for single mothers. Meyer and Rosenbaum
(2001) find that 60 percent of the 8.7 percentage point increase in annual employment single mothers
between 1984 and 1996 is due to the EITC. They find that a smaller amount, 35 percent of the increase
in employment between 1992 and 1996 is due to the EITC (with the remainder due to welfare reform
and other changes). The range of the implied employment elasticity with respect to net income across
all studies is quite narrow—between 0.69 and 1.16 (Hotz and Scholz 2003).

A few papers examine the impact of EITC on hours for single mothers already in the labor
market (Eissa and Liebman 1996, Meyer and Rosenbaum 1999, Rothstein 2007). In sharp contrast to the
findings above, however, there is little evidence consistent with the expected negative intensive margin
effect. Some studies estimate positive effects, some negative, and most are statistically insignificant.
Another source of evidence builds on the prediction from labor supply theory that taxpayers should be
bunched at the kinks in the EITC schedule (and should be less present at the end of the EITC schedule).
Liebman (1998) and Saez (2002b) use tax return data and find no evidence of consistent with these
predictions.

6

These tabulations are calculated using the 1984‐2007 March Current Population Surveys. The sample includes all women aged
19‐44 who are not in school or disabled. We also drop the relatively small number of women who report working positive hours
but have zero earnings or report positive earnings but zero hours. For these calculations, employment is defined by any work
over the (prior) calendar year.

10

This finding—of a significant extensive margin effect but no intensive margin effect—is
consistent with the current consensus that intensive labor supply elasticities are relatively small. It might
also be that EITC recipients are not fully aware of the structure of the EITC schedule. They receive the
EITC as lump sum payment with their tax return and have few opportunities to learn about the schedule.

There are fewer studies on the incentive effects for married couples; but the available evidence
is consistent with the theoretical expectations. Eissa and Hoynes (2004) and Ellwood (2000) find that
EITC expansions led to modest reductions in employment rates of married women. Eissa and Hoynes
(2004), for example, compare married mothers to married women without children and find that the
1993 EITC expansion led to a one percentage point reduction in the participation rate of married
mothers. Eissa and Hoynes (2006a) use instrumental variables methods and find that EITC expansions
from 1984‐1996 led to a small—one to four percent—decrease in annual hours for working married
women with children. Heim (2005) estimates a structural model of family labor supply and finds similar
impacts on hours worked of married women (yet he finds no impact of the EITC on employment of
married women).

Tax Cost of Marriage
Because the EITC is based on family income and because the same credit schedule applies to all
taxpayers with children regardless of marital status7, the EITC is not neutral with respect to marriage. By
non‐marriage neutrality, it is meant that the credit for a married couple differs from that for two
unmarried individuals with the same total income and family size. Marriage non‐neutrality is not unique
to the EITC, however. Both federal and state taxes (Feenberg and Rosen 1995) and traditional transfer
programs generally are not marriage neutral. Other, less‐prominent, provisions in the tax code that
generate marriage non‐neutrality include those related to the child‐care tax credit. Together these
features operate to tax marriage in some cases and subsidize it in other cases.

To see how this works, consider an extreme case: a married couple in 2004 with four children,
each earning $14,000 for a total of $28,000. Their credit is $1,570. If they divorce and each takes 2
children, their credit jumps to $8,600. Their marriage costs them over $7,000 in lost earned income
credit (or 25 percent of their joint income). On the other hand, very low income people may gain from
marriage. Consider a single parent with two children who earns $5,000 gets and EITC of $2000. If she

7

To offset the marriage penalty associated with the EITC, EGGTRA expanded the size of the flat credit for married
filers

11

marries someone earning $10,000, for a combined income, their credit jumps to $4100 (for a marriage
bonus of $2,100, or 14 percent of their joint income).

In tax year 1999 [need to update], approximately 48 percent of couples filing a joint federal tax
return faced a marriage penalty averaging $1141, while 41 percent received a marriage bonus averaging
$1274 (Bull et al 1999). These modest overall penalties mask substantial heterogeneity in the
population. Penalized married taxpayers with less than $20,000 earned income face an average
marriage penalty of 8 percent of income. A significant share of marriage penalties and subsidies incurred
by lower income families is caused by the loss of the EITC (CBO 1997).

Relatively little empirical work has examined the impact of the combined tax and transfer
system on the family (see for example, Dickert‐Conlin and Houser ‐DCH‐1998, Eissa and Hoynes –EH‐
2000a,b). Consistent with the work on traditional welfare programs, DCH find no effect of taxes and
transfers on the decision of females to become heads of household (through out‐of‐wedlock birth or
divorce). Eissa and Hoynes (2000a) document the changes to the tax consequence of marriage from
1984 to 1997, and show it declined following the flattening of the federal tax schedule in 1986 but then
subsequently increase in the period after. They use this time variation in the tax consequence of
marriage, augmented with the impact of welfare (ADFC/Food Stamps/Medicaid) to examine the impact
on the propensity of women to be married, and find a small impact of the tax‐transfer system on
marriage (EH 2000b). On balance, the evidence suggests the tax consequence of marriage has a minor
impact on behavior and raises mostly distributional concerns.

Should the Tax System be Neutral with Respect to Marriage?
While nearly 60 provisions of the federal income tax code alter tax liability by marital status (GAO,
1997), it is primarily the combination of a progressive income tax schedule and taxation on the basis of
total family income that generates marriage non‐neutrality. Although marriage neutrality of the tax
code has been espoused by some, it is not at all clear that the tax system should treat marriage
neutrally. On the one hand, the notion of horizontal equity suggests that marriage should be taxed
because couples benefit from economies of scale deriving from sharing resources. The benefits of
economies of scale accrue to any group of individuals residing together, however, and are not taxed
generally if they accrue to cohabiting couples, adult children living with parents, or group‐home
residents. On the other hand, marriage confers social benefits primarily in the form of child wellbeing.

12

To the extent that the relationship between marriage and child well‐being is causal, and to the
extent that individual marriage decisions ignore the social benefits, a strong argument for government
intervention emerges. Here, the tax code should subsidize marriage. In addition, the strong correlation
between poverty and single‐parent families suggests that marriage may be viewed as a cost‐effective
poverty alleviation policy.

The 2001 and 2003 tax cuts lowered marriage penalties by adjusting the size of the maximum
EITC credit region for married couples, and by making the standard deduction and 15 percent bracket
twice the size as for a single taxpayer. Making these permanent is likely to be very costly, however,
about $130 billion dollars over the 2008‐2017 budget window (Tax Policy Center, 2007).

5. Hypothetical Reforms to the EITC
To examine more comprehensively the impact of the EITC, we evaluate several hypothetical reforms to
the credit. We consider six reforms that alternatively expand and contract the program. Table 4
presents the parameters for 2004 (current) law—Panel A—and for each reform. Panel B presents two
reforms that expand the program by (1) increasing the phase‐in (subsidy) rate, maximum credit and
phase‐out rate, and (2) expands the credit for childless adults. Panel C presents the parameters of, what
we term, “universal” reforms, which reduce the phase‐out rate to be one‐third the current‐law rate
(5.33% and 7.02% for one versus two or more child‐families, respectively) and thereby expand eligibility
further up earnings distribution. Panel D presents the parameters for “targeted” reforms, which raise
the phase‐out rate three‐fold (47.94% and 63.18%, respectively) and thereby focus the credit on lower‐
earning taxfilers8. For the universal and targeted reforms, we consider both non‐revenue neutral and
revenue‐neutral variations. We impose revenue neutrality in a specific way, by adjusting the maximum
credit (and hence the phase‐in rate of the credit) but holding fixed the income cutoffs for the initial two
credit regions. Our discussion focuses on the revenue‐neutral versions, since they are arguably more
realistic and highlight more clearly the distributional tradeoffs implicit in the current design of spending
$40 billion in this refundable credit. In each case, we examine distributional impacts, but also discuss
the likely efficiency (labor supply) consequences. Our welfare analysis of these large reforms is only

8

Other simulations that are of interest to the wider tax expenditures project are removing the “AMT patch” and eliminating the
2001 and 2003 tax cuts. We have examined these scenarios and show that they lead to no significant changes for the EITC. Thus
we have chosen to not present them here although they are available on request. In an effort to lesson the marriage penalty,
the 2001 tax act did expand the flat and phase‐out regions of the EITC for married couples (as illustrated in Figure 1 and
specified in the notes to Table 1). In practice, these changes were modest in size and impact.

13

suggestive, however, since a full blown analysis with parametric utility functions and social welfare
weights is beyond the scope of this paper (see Liebman 2002 for such an analysis). We defer discussion
of “marginal reforms”—Panels E and F—to Section 6, in which we carry out a welfare evaluation of
different EITC phase‐out rates.

Our evaluation here is based on the 2004 SOI Public Use Tax Data used to profile the EITC
population. Using those data and the NBER’s TAXSIM model, we recalculate each taxfiler’s tax liability,
marginal tax rate under the alternative EITC policies, and aggregate to get the number of recipients and
total cost9. More precisely, marginal and average tax rates are defined for each dollar of earned income,
and do not include payroll taxes (we also relax this assumption in section 6) or state income taxes. The
simulated values are used to populate distributional tables similar to those presented above under
current law, allowing us to infer the likely distributional and efficiency consequences of each reform.

Two caveats are worth noting. The simulations of total cost, number of recipients and
(marginal and average) tax rates are static, and so assume no change in labor supply or earnings (we
relax this assumption in Section 6).10 In addition, by using the 2004 SOI data, our results are limited to
the existing sample of filers.

We present the simulated number of EITC recipients, total EITC tax cost, and distribution of the
EITC tax cost by number of children, filing status, and cash income decile under current law and the
alternative policies in Table 511. We compare marginal and average tax rates under current and the
alternative policies in Table 6. Below, we discuss each reform separately, considering first expansionary
reforms.

A:

Expansionary Reform 1: Increased Subsidy Rate

Our first expansion broadly expands the program by increasing the phase‐in rate by about one‐third:
from 34 to 46 percent for parents with one child and from 40 to 54 percent for those with two or more
children (see Figure 11a). We hold fixed the size of the phase‐in and flat regions and so raise the

9

Dan Feenberg was incredibly helpful in coding up all of the alternative EITC policies and making this analysis possible with
TAXSIM.
10
For married couples, we calculate the marginal tax rate for the primary earner.
11
Note that the numbers for “current law” in Table 5 differ slightly from the results presented earlier in Tables 2‐3. The current
law numbers in Table 5 use TAXSIM to calculate the EITC under current law assuming 100% take‐up. This provides the best
comparison to the simulations of the alternative policies. Our recalculation of current law shows 22.9 million recipients
(compared to 22.1 under current law) with most of these additional recipients in the childless group.

14

maximum credit to $3,487 ($5,754) for those with one child (two more children).12 It is worth noting
that this reform does not expand eligibility very far up the income distribution. The maximum income
for the EITC rises by about 18 to 20 percent (to $35,861 and $41, 362) relative to current law.

This expansion covers an additional 2.5 million tax‐filers (11 percent) but does so at a high cost‐‐
$20 billion (or 50 percent of current law expenditures). This expansion creates winners and no losers
(except for taxpayers who finance the additional expenditures). Still, it is useful to note where the
dollars flow and how that changes with the alternative policy. The distribution of the tax cost seems to
vary little by number of children and filing status, though it does benefit taxpayers with children
(especially with more than one child) and joint filers relative to head of household and single filers. This
reform, on the other hand, transfers most of the dollars to taxfilers with higher incomes. This occurs
both across EITC regions and across the cash‐income distribution. Essentially all the benefits accrue to
tax‐filers in the phase out region—who under current law receive 49.4 percent of the dollars and under
the expanded program end up with 52.1 percent. Those who gain most have income in the 5th and 6th
deciles of the distribution (above $23,570).

In addition to the distribution of benefits, we examine the impact of EITC reforms on average
and marginal tax rates. Simulations, presented in Table 6, show this expansion reduces average tax
rates (calculated as tax liability relative to earned income) for most for head of household filers (by ‐4.7
percentage points), and for taxpayers in the flat region of the EITC (by ‐4.9 percentage points). The table
also breaks out the impact on newly eligible taxpayers (with incomes between the current law maximum
and $35,861 and $41,362), and shows their tax liability declines by about 1.2 percentage points. The
cash income distribution shows all filers below the 7th decile benefit, but that the largest gains accrue to
the second and third decile (mirroring the flat region). By reducing the tax liability, this reform expands
the budget set for all eligible filers and thereby provides stronger incentives for non‐workers to enter
the labor market. As a consequence, it creates welfare gains along that margin of labor supply.13

The EITC expansion considered here reduces marginal tax rates (higher subsidy rates) for some
recipients and raises them (higher phase‐out rates) for other recipients. This renders the pattern of
marginal tax rates far less consistent than that of average rates (see the bottom panel of Table 6). Head
of household and single filers face lower marginal rates, while joint filers face a slightly higher marginal

12
13

This policy assumes no change to the credit for the childless.
For a full discussion of welfare effects along the discrete labor force participation margin, see Section 6 and Appendix A.

15

tax rate on earnings. By income, the simulation shows marginal tax rates decline for lower‐income filers
(in the phase‐in and flat regions, and below the second decile) and rise for those with higher incomes.
Not surprisingly, newly eligible filers face a marginal rate that is nearly 15 percentage points greater
than under current law, as they enter into the phase‐out region. These filers have income in the 5th and
6th decile of the distribution and thereby explain the observed rise in marginal tax rates at those points.
Applying a traditional Harberger analysis suggests welfare losses on balance from the marginal rate
changes because the increases hit a thicker part of the income distribution. This is especially the case if
the elasticity of hours worked with respect to the tax rate increases with income.

B:

Expansionary reform 2: Increase Childless Adult EITC

Our second expansionary reform is based on the recent proposal by the U.S. House Ways and Means
Committee to expand the EITC for childless filers (the Rangel proposal). The proposal doubles the
subsidy rate (to 15.3 percent) to cover fully the Social Security and Medicare payroll tax rate (and
doubles the maximum credit), expands the size of the flat region, and doubles the phase‐out rate to
15.3 percent. This reform expands eligibility to those with incomes up to $15,998 (from its current‐law
level of $11,490).

Figure 11(b) illustrates this reform and shows it to be a relatively modest expansion. . It is
simulated to cover an additional 3.3million taxfilers (14 percent) and cost about 2.8 billion per year (7
percent over current law). The distribution of the EITC tax cost changes in predicable ways. More
benefits go to single filers and to filers with no children, but also to the phase‐in and (mainly) flat regions
(relative to phase‐out region). Expanding the childless adult credit reduces average tax rates for single
filers (by 0.6 percentage points) and across the EITC distribution. More precisely, newly eligible
recipients see a decline of 0.7 percentage points in their average rates. Evidence on the behavioral
responses of (less‐skilled) childless adults is limited, but inference from standard labor supply and tax
work generally suggests small elasticities (cites). In work that does not incorporate income taxes, Juhn
(1992) finds substantial declines in labor market participation by less‐skilled men in the 1970s and 1980s
in response to deteriorating wage opportunities. If is therefore possible that this reform will generate
some labor supply and efficiency gains.

C:

Universal Reforms

Our second reform makes the credit more “universal” by extending substantially the reach of the phase‐
out region up the income distribution. That is accomplished by reducing the phase‐out rate from the
16

15.98 (21.06) percent for families with one child (two or more children) under current law to 5.33 (7.02)
percent, respectively. Static simulations show this expansion is projected to add $27 billion to the total
annual cost of the EITC and cover an additional 12.5 million tax‐filing units (Table 5). Because of the
scale of this expansion, illustrated in Figure 12(a), we also consider a version that requires no additional
revenues. The revenue‐neutral expansion is paid for by reducing the maximum credit (and phase‐in
rate) by 30 percent, as we show in Figure 12(b).

The revenue‐neutral reform is projected to cover 7.3 million (or 32 percent) more taxfilers.
Although this reform costs essentially the same as current law (by design), it has dramatic distributional
consequences. In relative terms, the credit flows away from unmarried parents (who have lower
incomes in general) and towards married couples—who now receive 30.7 percent instead of 24.8
percent of the total benefits. In addition, the credit flows away from tax‐filers in lower cash‐income
deciles to those in higher income deciles. About 70.5 percent of credit dollars go to filers in the bottom
4 deciles (with income below $23,570) under the revenue‐neutral reform, down from 89.7 percent
under current law.

The impact of these redirected benefits on tax liability and average tax rates is stark. Tax liability
rises everywhere along the EITC schedule except for those who are newly eligible. The 7 million newly‐
eligible filers get a 1.5 percentage point reduction in their average tax rate. On a finer level, the
distribution of average tax rate by cash income shows the revenue‐neutral expansion of the credit
benefits taxpayers above the 4th decile at the expense of all those with lower income. This
redistribution comes at a cost for newly eligible taxpayers, however: higher marginal tax rates on hours
worked between the 6th and 8th deciles of the cash income distribution. In fact, very low‐cash income
recipients also face higher marginal rates (as the subsidy rate is reduced). Any negative distortion to
labor supply caused by these higher marginal rates is offset, however, by lower marginal rates (by 2 to
3.9 percentage points) for taxfilers right below the middle (in the 3rd, 4th and 5th income deciles) of the
distribution. The efficiency consequences of this reform are therefore difficult to characterize, and
ultimately depends as well on the relative size of the elasticity of hours worked across the cash‐income
distribution and the shares of income facing higher as opposed to lower rates.

D:

Targeted Reforms

Our final set of large reforms target the credit by curtailing substantially the reach of the phase‐out
region. That is accomplished by raising sharply the phase‐out rate from the 15.98 (21.06) percent for
17

families with one child (two or more children) under current law to 47.94 (63.18) percent respectively
(see Figure 13a). These rates might seem entirely unrealistic, but we note they are quite modest for
traditional welfare programs (e.g. AFDC/TANF). The net impact is to render ineligible taxfilers with one
child and incomes between $19,472 and $30,338 ($20,846 and $34,458 for two or more children). Static
simulations show this contraction of the EITC saves the federal government $13.4 billion annually, and
eliminates 6.8 million tax‐filing units from the program (Table 5). The revenue‐neutral version of this
reform, illustrated in Figure 13b, redistributes the tax‐revenue savings to a higher subsidy rate and
thereby a higher maximum credit (by about one‐third its current law level). The specific parameters are
also presented in Panel D of Table 4.

On net, the revenue‐neutral targeted EITC reform eliminates 5.4 million recipients (a decline of
about 23 percent), who are more likely to be joint filers. Therefore, we observe redistribution from joint
filers (who have higher incomes) to single and (mainly) head of household filers. There is very little
redistribution between parents and childless adults in this reform. To the extent that joint filers have
more children than head of household filers, there is possible residual redistribution to childless adults.
Along the EITC schedule and cash‐income distribution, the credit flows are as expected—from the
phase‐out to regions below—and from the 4th decile to deciles below. In fact, this reform transfers 88.7
percent of the credit to filers with incomes at or below the 3rd decile (compared to 66.9 percent under
current law and 49.6 under the comparable universal reform). Figure 14 illustrates further the different
distribution of benefits under current law, and each reform of the revenue‐neutral reforms (universal
and targeted).

The targeted reforms reverse the relationship between average and marginal rates we observe
for the universal reforms. Average rates fall for recipients in the phase‐in and flat regions (and those
with incomes below the 3rd deciles) at the expense of those no longer eligible for the EITC (and with
higher incomes). One impact of this reform is stronger incentives for non‐workers to enter the labor
market: average tax rates decline by 4.7 percentage points for entrants into the flat region; and as a
results welfare gains along the extensive margin.

Marginal tax rate changes, on the other hand, suggest substantial distortions to taxfilers in the
phase‐out region (where the increase in the MTR is fully 11 percentage points). These are offset,
however, by the lower marginal rates that newly ineligible filers now face –on the order of 15
percentage points. Along the cash‐income distribution, marginal rates fall for everyone except those in
18

the 3rd and 4th deciles—who face 6.6 to 6.9 percentage point higher marginal tax rates. Distortions to
hours worked for some are therefore offset by better incentives for others. This pattern again
complicates somewhat the inference about the potential efficiency effects. Thought it seems
reasonable to conclude that with elasticities that are larger on the extensive margin compared to the
intensive margin, this reform has the potential to yield efficiency gains compared to current law.

6. Efficiency Impacts of the EITC
Previous work has argued that empirical evidence regarding the composition of labor supply responses
(greater along the extensive than intensive margin) has important implications for the welfare
evaluation of taxes. Saez (2002a) shows accounting for labor force participation responses can change
the optimal transfer program. In particular, this work has shown that with sufficiently high participation
elasticities, the optimal tax‐transfer scheme can be similar to the EITC—with negative marginal tax rates
at the bottom of the earnings distribution. An EITC would, on the other hand, be inefficient in a
standard model with only intensive (hours worked) responses.14

Liebman (2002) also examines the optimal design of the EITC. He uses a micro‐simulation model
calibrated to 1999 CPS data to illustrate the trade‐offs between efficiency and equity in the design of an
EITC—including the optimal maximum credit, phase‐in and phase‐out rates—with fixed costs and
participation effects. Liebman finds that the efficiency cost of transferring income through the EITC is
substantially lower than previous studies have found, in large part because of the participation response
of single mothers and the associated reduced welfare spending. His simulations suggest a cost of less
than $2 to provide a transfer worth $1 to EITC recipients.

Eissa, Kleven and Kreiner (2008) take a different approach and examine the impact of
participation responses on the welfare evaluation of actual tax reforms. They extend the standard
framework for welfare evaluation of tax reforms to account for discrete labor market entry by way of
nonconvexities in preferences and budget sets. Such non‐convexities are significant because they allow
first‐order welfare effects along the extensive (participation) margin. Eissa, Kleven and Kreiner (EKK)
simulate the effects of the 1986, 1990, 1993 and 2001 tax acts in the United States (incorporating all

14

Saez shows that the optimal program is instead a classical Negative Income Tax program, with a substantial income
guarantee that is phased out a high rate.

19

federal income tax changes not just the EITC) and show that each had different effects on tax rates along
the intensive and extensive margins. The 1993 expansion, for example, reduced the tax rates on labor
force participation, but increased the marginal tax rates on hours worked for most workers. The authors
show that conflating these two tax rates in welfare analysis can be fundamentally misleading. For tax
reforms that change average tax rates differently than marginal tax rates (such as the 1993 expansion of
the EITC), ignoring the participation margin can lead to even the wrong sign of the welfare effect.

Welfare Analysis of the EITC for Single Mothers
In this section, we apply EKK to evaluate the efficiency effects of “small” reforms of the EITC. Arguably,
the EITC is unlikely to be overhauled in a major way, so this approach is more relevant for understanding
the efficiency consequence of feasible reforms. Another advantage of examining small reforms is their
simplicity and transparency. Larger reforms, such as those examined above, generate first‐order labor
supply and revenue effects; so that a full analysis of the welfare effect of the reforms would have to
reflect the externalities created by changes in government revenue. Here, we avoid the need to specify
utility functions or estimate (or calibrate) utility parameters, and the fixed costs of work that generate
discrete responses along the extensive margin.

To simplify the analysis further, we focus our welfare analysis on single parents (head of
household filers), who represent the largest group of recipients—accounting for about 65 percent of
EITC recipients and dollars. This is also the group where discrete responses have been shown to be
especially important.

EKK show the marginal deadweight burden of tax reform is given by the effect on government
revenue from behavioral responses, where the behavioral revenue effect is related to the two different
margins of labor supply response. The first effect captures the revenue effect from the change in the
optimal hours of work for those who are working. The second effect captures the effect on revenue
brought about by the tax‐induced change in labor force participation. While the second effect on
efficiency is related to the tax rate on labor force participation, the efficiency effect from changed
working hours depends on the tax burden on the last dollar earned.

A full description of our simulation approach and the EKK deadweight loss formula is presented
in an appendix. We review only the basic approach here. We start by creating a sample of single
parents from the Current Population Survey (CPS). The CPS is better suited for this analysis because we
20

are explicitly interested in the participation response, and because the data include potentially eligible
single parents who do not work or who do not file tax returns. For each sample member, we estimate a
likelihood of labor market participation and potential earnings conditional on working, based on
exogenous characteristics. This allows us to impute their earned income credit, and more generally
their net tax liability. To be consistent and to avoid the problem of endogenous earnings and tax rates,
we use imputed earnings for workers as well. Third, we use predicted earnings to simulate individual
marginal and average tax rates under current law and under the marginal reforms. Finally, we calculate
welfare effects based on imputed tax rates and assumed elasticities—as in equation (23) in EKK.

Tax rates are based on the NBER TAXSIM model ‐augmented by a simple welfare benefit
calculator, and therefore account for both the tax and the transfer systems. Our measures of effective
tax rates include federal and state taxes, payroll taxes and public assistance (cash, Food Stamps and
Medicaid).15 Welfare benefits are based on each person’s state of residence and on the number of
dependent children, and are adjusted to account for the implicit tax rates in each program (except for
Medicaid), and for the less‐than‐100 percent take up rate (see Moffitt, 1992).

Impacts of Small Reforms on Tax Parameters
We consider two sets of simple “marginal” reforms to the EITC. First, we change the phase‐out rate by
+/‐ 1 percentage point (from 15.98 percent for single mothers with 1 child and 21.06 percent for those
with two or more children). This extends the credit to taxfilers with $31,423 and $35,476 of income
under the lower phase‐out rate, and to $29,376 and $33, 532 under the higher rate, respectively.
Second, we change the subsidy rate +/‐ 1 percentage point (from 34 and 40 percent respectively). The
subsidy cut has a cutoff very similar to the phase‐out rate increase, allowing us to evaluate the impact of
transferring money to the same population but using different labor supply incentives. The full
parameters of these moderate EITC reforms are shown in Panels E and F of Table 4.

Phase‐out Rate
Panels A and B of Table 7a show the impact of changing the phase‐out rate on the number of recipients
and average and marginal tax rates. Making the EITC more generous lowers the overall tax burden on
single mothers: the participation tax (benefit‐adjusted average tax) rate falls by 0.2 percentage points,
from 26.8 percent to 26.6 percent of wage income. This decline is somewhat higher for taxpayers in the

15

We assume workers bear the full incidence of employer payroll taxes, and adjust pre‐tax wages accordingly. This
adjustment reduces the effective taxation implied by all the different taxes and benefits, not just the payroll tax.

21

(current law) phase‐out region than for newly eligible filers, but generally of the same order of
magnitude. Marginal tax rates decline by a similar 0.3 percent overall but show a far less systematic
pattern than participation tax rate: they fall by 0.7 percentage points for the 7.85 million EITC recipients
in the (current‐law) phase‐out region and increase by a full 10.7 percentage points for the 0.212 million
newly eligible recipients. The average tax wedge, not reported in the table, is about 0.424 on the
extensive margin, and 0.532 on the intensive margin. Panel B of Table 7a shows the impact of making
the EITC less generous has similar impacts (to Panel A) that are of the opposite sign. About 240,000
taxpayers in the (current‐law) phase‐out of the EITC would lose eligibility, and face marginal tax rates
that are on average 11.3 percentage points lower than under current law.

Subsidy Rate
Panels C and D of Table 7a show the impact of changing the subsidy rate on the number of recipients,
and on average and marginal tax rates. Reducing the subsidy rate by 1 percentage point, holding all
other parameters fixed, reduces the maximum credit (see Panel F of Table 4) and eliminates 118,000
recipients. The smaller credit raises the overall tax burden and makes entry into the labor market less
rewarding:‐‐the overall participation tax rate (among EITC eligibles) rises by 0.6 percentage points. Even
though the (average) marginal tax rate remains unchanged, it falls substantially for taxpayers no longer
eligible to receive the credit, by 10.3 percentage points. Subsidizing earnings at a higher rate has
symmetric effects of the opposite sign (Panel D).

The results in Table 7a show the two instruments (subsidy rate and phase‐out rate) have
different effects on the participation and marginal tax rates. Using the subsidy rate leads to a greater
impact on the participation tax (because of the impact on taxpayers throughout the EITC eligible range),
while the phase‐out rate has a slightly stronger impact on the marginal tax rate (because of the
concentration of recipients along that segment).
Impacts of Small Reforms on Welfare
Table 7b presents the efficiency analysis. We present welfare effects along the extensive and intensive
margins of work under different assumptions about the elasticity. Our baseline (“middle”) elasticity
assumption includes a moderate total labor supply elasticity of 0.4, most of which is due to participation
(with an elasticity [η] of 0.3). The intensive, compensated hours‐of‐work elasticity (ε) is then 0.1. To
examine the impact of the size and the composition of the total elasticity on welfare, we evaluate three
other cases: “low”, “high” and “reversed middle” elasticity (with hours being more elastic than
participation). We also present the “traditional” welfare effect, based only on the intensive margin. The
22

total welfare gain as a percentage of aggregate labor income is reported in column (3), and can be
decomposed into the effect created along the intensive margin (column 1) and along the extensive
margin (column 2).

Phase‐out Rate
The welfare effects are somewhat striking. Our baseline elasticity assumption implies welfare gains for
all reforms of the phase‐out rate. We find a welfare loss for the more targeted EITC (higher phase‐out)
only in the case in which the overall elasticity is small (0.2) and hours‐or‐work do not respond. Panels A
and B show the welfare gains occur along the intensive‐margin (regardless of whether the phase‐out
rate is increased or reduced) and generally dominate the extensive margin effects). Notably, the
extensive margin generates welfare effects that depend on the direction of the change in the
participation tax rate: a lower (higher) phase‐out rate generates efficiency gains (losses) because the tax
burden declines (rises) and more (fewer) single mothers enter the labor market.

The intensive‐margin welfare effects show the importance of the distribution of taxpayers along
the EITC schedule and individual heterogeneity. Here, the interaction of the tax wedge with the EITC
segment along which the taxpayer is located (and the associated change in marginal rates) is critical.
The baseline elasticity leads to an intensive‐margin efficiency gain of 0.022 percent of wage income with
a lower‐phase‐out rate (Panel A). This result implies the welfare loss for newly eligible taxpayers (whose
marginal tax rate rises by 10.7 percentage points) is smaller than that of existing eligible recipients in the
phase‐out region. We also find –unexpectedly– a welfare gain (0.050 percent of wage income) with a
higher phase‐out rate. This occurs because the efficiency gains for 240,000 newly ineligible taxpayers–
whose marginal tax rates fall by 11.3 percent—dominates the welfare loss for the recipients whose
marginal rate rises by 0.8 percentage points. The lack of symmetry between these two results occurs
because of the difference in the taxpayers most affected by each reform (newly ineligible and newly
eligible). For example, the average tax wedge prior to the reform was 0.828 for taxpayers made
ineligible by the higher phase‐out rate and 0.482 for those made newly eligible by the lower rate.

Accounting for the participation response affects the size, and in some cases the sign, of the
welfare effect (columns 3 and 4). The results show generally larger welfare effects when only the
intensive margin is accounted for (as in the traditional model). Per dollar spent, the welfare gain rises
with the total elasticity when the phase‐out rate is reduced, and declines when it is raised (column 5).
Our results show the welfare gain per dollar spent (the marginal cost of funds‐MCF‐) is very sensitive to
23

the specific reform. A higher phase‐out rate implies gains of less than 1 percent of wage income for
most reasonable elasticity estimates (Panel B). On the other hand, the results in Panel A suggest if labor
supply were highly responsive, a lower phase‐out rate could be justified without appealing to any
welfare weights for the taxpayers who gain for most estimates of the MCF.

Subsidy Rate
Panels C and D show a similar pattern of efficiency effects when the instrument is instead the subsidy
rate. These reforms actually raise overall welfare (column 3) for all but the “low” elasticity in the lower‐
subsidy case because of offsetting intensive‐ and extensive‐margin effects. The intensive‐margin
efficiency effects are generally of the opposite sign to what intuition might initially suggest, but the
reason is that a lower subsidy rate generates welfare gains because fewer workers face the high
marginal tax rates in the phase‐out of the EITC. This effect dominates because these workers have
higher wages and because their tax rates change by a much larger amount than those in the first
segment of the credit. It is worth noting the extensive margin welfare effects are again symmetric
(column 2), and are negative when the tax burden rises (Panel C) and positive when the tax burden falls
(Panel D).

The results for increasing the subsidy rate (Panel D) also show the importance of accounting for
heterogeneity in evaluating welfare effects. The traditional efficiency analysis predicts a welfare loss
from this expansion of the EITC (see negative numbers in column 4). This occurs even though the
marginal tax rate falls for taxpayers in the first segment of the credit, because fewer workers are in that
segment and because marginal tax rates rise by about 10 percentage points (31 percent) for taxpayers
newly eligible for the expanded credit. The total welfare gain (column 3), however, is small and little
affected by the different elasticities. We note a higher hours‐worked elasticity reverses the sign in this
case. Because of the interaction of marginal tax rate changes and the location of taxpayers along the
schedules, reversing the composition of the elasticity to be greater along the hours worked margin (the
“middle reversed” case) reverses the welfare effect to be negative.

Comparing the welfare effects per dollar spent for the two instruments shows they are more
sensitive to the elasticity when the phase‐out rate is changed. It also shows contractions of the credit
(higher phase‐out/lower subsidy) generate smaller welfare gains than expansions of the credit (lower
phase‐out/higher subsidy).

24

7. Conclusion
The Earned Income Tax Credit is one of the ten costliest tax expenditures in the federal income tax
system (GAO 2005). The total tax cost of the EITC, including the pure tax expenditure as well as the
outlay, is 40 billion dollars in 2004. The justification for the existence of this tax expenditure is
redistributive—the EITC provides transfers through the tax system to low and moderate income working
families. The structure of the EITC—basically taking the form of an earnings subsidy that is phased out at
earnings above around $15,000—provides incentives to increase employment rates while increasing
after tax income. This structure likely increases the desirability of the EITC compared to transfers
through traditional welfare programs appealing to efficiency (promoting work) and equity (working poor
having greater social welfare weights than the non‐working poor) arguments.

Why a transfer like this is provided through the tax rather than transfer system is not completely
clear. There may be an efficiency gain to administering the EITC through the tax system given that the
credit depends on earnings and adjusted gross income. Further, there may lower "stigma" with a tax
based benefit, thereby increasing take‐up and individual welfare. However, the IRS may not be well
suited to monitor the compliance with other aspects of the credit eligibility—such as verifying qualifying
children.

In this paper, we take the discussion above as a starting point and a guide for identifying the
important questions concerning the EITC as a tax expenditure. We review the history and operations of
the EITC, describe the incentive effects of the EITC, and review the empirical literature on measuring the
incentive effects. We then use a large representative sample of tax filers to carefully document the
distributional impacts of the EITC, examining how the tax cost varies by family size, filing status, income,
and state of residence.

After establishing the basic distributional results, we consider how the tax cost and its
distribution change with several hypothetical EITC reforms. We consider expansionary reforms
(including expanding the credit for the childless), reforms that make the credit more universal
(expanding further up the earnings distribution), and reforms that make the credit more targeted. For
the universal and targeted reforms we focus on revenue neutral versions of these policies. In addition to
exploring the distributional implications of reform we also discuss how the policies change incentives for
work by simulating the changes to marginal and average tax rates.

25

Finally we apply the approach in Eissa, Kleven and Kreiner (2008) to conduct a welfare analysis
of the EITC for single parents. This allows us to capture the efficiency associated with the extensive and
intensive margins of labor supply. We show making the EITC more generous by reducing the phase‐out
rate is welfare improving, and for some elasticities, could be justified without appealing to any welfare
weights for single mother. Changing the subsidy rate does generate welfare gains, but of a small size,
and so could only be justified with substantial weights on the welfare of single mothers.

26

References
Amenta, Edwin (1998). Book Review. The Hidden Welfare State:Tax Expenditures and Social Policy in the United
States. The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 104, No. 3 (Nov) pp. 948‐950

Bull, Nicholas, Janet Holtzblatt, James R. Nunns and Robert Rebelien (1999). “Assessing Marriage
Penalties and Bonuses” in Proceedings of the Ninety‐First Annual Conference on Taxation, Austin, Texas:
National Tax Association, pp. 327‐340.
DeNavas‐Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D. Proctor, and Jessica Smith (2007). U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Reports, P60‐233, Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States:
2006, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Dickert, Stacy, Scott Houser and John Karl Scholz (1995). "The Earned Income Tax Credit and Transfer
Programs: A Study of Labor Market and Program Participation." In Tax Policy and the Economy. James
Poterba, ed. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2000a). “Explaining the Fall and Rise in the Tax Cost of Marriage: The
Effect of Tax Laws and Demographic Trends, 1984‐1997,” National Tax Journal, Volume 53, Number 3,
Part 2, pp. 683‐711, September 2000.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2000b). “Good News for Low Income Families? Tax‐Transfer Schemes
and Marriage”, Mimeo.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2004). “Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples:
The Earned Income Tax Credit,” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 88, Issues 9‐10, Pages 1931‐1958,
August 2004.
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2006a). “The Hours of Work Response of Married Couples: Taxes and the
Earned Income Tax Credit,” in Tax Policy and Labor Market Performance, Jonas Agell and Peter Birch
Sørensen, eds. MIT Press
Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes (2006b). “Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC and
Labor Supply,” Tax Policy and the Economy Volume 20, pp. 74‐110. MIT Press.
Eissa, Nada, Henrik Kleven, and Claus Kreiner (2008) “Evaluation of Four Tax Reforms in the United
States: Labor Supply and Welfare Effects for Single Mothers” Journal of Public Economics, Volume 92,
Issues 3‐4, April 2008.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey Liebman (1996). "Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXI, 605‐637.
Ellwood, David (2000). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on Work,
Marriage and Living Arrangements,” National Tax Journal 53(4) Part 2 (December).
Feenberg, Daniel and Harvey Rosen (1995). “Recent Developments in the Marriage Tax.” National Tax
Journal 48(1):91‐101.
Heim, Bradley (2005). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on the Labor Supply of Married
Couples: Structural Estimation and Business Cycle Interactions,” mimeo, Duke University, May 2005.
27

Hotz, V. Joseph, Charles Mullin and John Karl Scholz (2002). “The Earned Income Tax Credit and the
Labor Market Participation of Families on Welfare,” Mimeo, UCLA.
Hotz, V. Joseph and John Karl Scholz (2003). “The Earned Income Tax Credit” in Robert Moffitt, ed.,
Means‐Tested Transfer Programs in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Internal Revenue Service (2003). Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) Program Effectiveness and Program
Management FY 2002 – FY 2003.
Internal Revenue Service (2004). General Description Booklet for the 2001 Public Use Tax File, Statistics
of Income Division.
Juhn, Chinhui (1992). The Decline in Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining Market
Opportunities," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February, 1992).
Liebman, Jeffrey (1998). “The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and the Income
Distribution.” In Tax Policy and the Economy 12. James Poterba, ed. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Liebman, Jeffrey (2002). “The Optimal Design of the Earned Income Tax Credit,” in Making Work Pay:
The Earned Income Tax Credit and Its Impact on American Families. Ed. Bruce D. Meyer and Douglas
Holtz‐Eakin. Russell Sage Foundation, 2002.
Llobrera and Zahradnik (2004). “A hand up: How state earned income tax credits help working families
escape poverty in 2004”. Washington, DC: Center for Budget and Policy Priorities.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum (1999). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” NBER Working Paper 7363.
Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum (2000). “Making Single Mothers Work: Recent Tax and Welfare
Policy and its Effects.” National Tax Journal 53(4) Part 2 (December).
Meyer, Bruce and Dan Rosenbaum (2001). “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the Labor
Supply of Single Mothers.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, Issue 3 (August).
Ami Nagle, Ami and Nicholas Johnson (2006). “How State Earned Income Tax Credits Help Working
Families Escape Poverty In 2006.” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, http://www.cbpp.org/3‐8‐
06sfp.pdf
Okwuje, Ifie and Nicholas Johnson (2006) “A Rising Number Of State Earned Income Tax Credits Are
Helping Working Families Escape Poverty.” Center for Budget and Policy Priorities,
http://www.cbpp.org/10‐12‐06sfp.htm
Rothstein, Jesse (2007). “The Mid‐1990s EITC Expansion: Aggregate Labor Supply Effects and Economic
Incidence,” mimeo, Princeton Unversity.
Saez, Emmanuel (2002a) "Optimal Income Transfer Programs: Intensive Versus Extensive Labor Supply
Responses" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 2002, 1039‐1073.

28

Saez, Emmanuel (2002b). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” Mimeo, University of California,
Berkeley.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office (1997). “For Better or Worse: Marriage and the Federal Income Tax.”
June 1997.
U.S. Congress House Ways and Means Committee (2004). The Green Book. Background Material and
Data on the Programs Within the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means. Print #108‐6.
U.S. Government Accountability Office (2005). Government Performance and Accountability Tax
Expenditures Represent A Substantial Federal Commitment And Need To Be Reexamined. GAO‐05‐690.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget (2008). Budget of the United States Government ‐ FY 2009,
Analytical Perspectives.

29

Appendix: Description of Efficiency Calculations based on EKK
To study the relationship between EITC reforms and efficiency, we use the framework in Eissa, Kleven,
and Kreiner (2008). EKK show the marginal deadweight burden of tax reform is given by the effect on
government revenue from behavioral responses, where the behavioral revenue effect is related to the
two different margins of labor supply response. The first effect captures the revenue effect from the
change in the optimal hours of work for those who are working. The second effect captures the effect
on revenue brought about by the tax‐induced change in labor force participation. While the second
effect on efficiency is related to the tax rate on labor force participation, the efficiency effect from
changed working hours depends on the tax burden on the last dollar earned.
In particular, our welfare analysis uses expression in equation 23 of EKK:
N
⎡ m ∂mi
a ∂ai ⎤
εi + i
ηi ⎥ si
= ∑⎢ i
1 − ai ∂θ ⎦
i =1 ⎣1 − mi ∂θ

w h P (q )

∂EB / ∂θ
N

∑
i =1

i i i

i

In this expression, w is the wage, h is hours, m is the marginal tax rate, a is the average tax rate, ε is the
hours elasticity, η is the participation elasticity, θ is the reform, and s is the wage share for individual i.
As in EKK, we focus our analysis on single mothers with children. This simplifies the analysis
considerably because of the existence of only one potential worker. While we do not claim that it
provides a comprehensive calculation of the efficiency benefits of the EITC, it does represent results for
the largest group of recipients—representing about three‐quarters of the total tax cost of the EITC.
The data for this exercise come from the 2005 March Current Population (CPS) Surveys. The
March CPS is an annual demographic file of nearly 60,000 households, with information on labor market
and income outcomes for the previous year. Consistent with the rest of the paper, the data we use are
for tax year 2004.
The simulation procedure consists of several steps. First, we estimate the likelihood of labor
market participation and earnings for each individual in a baseline year (usually the year prior to the tax
change). For nonparticipants, the imputation of earnings is necessary to calculate labor income and tax
liability if they choose to enter following a reform. To be consistent, we use imputed earnings for
workers as well. The imputation of earnings is based on a simple log earnings regression, specified as:

log( yi ) = X iα + Pˆi β + ν i
where y is earned income (for the sample of workers), and X represents demographic characteristics,
including age, education, age‐education interactions, race, state of residence, and family size. To control
for the self‐selection of workers, we include a propensity score‐‐‐the predicted probability of
employment Pˆi as a regressor in the earnings equation. This probability of employment is estimated
from a first‐stage probit:

P (lfpi = 1) = Φ ( Z iγ )
where lfp is labor force participation and Z includes all demographic characteristics, including family size
30

and the number of preschool children. We therefore identify the selection effect using the number of
preschool children.
We use predicted earnings to simulate individual marginal and average tax rates (pre‐reform
levels), as well as changes in federal tax rates implied by the reforms. Our marginal and average tax
rates incorporate federal taxes, state taxes, payroll taxes, and taxes through the benefit system. The
benefit system is particularly important for single mothers with children. We use TAXSIM for the all tax
calculations. To simulate welfare benefits, we create a benefit calculator that includes the major
programs of the welfare system (cash assistance, food stamps, and Medicaid). Our benefit calculator
accounts for the main features of these programs, including the income‐dependent reduction rates,
state, and number of dependent children. We assign benefits using the empirical take‐up rate of 54
percent (Moffitt 1992).

31

Figure 1
2007 EITC Schedule by Earnings, Number of Qualifying Children and Filing Status

$5,000
Married couple extensions
$4,000
2+ Children
1 Child
Childless

$3,000

$2,000

$1,000

$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

Earned Income (2007 $)

32

$30,000

$35,000

$40,000

Figure 2
Changes in the EITC Schedule over Time, by number of children

$5,000

(a) One Child
$4,500

$4,000

2007 [After OBRA93]
Credit Amount ($2007)

$3,500

1993 [After OBRA90]
1988 [After TRA84]

$3,000

1984 [Before TRA86]

$2,500

$2,000

$1,500

$1,000

$500

$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

$35,000

Earned Income ($2007)

$5,000

(b) Two or more children

$4,500

2007 [After OBRA93]
1993 [After OBRA90]

$4,000

1988 [After TRA84]

Credit Amount ($2007)

$3,500

1984 [Before TRA86]
$3,000

$2,500

$2,000

$1,500

$1,000

$500

$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

Earned Income ($2007)

33

$35,000

$40,000

$40,000

Figure 3
EITC Pure Tax Expenditure, Outlay and Total Tax Cost 1975‐2004

50

Billions of 2004 $

40

Tax expenditure
TRA86

OBRA90 OBRA93

30
20
10
0
1975

1980

1985

1990

Total Tax Cost

1995

2000

Refundable Portion

Figure 4
EITC Recipients 1975‐2004

EITC Recipients (Millions)

25
20
15
10
5
0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Source: 1975‐2001, 2004 Green Book, Table 13‐14. For 2002‐2004 SOI tables from IRS. (check)

34

Figure 5: Percent of EITC Total Tax Cost and EITC Recipients by Cash Income Decile, 2004
(A) Unadjusted Cash Income Deciles
50%
45%
EITC Recipients
Tax Cost

40%

Percent in Decile

35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Cash Income Decile

(B) Declines using Family Size Adjusted Cash Income
50%
45%
EITC Recipients
Tax Cost

40%

Percent in Decile

35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

Family Size Equivalent
Cash Income Decile

Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2004 SOI Public Use File.
35

7

8

9

10

Figure 6
Percent of EITC Total Tax Cost by Cash Income Decile, 1984‐2004
100%

Percent

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%
1984

1986

1988

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

2000

Year
Decile 1

Decile 2

Decile 3

Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2004 SOI Public Use File.

36

Decile 4+

2002

2004

Figure 7
EITC Total Tax Cost per Income Tax Filer, by State in 2004

EITC Tax Cost per Filer, Lower 48 States
Source: 2004 SOI Public Use File

504 - 617
415 - 504
332 - 415
306 - 332
263 - 306
245 - 263
203 - 245
178 - 203
161 - 178
102 - 161

Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2004 SOI Public Use File.

37

Figure 8
Stylized EITC Budget Constraint

After Tax
Income
D

Phase-out
w(1-τp)

C

Flat
w
B

No EITC
w

Phase-in
w(1+τs)

A

Hours of Work

38

0

Figure 9
Marginal Tax Rates from 2004 Federal Income Tax
Single Filers with Two Children, No AMT or FICA

50%
40%

Marginal Tax Rate

30%
20%
10%
0%
-10%

$0

$25,000

$50,000

$75,000

$100,000

Earnings (2004 $)
-20%
-30%
-40%
-50%

Source: Authors’ tabulations. Tax calculations from TAXSIM.

39

$125,000

$150,000

Figure 10
Annual Employment Rate for Women by Marital Status and Presence of Children, 1983‐2006

100%

Percent employed at all last year

95%

90%

85%

80%

75%

70%

Single, No Children
Married, No Children
Single, Children
Married, Children

65%

60%

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

1998

2001

2004

Source: Authors’ tabulations of 1984–2007 March Current Population Surveys. The sample includes all women aged 19‐44 who
are not in school or disabled. We also drop the relatively small number of women who report working positive hours but have
zero earnings or report positive earnings but zero hours. For these calculations, employment is defined by any work over the
(prior) calendar year.

40

Figure 11
Expansionary EITC Reforms
(A) Increase Phase‐in Rate

$7,000
$6,000

Current Law (2+ children)
Alt Policy (2+ children)

$5,000

Current Law (1 child)
$4,000

Alt Policy (1 child)

$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

$35,000

$40,000

$45,000

$50,000

(B) Expand Childless Credit

$5,000

$4,000

Current Law (Childless)
Expand Childless

$3,000

Current Law (2+ children)
$2,000

$1,000

$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

41

$30,000

$35,000

$40,000

$45,000

$50,000

Figure 12
EITC Reforms Increasing “Uniformity”
(A) Non‐revenue neutral

$5,000

Current Law (2+ children)

$4,000

Alt Policy (2+ children)
Current Law (1 child)

$3,000

Alt Policy (1 child)
$2,000

$1,000

$0
$0

$10,000

$20,000

$30,000

$40,000

$50,000

$60,000

$70,000

$80,000

(b) Revenue Neutral

$5,000

$4,000

Current Law (2+ children)
Alt Policy (2+ children)

$3,000

Current Law (1 child)
$2,000

Alt Policy (1 child)
$1,000

$0
$0

$10,000

$20,000

$30,000

$40,000

42

$50,000

$60,000

$70,000

$80,000

Figure 13
EITC Reforms Increasing “Targeting”
(A) Non‐revenue Neutral

$7,000
$6,000

Current Law (2+ children)
Alt Policy (2+ children)

$5,000

Current Law (1 child)
$4,000

Alt Policy (1 child)

$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

$30,000

$35,000

$40,000

$45,000

$50,000

$45,000

$50,000

(B) Revenue Neutral
`

$7,000
$6,000

Current Law (2+ children)
$5,000

Alt Policy (2+ children)
Current Law (1 child)

$4,000

Alt Policy (1 child)
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
$0
$0

$5,000

$10,000

$15,000

$20,000

$25,000

43

$30,000

$35,000

$40,000

Figure 14
Percent Distribution of EITC Total Tax Cost, under current law and revenue neutral reforms
50%
45%
Current law

Percent in Decile

40%

Targeted reform (rev neutral)

35%

Universal reform (rev neutral)

30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Cash Income Decile

Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2004 SOI Public Use Tax Data and TAXSIM.

44

8

9

10

Table 1: Historical EITC Parameters (current year dollars)

Tax year
1975–78
1979–84
1985–86
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
One child
Two children
1992
One child
Two children
1993
One child
Two children
1994
No children
One child
Two children
1995
No children
One child
Two children
1996
No children
One child
Two children
1997
No children
One child
Two children
1998
No children
One child
Two children
1999
No children
One child
Two children
2000
No children
One child
Two children
2001
No children
One child
Two children
2002
No children
One child
Two children
2003
No children
One child
Two children
2004
No children
One child
Two children
2005
No children
One child
Two children
2006
No children
One child
Two children
2007
No children
One child
Two children

Phase-in rate
10
10
14
14
14
14
14
16.7
17.3
17.6
18.4
18.5
19.5
7.65
26.3
30
7.65
34
36
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40
7.65
34
40

Minimum
income for max
credit Maximum Credit
4,000
400
5,000
500
5,000
550
6,080
851
6,240
874
6,500
910
6,810
953
7,140
1,192
7,140
1,235
7,520
1,324
7,520
1,384
7,750
1,434
7,750
1,511
4,000
306
7,750
2,038
8,425
2,528
4,100
314
6,160
2,094
8,640
3,110
4,220
323
6,330
2,152
8,890
3,556
4,340
332
6,500
2,210
9,140
3,656
4,460
341
6,680
2,271
9,390
3,756
4,530
347
6,800
2,312
9,540
3,816
4,610
353
6,920
2,353
9,720
3,888
4,760
364
7,140
2,428
10,020
4,008
4,910
376
7,370
2,506
10,350
4,140
4,990
382
7,490
2,547
10,510
4,204
5,100
390
7,660
2,604
10,750
4,300
5,220
399
7,830
2,662
11,000
4,400
5,380
412
8,080
2,747
11,340
4,536
5,590
428
8,390
2,853
11,790
4,716

Phase-out rate
10
12.5
12.22
10
10
10
10
11.93
12.36
12.57
13.14
13.21
13.93
7.65
15.98
17.68
7.65
15.98
20.22
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06
7.65
15.98
21.06

Phaseout range
Beginning
Income Ending Income
4,000
8,000
6,000
10,000
6,500
11,000
6,920
15,432
9,840
18,576
10,240
19,340
10,730
20,264
11,250
21,250
11,250
21,250
11,840
22,370
11,840
22,370
12,200
23,050
12,200
23,050
5,000
9,000
11,000
23,755
11,000
25,296
5,130
9,230
11,290
24,396
11,290
26,673
5,280
9,500
11,610
25,078
11,610
28,495
5,430
9,770
11,930
25,750
11,930
29,290
5,570
10,030
12,260
26,473
12,260
30,095
5,670
10,200
12,460
26,928
12,460
30,580
5,770
10,380
12,690
27,413
12,690
31,152
5,950
10,710
13,090
28,281
13,090
32,121
6,150
11,060
13,520
29,201
13,520
33,178
6,240
11,230
13,730
29,666
13,730
33,692
6,390
11,490
14,040
30,338
14,040
34,458
6,530
11,750
14,370
31,030
14,370
35,263
6,740
12,120
14,810
32,001
14,810
36,348
7,000
12,590
15,390
33,241
15,390
37,783

Source: Tax Policy Center, http://www.taxpolicycenter.org/taxfacts/Content/PDF/historical_eitc_parameters.pdf.
Note: The values of the beginning and ending points of the phase‐out range were increased for married taxpayers filing jointly
by $1,000 in 2002‐2004 and $2,000 in 2005‐2007.

45

Table 2
EITC Distributional Analysis under 2004 Tax Law
EITC Recipients
Number
(millions)
All

Total Tax Cost

% of total

22.1

Amount
(billions)

% of total

$40.1

Average payment
per recipient
$1,806

Number of EITC Qualifying Children
1 child

8.4

38%

$14.4

36%

$1,715

2+ children

9.2

42%

$24.7

62%

$2,693

No Children

4.6

21%

$1.0

3%

$218

11.7

53%

$26.1

65%

$2,230

Filing Status
Head of Household
Joint Return

5.1

23%

$10.0

25%

$1,953

Single

5.3

24%

$3.9

10%

$742

5.9

27%

$9.1

23%

$1,544

4.2

19%

$11.7

29%

$2,817

12.1

54%

$19.2

48%

$1,595

EITC Range
Phase In
Flat
Phase Out

Source: Authors tabulations of 2004 SOI Public Use File.

46

Table 3
EITC Distributional Analysis by Cash Income Deciles

All
Cash Income Decile
0‐10% (excluding negative)
10‐20%
20‐30%
30‐40%
40‐50%
50‐60%
60‐70%
70‐80%
80‐90%
90‐100%
Cash Income Bracket
Less than 0
0‐2500
2500‐5000
5000‐7500
7500‐1000
10000‐12500
12500‐15000
15000‐17500
17500‐20000
20000‐22500
22500‐25000
25000‐27500
27500‐30000
30000‐32500
32500+

All Tax Filers EITC Recipients
(millions)
(millions)
130.9
22.1

EITC Tax Cost
(Billions)
$40.1

Cash Income
(Billions)
$7,099.3

Percent
distribution, EITC
recipients
100.0%

Percent
distribution, EITC
tax cost
100.0%

Tax cost per EITC
recipient
$1,811

Tax cost per tax Tax cost as % of cash
filer
income
$306
0.6%

11.9
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2
13.2

3.0
5.9
4.4
4.1
3.9
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

$2.0
$9.9
$13.8
$9.6
$4.5
$0.4
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0
$0.0

$33.0
$108.9
$186.5
$267.4
$364.3
$480.1
$622.6
$810.5
$1,100.6
$3,125.5

13.6%
26.5%
20.0%
18.7%
17.6%
3.5%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

4.9%
24.6%
34.5%
23.9%
11.2%
0.9%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

$647
$1,685
$3,127
$2,309
$1,151
$463
$884
$1,860
$481
$0

$165
$747
$1,047
$723
$339
$27
$2
$0
$0
$0

5.9%
9.1%
7.4%
3.6%
1.2%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

0.0
5.1
6.0
5.6
5.8
5.5
5.6
5.6
5.5
4.9
4.5
4.1
3.9
4.0
64.8

0.0
1.0
1.8
2.1
2.7
2.5
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.2
0.7
0.6

$0.0
$0.3
$1.4
$2.8
$4.6
$6.0
$5.9
$5.4
$4.1
$3.6
$2.6
$1.7
$1.0
$0.5
$0.3

$0.0
$6.7
$22.4
$34.9
$50.7
$62.3
$76.6
$90.1
$102.5
$104.5
$105.7
$107.9
$112.5
$124.5
$6,098.2

0.0%
0.8%
3.4%
6.9%
11.5%
15.0%
14.8%
13.4%
10.1%
8.9%
6.4%
4.3%
2.5%
1.2%
0.7%

0.0%
0.8%
3.4%
6.9%
11.5%
15.0%
14.8%
13.4%
10.1%
8.9%
6.4%
4.3%
2.5%
1.2%
0.7%

$0
$331
$764
$1,328
$1,726
$2,417
$3,308
$3,090
$2,576
$2,158
$1,698
$1,271
$861
$706
$452

$0
$64
$229
$495
$793
$1,084
$1,067
$968
$744
$729
$576
$415
$260
$120
$4

0.0%
4.9%
6.1%
7.9%
9.1%
9.6%
7.8%
6.0%
4.0%
3.4%
2.4%
1.6%
0.9%
0.4%
0.0%

Source: Authors’ tabulations of 2004 SOI Public Use File.

47

Table 4
EITC Parameters under Alternative Simulations

EITC Policy Reform Parameters

Number of
Children

Phase‐In Rate

Maximum income for
phase‐in ($)

Maximum
Credit ($)

Phase‐Out
Begin ($)

Phase‐Out
Rate

End of Phase‐
Out Region ($)

6,390
14,040
14,040

0.0765
0.1598
0.2106

11,490
30,338
34,458

14,040
14,040

0.1598
0.2106

35,861
41,362

10,900

0.1530

15,998

14,040
14,040

0.0533
0.0702

62,896
75,294

14,040
14,040

0.0533
0.0702

48,017
56,604

14,040
14,040

0.4794
0.6318

19,472
20,846

14,040
14,040

0.4794
0.6318

21,314
23,147

14,040
14,040

0.1498
0.2006

31,423
35,476

14,040
14,040

0.1698
0.2206

29,376
33,532

14,040
14,040

0.1598
0.2106

29,859
33,947

14,040
14,040

0.1598
0.2106

30,817
34,968

Panel A: 2004 Law
0
1
2+

0.08
0.34
0.40

5,100
7,660
10,750

390
2,604
4,300

Panel B: Expansionary Reforms
1
2+

0.46
0.54

0

0.153

Increase phase‐in rate
7,660
3,487
10,750
5,754
Expand EITC for childless adults
5,720
780
Panel C:Universal Reforms

1
2+

0.34
0.40

1
2+

0.24
0.28

Non revenue neutral
7,660
2,604
10,750
4,300
Revenue Neutral
7,660
1,811
10,750
2,988
Panel D :Targeted Reforms

1
2+

0.34
0.40

1
2+

0.46
0.54

Non revenue neutral
7,660
2,604
10,750
4,300
Revenue Neutral
7,660
3,487
10,750
5,754
Panel E: Moderate Reforms

1
2+

0.34
0.40

1
2+

0.34
0.40

1
2+

0.33
0.39

1
2+

0.35
0.41

Phaseout Rate Cut(1 percentage point)
7,660
2,604
10,750
4,300
Phaseout Rate Increase (1 percentage point)
7,660
2,604
10,750
4,300
Panel F: Moderate Reforms
Subsidy Rate Cut(1 percentage point)
7,660
2,528
10,750
4,193
Subsidy Rate Increase (1 percentage point)
7,660
2,681
10,750
4,408

48

Table 5: Distributional Implications of Major Reforms
Panel A:
Panel B: Expansionary Reforms
Current Law Increase phase‐
Expand to
(recalculation)
in
Childless
Number of EITC Recipients (millions)
Total Tax Cost (billions)

Panel C: Universal
Non revenue
Revenue
neutral
neutral

Panel D: Targeted
Non revenue
Revenue
neutral
neutral

22.9
$40.1

25.4
$60.0

26.2
$42.9

35.5
$67.1

30.2
$39.1

16.1
$26.5

17.5
$38.4

34.0%
54.2%
11.8%

34.2%
55.3%
10.5%

31.8%
50.8%
17.4%

33.1%
58.8%
8.1%

33.3%
56.4%
10.2%

35.0%
52.1%
12.9%

35.0%
50.7%
14.2%

65.2%
24.8%
10.0%

65.4%
25.8%
8.8%

61.2%
23.9%
14.9%

56.7%
36.6%
6.7%

60.8%
30.7%
8.5%

66.7%
19.9%
13.4%

67.4%
20.6%
12.0%

5.5%
19.9%
25.1%
49.4%

5.5%
17.8%
22.5%
52.1%

3.1%
20.3%
29.6%
43.1%

4.6%
12.0%
15.2%
45.8%

5.0%
14.7%
18.2%
50.3%

4.6%
30.0%
37.5%
27.9%

4.9%
27.6%
34.6%
32.8%

6.6%
27.1%
33.2%
22.7%
9.4%
0.8%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

5.7%
24.1%
30.1%
22.9%
13.3%
3.6%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

7.4%
28.6%
32.8%
21.4%
8.9%
0.8%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

4.0%
16.3%
20.7%
18.7%
15.3%
12.0%
8.8%
4.0%
0.2%
0.0%

5.2%
19.9%
24.5%
20.9%
15.5%
9.9%
4.0%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%

9.9%
40.9%
43.6%
5.1%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

8.8%
37.5%
42.4%
10.7%
0.4%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Percent Distribution of Total Tax Cost by
Number of EITC Qualifying Children
1 child
2+ children
No Children
Marital Status
Head of Household
Joint Return
Single
EITC Range
None
Phase In
Flat
Phase Out
Cash Income Decile
0‐10%
10‐20%
20‐30%
30‐40%
40‐50%
50‐60%
60‐70%
70‐80%
80‐90%
90‐100%

Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2004 SOI Public Use File.
Note: EITC ranges for income are constructed using adjusted gross income and defined separately for each reform. In some cases, therefore, the tax rate can change due to
changes in the composition of the group (as well as due to policy changes for those remaining in the group). “Current law” is not the actual tax cost but our recalculation using
TAXSIM assuming a 100 percent take‐up rate in the EITC.

49

Table 6
Average and Marginal Tax Rates under Current Law and Changes with EITC Reform
Tax Rates
under
Current Law

Change In Tax Rates: (Alternative Simulation ‐ Current Law)
Universal
Targeted
Expansionary Reforms
Increase Expand to Non revenue
Revenue Non revenue
Revenue
phase‐in
Childless
neutral
neutral
neutral
neutral

Average Tax Rate by
Marital Status
Head of Household
Joint Return
Single
EITC Range
Not eligible
Phase In
Flat
Phase Out
Newly eligible (phase‐out)
Newly ineligible (phase‐out)
Cash Income Decile
0‐10%
10‐20%
20‐30%
30‐40%
40‐50%
50‐60%
60‐70%
70‐80%
80‐90%
90‐100%
Marginal Tax Rate by
Marital Status
Head of Household
Joint Return
Single
EITC Range
Not eligible
Phase In
Flat
Phase Out
Newly eligible (phase‐out)
Newly ineligible (phase‐out)
Cash Income Decile
0‐10%
10‐20%
20‐30%
30‐40%
40‐50%
50‐60%
60‐70%
70‐80%
80‐90%
90‐100%

‐10.2%
4.7%
4.6%

‐4.7
‐0.5
‐0.2

‐0.1
0.0
‐0.6

‐2.4
‐0.7
0.0

2.2
0.1
0.2

2.0
0.4
0.1

‐1.7
0.1
‐0.1

7.6%
‐10.1%
‐15.5%
‐6.6%

‐0.1
‐3.0
‐4.9
‐2.6
‐1.3
‐

0.1
‐1.5
‐1.1
‐0.2
‐0.7
‐

‐0.1
0.0
‐0.1
‐2.0
‐2.6
‐

0.0
2.6
4.4
0.5
‐1.5
‐

0.1
0.0
0.2
1.9
‐
4.3

0.0
‐3.0
‐4.7
0.5
‐
3.2

‐4.9%
‐8.5%
‐6.3%
‐1.7%
2.4%
5.0%
6.5%
7.9%
9.5%
14.8%

‐1.4
‐3.2
‐2.5
‐1.7
‐1.2
‐0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

‐1.2
‐1.3
‐0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

‐0.6
‐0.1
‐0.2
‐1.2
‐1.8
‐1.6
‐1.0
‐0.3
‐0.1
0.0

1.0
2.7
2.1
0.4
‐0.6
‐0.7
‐0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.9
2.9
1.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

‐1.4
‐3.1
‐1.6
1.8
1.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

7.5%
16.8%
12.1%

‐0.5
0.4
‐0.1

0.1
0.0
0.3

‐3.1
0.3
‐0.1

‐1.8
‐0.1
0.0

1.2
‐0.1
0.1

2.4
0.2
0.0

18.0%
‐8.8%
‐4.9%
12.9%

0.0
‐2.6
‐0.2
0.1
14.8
‐

0.0
‐0.9
‐0.7
0.3
5.6
‐

‐0.2
0.0
0.0
‐5.7
5.8
‐

‐0.1
2.7
0.8
‐5.6
5.5
‐

0.0
0.1
2.1
8.7
‐
‐15.3

0.1
‐2.5
1.3
11.0
‐
‐14.9

‐4.0%
‐1.1%
5.3%
13.7%
16.8%
16.4%
18.6%
18.8%
21.3%
28.4%

‐1.4
‐1.7
0.1
0.0
0.5
2.9
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0

‐1.0
‐0.4
3.2
0.0
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
‐0.1
‐2.1
‐4.0
‐3.2
0.9
2.0
2.0
0.3
0.0

1.2
2.0
‐2.0
‐3.9
‐3.2
0.9
1.6
0.2
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1
6.9
0.8
‐5.0
‐0.9
‐0.1
0.0
‐0.1
0.0

‐1.4
‐1.7
6.9
6.6
‐4.9
‐0.8
‐0.1
0.0
‐0.1
0.0

Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2004 SOI Public Use File.
Note: EITC ranges for income are constructed using adjusted gross income and defined separately for each reform. In some
cases, therefore, the tax rate can change due to changes in the composition of the group (as well as due to policy changes for
those remaining in the group). “Current law” is not the actual tax cost but our recalculation using TAXSIM assuming a 100
percent take‐up rate in the EITC.

50

Table 7a
Impacts of Marginal EITC Changes on Incentives at the Intensive and Extensive Margins
Population
(millions)

Participation
Tax Rate

Change in
Participation
tax rate

Marginal
Tax Rate

Change in
Marginal tax
rate

A. Marginal Reform 1: 2004 EITC with lower phase-out rate
Total Eligible for EITC

13.268

0.268

-0.002

0.288

-0.003

Phase In

2.421

0.164

0.000

0.023

0.000

Flat

2.783

0.169

0.000

0.187

0.000

Phase Out

7.852

0.331

-0.003

0.405

-0.007

Newly Eligible

0.212

0.401

-0.002

0.323

0.107

By EITC Region

B. Marginal Reform 2: 2004 EITC with higher phase-out rate
Overall Eligibles

12.817

0.270

0.002

0.293

0.002

Phase In

2.421

0.164

0.000

0.023

0.000

Flat

2.783

0.169

0.000

0.187

0.000

Phase Out

7.613

0.329

0.003

0.404

0.008

Newly Ineligible

0.24

0.394

0.002

0.442

-0.113

By EITC Region

C. Marginal Reform 3: 2004 EITC with lower subsidy rate
Total Eligible for EITC

12.938

0.268

0.006

0.290

0.0002

Phase In

2.421

0.164

0.009

0.023

0.009

Flat

2.783

0.169

0.007

0.187

0.000

Phase Out

7.734

0.330

0.004

0.405

-0.001

Newly Ineligible

0.118

0.398

0.001

0.434

-0.103

By EITC Region

D. Marginal Reform 4: 2004 EITC with higher subsidy rate
Overall Eligibles

13.174

0.267

-0.006

0.288

0.000

Phase In

2.421

0.164

-0.009

0.023

-0.009

Flat

2.783

0.169

-0.007

0.187

0.000

Phase Out

7.852

0.331

-0.004

0.405

0.001

Newly Eligible

0.118

0.400

-0.001

0.317

0.099

By EITC Region

Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2005 March CPS.
Notes: EITC regions assigned under current law EITC parameters. Participation and marginal tax rates are means
under current law. Difference is alternative policy minus current law.
51

Table 7b
Welfare Effects of Phase‐out Rate Changes on Single Parents

Total
(3)

Traditional
(4)

Welfare
gain per
Dollar
Revenue
(5)

Efficiency gains
Elasticity
Composition

Intensive
(1)

Extensive
(2)

A. Marginal Reform 1: 2004 EITC with lower phase-out rate
Low

ε=0, η=0.2

0.000

0.019

0.019

0.043

1.120

Middle

ε=0.1, η=0.3

0.022

0.029

0.050

0.086

1.391

High

ε=0.2, η=0.4

0.043

0.039

0.082

0.129

1.834

ε=0.3, η=0.1

0.065

0.010

0.074

0.086

1.706

Middle [Reversed]

B. Marginal Reform 2: 2004 EITC with higher phase-out rate
Low

ε=0, η=0.2

0.000

-0.018

-0.018

0.100

1.118

Middle

ε=0.1, η=0.3

0.050

-0.026

0.023

0.199

0.877

High

ε=0.2, η=0.4

0.100

-0.035

0.064

0.299

0.721

Middle [Reversed]

ε=0.3, η=0.1

0.149

-0.009

0.140

0.199

0.542

C: Marginal Reform 3: 2004 EITC with lower subsidy rate
Low

ε=0, η=0.2

0.000

-0.024

-0.024

0.129

1.080

Middle

ε=0.1, η=0.3

0.065

-0.035

0.029

0.258

0.916

High

ε=0.2, η=0.4

0.129

-0.047

0.082

0.388

0.796

ε=0.3, η=0.1

0.194

-0.012

0.182

0.258

0.637

Middle [Reversed]

D. Marginal Reform 4: 2004 EITC with higher subsidy rate
Low

ε=0, η=0.2

0.000

0.024

0.024

-0.021

1.080

Middle

ε=0.1, η=0.3

-0.011

0.036

0.026

-0.043

1.086

High

ε=0.2, η=0.4

-0.021

0.049

0.027

-0.064

1.091

Middle [Reversed]

ε=0.3, η=0.1

-0.032

0.012

-0.020

-0.043

0.943

Source: Authors’ tabulations of the 2005 March CPS.
Note: The participation elasticity is given by η and the compensated hours of work elasticity is given by ε. The welfare gain is
measured in percentage of wage income. The total welfare gain is calculated as the sum of the intensive and extensive gains.
The “traditional” welfare gain is calculated assuming that the total labor supply elasticity is entirely along the intensive margin.
The welfare gain per dollar spent equals RTB/(RTB−EG) where EG is the efficiency gain and RTB is the reduction in tax burden.

52

