NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE PREVALENCE AND EFFECTS OF OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
Morris M. Kleiner
Alan B. Krueger
Working Paper 14308
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14308

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

¸˛We thank Larry Katz and Charles Wheelan for comments and Matthew Hendricks for his assistance
with the study. We also thank participants at the Labor and Employment Relations Association annual
meeting for their comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Morris M. Kleiner and Alan B. Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational Licensing
Morris M. Kleiner and Alan B. Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 14308
September 2008
JEL No. J08
ABSTRACT
This study provides the first nation-wide analysis of the labor market implications of occupational
licensing for the U.S. labor market, using data from a specially designed Gallup survey. We find that
in 2006, 29 percent of the workforce was required to hold an occupational license from a government
agency, which is a higher percentage than that found in studies that rely on state-level occupational
licensing data. Workers who have higher levels of education are more likely to work in jobs that require
a license. Union workers and government employees are more likely to have a license requirement
than are nonunion or private sector employees. Our multivariate estimates suggest that licensing has
about the same quantitative impact on wages as do unions -- that is about 15 percent, but unlike unions
which reduce variance in wages, licensing does not significantly reduce wage dispersion for individuals
in licensed jobs.

Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey Institute
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu
Alan B. Krueger
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@princeton.edu

Introduction
One of the fastest growing, yet least understood, institutions in the U.S. labor market is
occupational licensing. The movement to a service-oriented economy from manufacturing,
where unions and contracts were prominent, created a demand for a “web of rules” of the
workplace that licensing may have provided (Dunlop, 1958). While unions have declined,
occupational licensing has grown over the last fifty years (Kleiner, 2006).
Occupational regulation in the U.S. generally takes three forms. The least restrictive form
is registration, in which individuals file their names, addresses, and qualifications with a
government agency before practicing their occupation. The registration process may include
posting a bond or filing a fee. In contrast, certification permits any person to perform the relevant
tasks, but the government—or sometimes a private, nonprofit agency—administers an
examination and certifies those who have achieved the level of skill and knowledge for
certification. For example, travel agents and car mechanics are generally certified but not
licensed. The toughest form of regulation is licensure; this form of regulation is often referred to
as “the right to practice.” Under licensure laws, working in an occupation for compensation
without first meeting government standards is illegal. In 2003 the Council of State
Governments estimated that more than 800 occupations were licensed in at least one state, and
more than 1,100 occupations were licensed, certified or registered (CLEAR, 2004).
In this paper we use newly available data from a national survey conducted by the Gallup
Organization on our behalf to analyze the influence of occupational licensing in the labor market.
To determine if a worker is in a licensed position, the survey asks the question: “Does your job
require a license by a federal, state or local government agency?”

1

This study is the first attempt to gather nation-wide data by asking individuals whether a
government license is required to do their work. We find that about twenty-nine percent of the
work-force is required to obtain a license from either the federal, state or local government to
work for pay. The information from the survey shows that licensing is more prevalent among
more highly educated workers, minorities, union members, and government workers. The impact
of licensing on wages, as judged from a cross-sectional regression, is similar to the influence of
unions on wages. Unlike the estimates of the impact of unions, that reduces the variation of
wages, licensing results show that there is little effect on wage variations. However, workers
who are licensed say they are more competent in doing their jobs, in contrast to what we find for
union members.
Why License?
The simplest theory of occupational licensing emphasizes the administrative procedural
role of licensing. It perceives a costless supply of unbiased, capable gatekeepers and enforcers.
Friedman (1962) questioned the role of the government and professional associations as unbiased
gatekeepers and enforcers. Instead, he viewed licensing’s entry restrictions as creating
undesirable monopoly rents through greater barriers to entry. Friedman argued that licensing
systems are almost always run by and for incumbents, so that gatekeepers and enforcers are selfinterested. Their vested interests lead them to not only create monopoly rents through restrictions
on entry but also to limit complaints and disciplinary procedures against most incumbents.
An alternative view is that licensing requirements can take the form of unspecified fixed
costs controlled by the licensing authority that is similar to the unbiased gatekeeper (Shapiro
1986). The skill and quality of the licensed worker affects the relative cost of producing highquality services, and licensing takes the more specific form of a minimal human capital

2

requirement. In practice the fixed costs would be requirements that entrants and incumbents take
job specific training programs, pass an exam or have long-term residency requirements. These
models resemble the ones above in predicting, typically, that both the average quality and the
average prices or earnings from the services within the regulated industry will rise as licensing
requirements are implemented or tightened, resulting in benefits for those who want higher
quality, but at a cost to those who are in lower quality service markets.
Growth of Regulation
During the early 1950s, less than 5 percent of the U.S. work force was covered by
licensing laws at the state level (Council of State Governments, 1952). That grew to almost 18
percent by the 1980s—with an even larger number if federal, city and county occupational
licensing is included. By 2000, the percent of the workforce in occupations licensed by states
was at least 20 percent, according to data gathered from the Department of Labor and the 2000
Census.
As employment shifted from manufacturing to service industries, which typically have
lower union representation, the members of the occupations established a formal set of standards
that governed members of the occupation. For a professional association, obtaining licensing
legislation meant raising funds from members to lobby the state legislature, particularly the
chairs of appropriate committees. In addition, the occupation association often solicits volunteers
from its membership to work on legislative campaigns. With both financial contributions and
volunteers, the occupational association has a significant ability to influence legislation,
especially when opposition to regulatory legislation is absent or minimal (Wheelan, 1998).
Most prior studies gathered data to estimate the number of individuals who were in
licensed occupations at the state level, where most licensing occurs in the U.S. (Kleiner, 2006).

3

However, these estimates understate the regulation that also occurs at the federal and local level.
For this reason the Gallup Survey provides a more comprehensive assessment of the coverage of
occupational licensing. In Figure 1 we show trends in the growth of occupational licensing and
unionization from 1950 to 20061. Licensing data for earlier periods are only available at the
state/occupational level; the data gathered through the Gallup Survey are denoted with a dashed
line in the figure. Despite possible problems in both data series, it is clear that occupational
licensing is rising and unionization is declining. By 2006, 29 percent of workers said they were
required to have a government-issued licensed to do their job, compared with only 12 percent
who said they were union members.
The Gallup Survey
The survey we use for our analysis was a national survey conducted by the Gallup
Organization from May to August of 2006. The random digit dial phone survey began with the
Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) American Time Use Survey (AUTS), and included Current
Population Survey (CPS) questions on demographics, industry, occupation, earnings, and
education. The response rate was 37 percent, which is reasonable for a private survey of this
kind.2 The total number of respondents in the survey was 3,982, and 2,037 of these individuals
were employed in the reference week. Due to missing data the totals for the analysis of wages
and perceived competence is generally lower. We examined the individual responses for those
who stated that they needed a license to do their work and found few surprises. When we
examined individual responses for accountants, teachers, and barbers, they typically stated they
1

The method used to calculate the percent licensed prior to 2006 first involved gathering the listing of licensed
occupations in Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupation and Employment Survey. This was matched with occupations
in the 2000 Census. If no match was obtained the occupation was dropped. From the Census the number working
in the licensed occupation in each state was estimated and used to calculate a weighted average of the percent of the
workforce in U.S. that works in a licensed occupation.
2
Sample weights were developed to adjust for non response. The pattern of time use closely matched the ATUS.
All of the results we present rely on weighted estimates.

4

needed a license to do their work. Similarly, factory laborers, carpenters, and economists stated
they did not need a license.
In Figure 2 we show the distribution of licensed occupations by education, race, union
status, public or private sector, and gender. The results indicate that licensing increases with
education: more than 40 percent of those with post college education are required to have a
license, a contrast to 11 percent for those with less than a high school education. Both AfricanAmericans and Hispanics have a higher percentage of licenses than do Whites or Asians. In
panel C of Figure 2 the results show that union members are more likely to be licensed,
reflecting the large number of teachers and nurses who tend to be both union members and
licensed. Government workers are more likely to have a license than non-government workers,
and there is no difference in the licensing rate by gender.
Multivariate Estimates
In Table 1 we summarize initial results of the impact of licensing on wages. Specifically,
we augment a standard human capital earnings equation to include a dummy variable measuring
whether a license is required for the worker’s job. We regard these estimates as mainly
descriptive as licensed workers may differ from unlicensed workers in unobserved ways, even
after we condition on education and occupation. If a licensed dummy is added to a standard
wage equation, having a license is associated with approximately 15 percent higher hourly
earnings (p-value < 0.001). The cross-sectional effect of licensing is remarkably similar to the
estimated effect of belonging to a union (see Lewis, 1986), and greater than an additional year of
schooling.
Of course, jobs that require a license may also require higher skill, and thus may not be
directly comparable, even conditional on education, experience and other covariates variables in

5

the regression. We can partially adjust for unobserved factors by controlling for occupation
dummies. Within some occupations (e.g., electricians), identical jobs are licensed in some states
and not in others. In an alternative specification in column 2, we controlled for 306 detailed
occupation dummies. We continued to find an estimate of the licensing variable of around 15
percent, and the estimate continued to be statistically significant. The resilience of the licensing
wage effect to occupation controls suggests that the cross-sectional estimate is not severely
biased by omitted variables associated with licensing at the occupation level.3
Does licensing reduce variability in wages similar to the impact of unions? To examine
the role of each labor market institution on the wage structure within large occupational
categories, we grouped workers into three large occupational groups: professional and technical
workers, managers and administrators, other occupations. Large occupational groups were used
to have sufficient observations for a meaningful analysis of wage dispersion in similar types of
jobs. We also looked within the full sample. For each sample we first regressed the log wage on
education, experience, and dummy variables indicating union status, occupational licensing
status, public sector employment and gender. We then used the squared residuals from this
regression to compare the mean squared residual in licensed and unlicensed jobs and in
unionized and nonunionized jobs. The results in Table 2 show that the dispersion of wages of
union members is significantly lower than for nonunion members, consistent with Freeman
(1982). Residual wage dispersion in licensed jobs, however, is about the same or only slightly
smaller, on average, than in unregulated ones. Unlike unions, the institution of occupational
licensing does not appear to result in lower wage dispersion.

3

We also attempted to instrument for licensing by using the state licensing of an occupation such as electricians
plumbers and teachers but were not able find a robust instrument in our first stage estimates.

6

If licensing is associated with increases in earnings, does it result in more competent
services? Our evidence here is sketchy and depends on subjective self assessments. We model
answers to a question that asked: “On a scale of 0 to 6, where 0 means not at all and 6 means
very much, how competent did you feel while you were at work yesterday?” Using responses to
this question as the dependent variable, we estimate a multivariate equation with standard human
capital and labor market variable as controls. Table 3 shows our results. We find that
individuals who have a license perceive themselves as being more competent. In contrast, union
members perceive themselves as less competent than other workers. Although a more precise
measure of quality would gather information from consumers or directly observe output, these
estimates show that self-reported abilities are higher for licensed workers. Moreover, the
contrast with union members suggests that the results are not merely the consequence of a wage
premium. If the results can be replicated for consumer outcomes, there may be support for the
Shapiro model of greater ability, quality, and costs of licensing for some consumers as a
consequence of licensing (Shapiro, 1986).
Conclusions
Our study provides the first national analysis of labor market implications of workers
who are licensed by any agency of the government in the U.S. Using a specially designed
Gallup survey of a nationally representative sample of Americans, we provide a preliminary
analysis of the influence of this form of occupational regulation. We find that 29 percent of the
workforce was required to hold a license in 2006, which is a higher percentage than that found in
other studies that rely on state-level occupational licensing data or single states. Workers who
have higher levels of education are more likely to work in jobs that require a license. This
pattern suggests that our results are not spuriously reflecting driver’s licenses. Union workers

7

and government employees are more likely to have a license requirement than are nonunion or
private sector employees. Our multivariate estimates suggest that licensing has about the same
quantitative impact on wages as do unions -- that is about 15 percent. If this result holds up to
further scrutiny, occupational licensing would be a much more important phenomenon for the
distribution of income than labor unions.
With the large and growing number of workers required to obtain an occupational
license, and the apparently large effect of licensing requirements on the labor market, we think it
would be prudent for the government to measure the extent of occupational licensing in a manner
similar to information that is collected for unions. To help this effort, we are in the process of
developing a small number of questions on occupational licensing that can be added to a labor
force survey, such as the Current Population Survey. These questions would help to answer
more fully how much regulation is optimal, the effect of licensing on wages and productivity,
and the type of regulation that is best suited for the emerging jobs in the workforce.

8

References
Council of Licensure, Enforcement, and Regulation (CLEAR), 2004,
http://www.clearhq.org/mission.
Council of State Governments, 1952. Occupational Licensing Legislation in the States, Chicago,
Illinois.
Dunlop, John T., 1958, Industrial Relations Systems, Holt, New York.
Freeman, Richard B., 1982. “Union Wage Practices and Wage Dispersion within
Establishments,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 3-21.
Friedman, Milton, 1962. Capitalism and Freedom, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. Licensing Occupations: Enhancing Quality or Restricting
Competition? Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo, Michigan.
Lewis, H.G. 1986. Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
Shapiro, Carl. 1986. “Investment, Moral Hazard and Occupational Licensing.” Review of
Economic Studies 53: 843-862.
Wheelan Charles J., 1998. “Politics or Public Interest? An Empirical Examination of
Occupational Licensure.” Unpublished manuscript, Chicago, University of Chicago,

9

Figure 1: Comparisons in the Time-Trends of Two Labor Market Institutions:
Licensing and Unionization*

*Dashed line shows the value from state estimates of licensing to the Gallup
Survey results

10

Figure 2: Occupational Licensing by race, gender, education, occupation, and
industry
Panel A: Education

11

Panel B: Licensing by Race

Panel C: Licensing by Union Status, Industry and Gender

0.5
0.44
0.41
0.4

0.28

0.3
0.25

0.28

0.25

0.2

0.1

0
Union

Nonunion

Gov't

Male

Private

12

Female

Table 1: Multivariate Estimates of the Influence of Occupational Licensing on
Hourly Wages With and Without Occupation-specific Controls
Dependent variable Log
wage
License
Experience
2
Experience /100
Education
Gender
Union
Government
Constant
306 occupation-specific
controls
Sample size

Coefficient
(1)
0.15
0.03
-0.04
0.11
-0.29
0.12
-0.08
1.56
No

Standard error
0.03
0.004
0.007
0.005
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.08

1628

Coefficient
(2)
0.157
0.03
-0.04
0.08
-0.23
0.14
-0.01
2.28
Yes
1614

R2 = 0.32

R2 =0.55

13

Standard error
0.04
0.004
0.007
0.007
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.17

Table 2: Wage Variability in Licensed and Unlicensed Jobs and Union and Non-Union Jobs,
Within Broad Occupational Categories and Overall

Occupation Category
Professional/Technical
Managers
Other
All

Occupation Category
Professional/Technical
Managers
Other
All

Mean Within-Category Squared Residual
Licensed
Unlicensed
Difference
0.33
0.32
0.01
0.48
0.37
0.11
0.34
0.38
-0.03
0.36
0.34
0.02

P-Value
0.749
0.293
0.756
0.567

Mean Within-Category Squared Residual
Union
Nonunion
Difference
0.22
0.35
-0.13
0.25
0.41
-0.15
0.14
0.4
-0.26
0.22
0.37
-0.15

P-Value
0.017
0.35
0.06
0.002

Note: Tables shows means squared residual from log wage regression. See text for details.
Sample size is 1,680.

14

Table 3: OLS Estimates of the Impact of Licensing on Perceived Competence,
N=1951*
Dependent variable: Perceived
Competence
License
Education
Age
Union
Government
Self employed
Nonprofit
Constant
R2= .02

Coefficient

Standard error

.16
.016
.007
-.006
.13
.05
.07
-.59

.05
.009
.009
.069
.07
.07
.08
.12

*Question was “On a scale of 0 to 6, where 0 means not at all and 6 means very much, how competent
did you feel while you were at work yesterday?”

15

