NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES CHURCH ATTENDANCE CAUSE PEOPLE TO VOTE? USING BLUE LAWS'
REPEAL TO ESTIMATE THE EFFECT OF RELIGIOSITY ON VOTER TURNOUT
Alan Gerber
Jonathan Gruber
Daniel M. Hungerman
Working Paper 14303
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14303

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

We thank Tracy Liu, and in particular Gabriel Durazo for research assistance in collecting the Blue
Laws data. We thank Shang Ha for research assistance. We are grateful to James Snyder, who supplied
the election data. This work was supported by the Metanexus Institute and the Yale University Institution
for Social and Policy Studies. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Alan Gerber, Jonathan Gruber, and Daniel M. Hungerman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does Church Attendance Cause People to Vote? Using Blue Laws' Repeal to Estimate the
Effect of Religiosity on Voter Turnout
Alan Gerber, Jonathan Gruber, and Daniel M. Hungerman
NBER Working Paper No. 14303
September 2008
JEL No. H1,J2
ABSTRACT
Regular church attendance is strongly associated with a higher probability of voting. It is an open question
as to whether this association, which has been confirmed in numerous surveys, is causal. We use the
repeal of the laws restricting Sunday retail activity ("Blue laws") to measure the effects of church-going
on political participation. The repeal of Blue Laws caused a 5 percent decrease in church attendance.
We measure the effect of Blue Laws' repeal on political participation and find that following the repeal
turnout falls by approximately 1 percentage point. This turnout decline, which is statistically significant
and fairly robust across model specifications, is consistent with the large effect of church attendance
on turnout reported in the literature, and suggests that church attendance may have significant causal
influence on voter turnout.

Alan Gerber
Yale University
Institution for Social and Policy Studies
77 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
alan.gerber@yale.edu
Jonathan Gruber
MIT Department of Economics
E52-355
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
gruberj@mit.edu

Daniel M. Hungerman
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
439 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556-5602
and NBER
dhungerm@nd.edu

Introduction
For most Americans, attending religious services is a routine and important part of life. On an
average Sunday roughly one-fourth of the U.S. population attends religious services, and roughly half of
the population attends religious services at least monthly.1 Donations to churches and other religious
organizations make up a plurality (and by some estimates a majority) of charitable contributions
(Andreoni, 2006). Over two-thirds of Americans belong to a church or other religious organization
(Iannaccone, 1998). Despite the broad reach and clear importance of religious observance, there has been
relatively little progress in measuring how church attendance shapes the choices people make and the
attitudes they hold.
There are strong correlations between the degree of religious observance and a wide variety of
pro-social behaviors and positive health outcomes. For example, there is a well-known positive
association between attending religious services and political participation; those reporting regular church
attendance are much more likely to vote (Rosenstone and Hansen 1993; Verba, Schlozman, and Brady
1995). Prior work has found that, controlling for socioeconomic characteristics, age, gender, and political
conditions, those who report attending church weekly are between 10 and 15 percentage points more
likely to vote, a difference roughly equal to the gap in turnout between a presidential and non-presidential
year.
It is unclear how these correlations between religiosity and various outcomes should be
interpreted. Do these associations measure the causal effect of church attendance, or do they capture long
and short run differences in those who choose to attend church and those who do not? In the case of
church attendance and voting, it is quite plausible that a person who enjoys participating in church life (an
activity which involves listening to speeches, meeting with others, volunteering, and organizing) would
also enjoy participating in politics. Short-run factors may be at work as well. Those who are new to an
area may have less religious involvement and it is well established that on average newcomers are less
1

Figures based on calculations of GSS data from 1973 to 1998.

1

likely to vote. A larger point is that any catalogue of particular conjectures about how church goers may
differ from non-church goers runs the risk of overlooking important sources of difference.
We measure the causal effect of church attendance by observing the consequences of the decline
in church attendance that followed a policy change. In recent decades, long-standing restrictions on
Sunday retail activity, often referred to as “Blue Laws,” were repealed. In a recent paper, Gruber and
Hungerman argue that a consequence of permitting Sunday morning shopping was to reduce the relative
appeal of Sunday morning church attendance. They provide compelling evidence that there was a notable
decline in church attendance following the repeal (Gruber and Hungerman, 2008).
We extend this earlier work to examine whether the repeal of the “Blue Laws” was also
associated with a decline in voting in presidential and mid-term elections, which is what is predicted to
occur if church attendance promotes political participation. We find that the repeal of the Blue Laws
resulted in an approximately 1 percentage point fall in the percentage of the population that turns out to
vote. Additionally, there is little evidence that repeals in Blue Laws were preceded by declines in voter
participation or declines in religious participation; the results here are not driven by “reverse causality.”
We thus conclude that the relationship between Blue Laws and voting plausibly operates through Blue
Laws’ impact on religious attendance. The findings here therefore provide much more compelling
evidence of a true relationship between attendance and voting than does prior research. We also examine
whether there are any partisan differences in the effect of the Blue laws’ repeal. We find that the decline
in turnout appears to affect Democratic but not Republican vote shares, a result we present in section 3
and briefly discuss in the conclusion.
These findings have implications for the larger question of how citizen engagement in voluntary
associations affects society. Citizen involvement in religious organizations, unions, civic groups, and
clubs is often credited with creating networks of communication and fostering trust and reciprocity among
members of society. The “social capital” created by such organizations is cited by some as an important
determinant of the quality of political and economic performance and therefore a decline in citizen
involvement in such activities has serious and broad consequences (e.g., Putnam 2000). Robert Putnam, a

2

leading proponent of the view that the level of social capital plays a critical role in societal performance
along many dimensions, argues that religious organizations are of special importance: “Faith
communities in which people worship together are arguably the single most important repository of social
capital in America.” (Putnam 2000, 66). Concern over a decline in church attendance is premised on the
belief that churchgoing causes rather than is merely associated with increases in social capital. More
generally, if church attendance is determined to have a causal effect on political participation, this would
provide a valuable example of how participation in voluntary organizations does in fact have a causal
effect that spills over into the political sphere as social capital theorists maintain.
Establishing whether church attendance has a causal effect on participation also has implications
for our understanding of mass politics and for evaluating the full range of consequences that follow from
public policy toward religious organizations. For instance, one important feature of churches is that their
membership is not concentrated among the highest socioeconomic strata, and so, if it was real, the
mobilizing effect of church attendance might counteract some of the class biases observed in political
participation (Brady, Schlozman, Verba, and Luks 2008).
Our paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 reviews the literature linking religiosity and political
behavior. Section 2 discusses the history of Blue Laws and the identification strategy. Section 3 presents
the estimation results. Section 4 discusses the implications of our findings, some of their limitations, and
directions for future investigation.

Section 1. Literature Review
There is a large body of work documenting correlations between church attendance and various
pro-social behaviors. In particular, attending church has been linked to: lower levels of criminal activity
(Evans, Cullen, Dunaway and Burton, 1995; Lipford, McCorkmick, and Tollison, 1993; Hull and Bold,
1995), lower rates of delinquency (Bachman et al. 2002; Johnson et al 2000.; Wallace and Williams,
1987), lower rates of substance abuse (National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse, 2001), better
health status and outcomes (Levin and Vanderpool, 1987; Hummer, Rogers, Nam, and Ellison, 1999),

3

improved self-reported measures of well-being (Ellison, 1991; Hout and Greeley, 2003), and greater
marital stability (Lehrer and Chiswick, 1993). Religiosity is strongly correlated with self-reports of wellbeing (Ellison 1991, Hout and Greeley 2003), and recent work has found that differences in those
reporting never attending to attending church weekly is comparable to the boost in happiness from
moving from the bottom to the top income quartile (Gruber and Mullainathan, 2002).
Voter turnout is also strongly associated with religious observance. There is a robust and large
positive association between turnout and a citizen’s frequency of church attendance. Rosenstone and
Hansen (1993) pool survey data from several decades of American National Election Studies and regress
turnout on reported church attendance and a collection of additional variables, including age, income,
gender, and education. They estimate that those who report attending church every week or almost every
week are 15.1 percentage points more likely to report voting in presidential election and 10.2 percentage
points more likely to report voting in mid-term elections than those who say they do not attend religious
services (Rosenstone and Hansen, 1993, Tables D-1 and D-4). Verba, Schlozman, and Brady (1995)
perform a similar analysis, predicting turnout in a larger set of elections. Using the data from the 2,500
respondent Citizen Participation Study survey, Verba, Schlozman, and Brady confirm the strong
correlation between church attendance and turnout (Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995). Other research
has focused on the relationship between church going and turnout for particular ethnic or racial
subgroups. A positive relationship between religious participation and voting has been demonstrated for
Asian Americans (Wong et al, 2005), Latinos (Jones-Correa and Leal, 2001), Muslims (Jamal, 2005), and
African Americans (Alex-Assensoh and Assensoh, 2001).
There are two main explanations for how church attendance might cause greater voter turnout.
First, participation in a church builds civic skills and thereby increases a citizen’s interest in and capacity
for participation. Church goers are exposed to a basic political education through political information
from other members and the clergy. Those who attend church participate in decision making processes
regarding church affairs, plan meetings, or give speeches. These activities help develop general civic
skills that might lead to political involvement outside of church. Second, church members are easily

4

mobilized. Church members are part of a community and may be relatively easily encouraged to
participate by requests from other church members or the church leadership. These requests may be
especially effective due to social pressure to participate in political causes that are of common concern.
Recent work in voter turnout provides evidence to support both of these channels. For example,
turnout behavior appears to be relatively malleable. Randomized assignment field experiments have
shown that some common mobilization tactics, such as pre-election door to door canvassing, can increase
turnout substantially (Gerber and Green, 2000). The initial study in the most recent wave of scholarship,
conducted in New Haven in 1998, showed an 8 percentage point average treatment on treated effects and
results of this magnitude have been supported by most subsequent studies of canvassing (Green and
Gerber, 2008). Encouragements to vote might be delivered personally by church members and so might
be similarly effective.
Moreover, voter turnout appears to be highly sensitive to even small amounts of social pressure.
Members of a church congregation are likely to be reminded about the upcoming election during church
services, with the clear implication if not the explicit injunction to vote. The social pressure exerted by the
public encouragement to adhere to the social norm of voting may be effective at increasing turnout.
Recent experimental studies on the effect of social pressure on voter turnout confirm earlier work in
social psychology showing that social pressure can induce compliance with behavior that is supported by
social norms (Cialdini and Goldstein 2004, Cialdini and Trost 1998, Scheff 2000 ). In a recent field
experiment, Gerber, Green, and Larimer examined the effect of different pre-election mailings on the
probability a subject voted. Two of the mailings reminded voters that whether they voted or not is a
matter of public record. They found these mailings caused over a 5 percentage point increase in the voting
rate, approximately 10 times the effect of a typical political mailing (Gerber, Green, and Larimer, 2008).
Other experimental work has shown that the more personal an encouragements to vote is, the more
effective it is at producing higher turnout (Gerber and Green, 2000; Green and Gerber, 2004).
At the same time, efforts to measure the causal effects of church going are hampered by the nonrandom nature of differences in church attendance across individuals. While church attendance may be

5

causing the higher turnout reported in these studies, it is also possible that those who are more likely to be
politically active are the very individuals who attend church. For example, individuals may have a fixed
desire for social participation that extends to all arenas, including both political and religious
participation. In such a case, the positive correlation observed in other studies may reflect this omitted
third factor. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that the most influential work examines
correlations between survey measures of church attendance and turnout. Survey work suffers from
various forms of measurement error. If those who attend church or report they attend church also
exaggerate their pro-social behavior, the relationship between religious attendance and pro-social
behavior will tend to be biased upward.
While aware of this difficulty, scholars who specialize in political behavior routinely interpret the
correlation between church-going and turnout as evidence church attendance causes turnout. Researchers
minimize the problem of drawing causal conclusions in this area or assume that the available control
variables were adequate to eliminate concerns (Rosenstone and Hansen, 1993, p172, Huckfeldt and
Sprague, 1993; Verba, et al 1995).2 However, some differences between churchgoers and others (such as
tastes for organizational involvement or listening to sermons and speeches) may be difficult to observe, so
that adding control variables will not fully address whether the association between attendance and voting
reflects these omitted factors. Some more recent work is agnostic about whether the correlation between
church attendance and voting ought to be interpreted as causal. A review of survey evidence
demonstrating the strong positive association between church attendance (as well as union membership)
and political participation concludes that “much more work is needed to determine whether the “effects”
we find are simply the result of confounds (such as the possibility that those with a sense of duty are more

2

Verba et al. for instance discuss the possibility of spurious correlations at length, but ultimately dismiss the
plausibility and relevance of the typical objections to ascribing a causal interpretation to the association between
institutional involvement and political activity. They note that empirically it is not simply being affiliated with an
institution, but how actively the individual is engaged that matters for political participation (p279). This argument
does not address the possibility that a taste for participation is expressed in both the extent of involvement in
institutions, on one hand, and the extent of involvement in politics, on the other.

6

likely to join both churches and unions and such people also participate in politics at higher rates) or real
mechanisms...” (Brady, Schlozman, Verba, and Luks, 2008).
The strategy that we will pursue in this paper is to use a policy change, repeal of the Blue Laws,
as a shifter of religious participation that may impact voting. Several recent studies have used policy
changes to study voter turnout. Dee (2004) and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopolous (2004) measure the
effect of education on voter turnout using the change in educational attainment caused by compulsory
education laws and changes in child labor laws. They conclude that education has a positive effect on
voter turnout in the United States, a result in agreement with the results of previous cross sectional
regression using the American National Election Study and the Current Population Survey.

Section 2: A Brief History of Blue Laws
This section provides some background on Blue Laws in the United States. For more
information, readers should consult Goos (2005), Laband and Heinbuch (1987), and Gruber and
Hungerman (2008).
Blue Laws, also called Sunday closing laws, are laws which restrict various activities on the
Sabbath. Such laws have been fairly common throughout the nation’s history. All of the original
colonies had Sunday closing laws, and every state had at least some law prohibiting certain activities on
Sunday. By the mid 1900s, over 30 states had laws prohibiting retail activity on Sundays. These laws
frequently prohibited “labor” or “all manner of public selling,” but often made exceptions for acts of
charity.3 It is these general statewide prohibitions on retail activity which will be the focus here.
In 1961 the Supreme Court issued a key decision regarding the constitutionality of Blue Laws in
the case McGowan v. Maryland. The court upheld the constitutionality of Blue Laws, but stated that Blue
Laws could be found unconstitutional if their classification of prohibited activities rested “on grounds
wholly irrelevant to the achievement of the State’s objective.” After the ruling, Blue Laws began to be

3

States sometimes also exempted certain retail activities, for instance by allowing pharmacies to stay open on
Sunday.

7

challenged on the basis that they failed this constitutional test (Theuman, 2005). These challenges were
often successful since Blue Laws could be confusing in their classification of what activities were allowed
and what activities were not. For example, in Texas it was possible to sell hammers, but not nails, on a
Sunday (King, 1985). In the decades following this ruling, most states repealed their Blue Laws either
through judicial or legislative action (Goos, 2005).
To study these laws, we gathered information on each state’s Blue Laws from the 1950s until the
present. We identified states that witnessed a discreet and significant statewide repeal in the prohibition
of retail activity on Sundays. Some states’ laws were (or are) decided at the county or city level, making
collection of these data infeasible.4 A few states were not used because we could not verify the exact time
that the laws were repealed, or because the states gradually added exceptions to their laws over time,
making it difficult to assess in any particular year whether the laws in place could be regarded as
effective.5 Eight western states (Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon,
and Wyoming) never had any retail Blue Laws during this time period. Since these states do not directly
contribute to identification in the results that follow, one would hope that their inclusion is irrelevant. We
investigate whether the results are sensitive to including these western states below.
Panel A of Table 1 lists the usable states and the year when their laws were repealed, either by
judicial action or act of the legislature. The states with usable laws make up a fairly diverse group.
While there are relatively few states in the west and in New England, we nonetheless have state
representation in all areas of the country, and there is no clear pattern in the timing of when laws are
repealed in any given part of the country.
Even if the collection of states appears reasonably diverse and the timing of repeal appears
nonsystematic, there are a few other important questions concerning the use of these laws. First, one may
wonder if these laws were enforced before their repeal. If they were not enforced, then their repeal would

4

These states include Alaska, Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii , Kentucky, Louisiana,
Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, North Carolina,
Oklahoma, and Rhode Island.
5
These states include Illinois, Massachusetts, Maine, New York, West Virginia, and Wisconsin

8

not have an effect on religious or voting behavior and this will bias us away from finding an impact of
these laws. Fortunately, we were able to uncover newspaper stories and other evidence indicating the
significance of changes in the laws for a number of states (e.g., Merry, 1983; McGee, 1991; Hansard,
1985; The New York Times, 1970; and the Associated Press, 1984).
Second, one may wonder whether the timing of Blue Laws’ repeal is coincident with other
phenomena. For example, it might be the case that declining levels of civic participation lead to the laws
being repealed. We address this concern in the empirical section of the paper. But fortunately it appears
that the phenomena contributing to a state’s repealing its Blue Laws are varied and state-specific. Some
states repealed their laws only after court battles that lasted years. Other states changed their laws by
legislative action without court involvement.
It is also hard to generalize about the role of special interest groups in repealing Blue Laws.
Retail establishments in the same state sometimes supported Blue Laws and sometimes did not. Support
for the laws could vary even among similarly-sized businesses in a state (Barmash, 1986), although small
businesses were more likely to support the laws (Laband and Heinbuch, 1987). Labor unions have both
supported and argued against Sunday closing laws (Merry, 1983). Price and Yandle (1987) investigate
what economic and social forces are associated with the repeal of these laws. After considering the share
of women in the workforce, the presence of labor unions, a state’s political makeup, and various other
state socioeconomic characteristics, they do not find any covariates consistently associated with the
presence of Blue Laws.
In sum, we focus on states where we can identify a significant change in statewide prohibitions of
retail activities on Sunday; these laws create immediate and significant changes in the opportunity cost of
religious participation. A number of diverse states have witnessed such a change; there does not appear to
be any systematic pattern in the timing or location of the law changes in these states. Prior research has
failed to identify social or economic factors that are consistently related to Blue Laws’ repeal, and
anecdotal evidence suggests that the factors leading to a state repealing its Blue Laws are varied. All of
this suggests that changes Blue Laws create an empirically attractive change in the opportunity cost of

9

religious participation.

Section 3: Specification and Results
This section presents empirical results on the impact of Blue Laws’ on church attendance and
voting. We begin first with a discussion of Blue Laws and attendance, using data from the GSS.
A. GSS Data and Empirical Methods
Our empirical analysis begins with examining Blue Laws’ impact on religious attendance. To
carry out this analysis, we turn to the General Social Survey (GSS), the longest-running national survey
that gathers data on religious participation. In most years since 1972, this survey has asked a sample of
1,500 to 2,500 respondents about their frequency of religious attendance. There are nine possible
responses to this question: never; less than once per year; about once or twice a year; several times a year;
about once a month; two to three times a month; nearly every week; every week; and several times a
week. We start by simply using the linear index formed by these responses (with values 0 through 8);
given that each interval represents roughly a doubling of attendance frequency, this is akin to a log scale.
We also convert answers into estimated weeks of annual attendance (so for example we estimate that a
person who attends every week attends 52 times a year).
Our sample covers the years 1973 to 1998. We consider individuals in the states with usable Blue
Laws data listed in Table 1 (including western states which never had Blue Laws). We limit the sample
to individuals who report their “religious preference” as Catholic or Protestant, as these individuals are
those most likely to attend services on Sunday (these individuals make up nearly 90 percent of the
sample).6 Additionally, we drop data from a given state in the year the law changed (as it is not clear how
to categorize such cases).
Panel B of Table 1 reports the means of selected variables of interest from the GSS. The average
value of our attendance index, which ranges from 0 (never) to 8 (several times a week) is slightly above 4,
6

We have also tried examining the effects of Blue Laws on Jews, for whom Blue Laws should not matter since their
day of worship is not Sunday. The estimates were insignificant as expected, but the sample was too small for the
results to be regarded as reliable.

10

which corresponds to monthly attendance. (Monthly attendance is also the median response.) The table
also shows that GSS somewhat over-samples female respondents.7
We use these data to estimate models of the form

Aijt = δ Laws jt + β X ijt + γ Z jt + φ j + υt + ε
where Aijt is religious attendance for individual i in state j in year t; Laws jt is an indicator for whether the
Blue Laws are still in place in state j in year t; Xijt is a set of characteristics of the individual i (age, age
squared, gender, dummies for race, dummies for educational attainment, and a dummy for being married);
Zjt is a set of state/year control variables (state percent black, state percent foreign born, inflation-adjusted
per-capita disposable income, and the statewide rate of insured unemployment); φ j is a set of state
dummies; and υ t is a set of year dummies. This “difference-in-difference” equation thus assesses
whether repealing the Blue Laws causes a deviation from a state’s mean of participation relative to other
states at this time. Following Bertrand et al. (2004), we cluster our standard errors at the state level.
The results from this analysis are presented in Table 2. The first column shows our basic
difference-in-difference regression for the religious attendance index. There is a statistically significant
negative effect on religious attendance of Blue Law repeal. The result indicates that repealing the Blue
Laws reduced attendance by 0.25 index points, a little over 5 percent of the sample mean. This is a
sizeable effect: it is half as large as the well-noted higher rate of religious attendance for married
individuals, for example. The rest of the column shows selected coefficients on other control variables;
they are as expected.
Column 2 reports estimates when the dependent variable is estimated weeks of attendance per
year.8 We find that on average Blue Laws’ repeal reduces attendance by a few weeks a year. The
average number of estimated weeks of attendance is about 30, so the 2-week impact estimated in column
2 is about 6% of the mean. Since Blue Laws likely impact “marginal” churchgoers more than others, the
7

We compared data on observable characteristics such as age and gender in the sample of states used in the
regressions to the sample of states excluded. The means were generally similar.
8
For these results we estimate that individuals in the highest attendance category attend twice a week.

11

2-week estimate likely understates the drop in churchgoing observed by those affected by the repeal
(although, with a repeated cross-section of data like the GSS, we cannot formally verify this). Both
columns 1 and 2 point to a non-negligible impact of Blue Laws on attendance.
The last two columns test our estimates for reverse causality. In these columns we include in the
model a dummy that goes from zero to unity starting two years before a state repeals its Blue Laws. If
Blue Law repeal is just picking up a pre-existing reduction in demand for church-going, then this should
be captured in this “lead” term. In fact, the lead term is insignificant, and our estimated effect of the Blue
Laws is in all cases unchanged. The results here thus show that the repeal of Blue Laws led to a
statistically and economically significant decline in religious attendance. In the next subsection, we see if
Blue Laws repeal also lead to a decline in voter turnout.

B. Specification and Estimation of Voting
In this section we examine how changes in Blue Laws and the resultant decline in religious
participation impacts voter turnout. We use county-level data on voter turnout; the unit of observation is
thus a given county in a given year. Our key dependent variable is voter turnout for presidential elections
between 1952 and 2000. The regression we estimate is:

turnoutct = δ repealct + β X ct + φc + θ ry + ε .
Here turnoutct is the percent of the population voting in the presidential election in year t for county c,

repealct is a dummy that equals unity if a state has repealed its Blue Laws (and zero otherwise), Xct is a
matrix of regressors, and the terms φc and θ ry are county and region-by-year dummies. We will measure

turnoutct in both levels and logs. The key coefficient is δ , which captures how a change in Blue Laws
(and thus the opportunity cost of religious participation) impacts voter turnout.
The regressors in X will help control for other determinants of voter turnout. These include
dummy variables for whether senatorial and gubernatorial elections are being held in a given state and

12

year, and the county’s population (in both levels and logs). The population data come from the Decennial
Censuses; we linearly interpolate each county’s population for years between the censuses. We also
include a measure of whether a state is a “battleground” state: the difference between the share of the state
voting democratic and the national share voting democratic. We include the square of this “battleground”
variable as well.
The regressions include county-level dummies, so that identification comes from changes within
counties across time. The regressions also use a very strong set of region-by-year dummies, where
“region” refers to the four geographic regions as defined by the census. These variables thus control for
any relevant time-varying phenomena for each region in the country. (Of course, this set of region-byyear dummies subsumes a typical set of year dummies). We have multiple repeals of Blue Laws in all
four regions of the country, meaning that for each region we will exploit within-region variation in Blue
Laws’ prevalence across time for identification.
Most of the results which follow will use weighted regressions; this is for two reasons. First, as
the dependant variable is essentially a measure of per-capita turnout, more populous counties are more
informative and this should be exploited to improve the regression’s efficiency. Second, as shown below,
the weighted model fits the data better.
Panel C of Table 1 gives means for some key variables. As shown in the table, we also have data
on total votes cast for each presidential candidate; this will allow us to examine how changes in the
opportunity cost of religious participation affect voter support for members of different political parties.
Table 3 presents results from our basic regression. All residuals correct for heteroskedasticity
and are clustered at the state level. The dependent variable is the percent of the population voting in
presidential elections from 1952 to 2000 (in levels). The first column presents our estimates of the
baseline specification. The key coefficient, for whether Blue Laws have been repealed, is negative and
significant. The coefficient suggests that the percent of the population voting in presidential elections
falls by about one point after Blue Laws are repealed. This is a bit less than 3 percent of the mean of the
dependent variable; the effect is thus reasonable but significant in magnitude.

13

Comparing magnitude of the effects in Table 3 to those in Table 2 is somewhat difficult since the
bases are different. Roughly speaking, we find that attending church about 2.5 fewer weeks per year
leads to a one percent decline in the odds of voting. This result is remarkably consistent with Rosenstone
and Hansen (1993), who find that attending nearly every week raises the odds of voting by 15%. Our 2.5
week estimate is roughly one-twentieth of the weeks in the year, and our estimated impact is one-fifteenth
of theirs. This result therefore seems compatible with a large but not implausible relationship between
religious participation and voting.
Turning to the other regressors, one sees that the senatorial and gubernatorial election dummies
are both insignificant. The last two variables capture the role of “battleground” states; the difference in
the share of a state’s vote for the democratic candidate and the share of the national vote is negative and
significant; the coefficient for the square of this difference is positive but small and insignificant.
Together the coefficients suggest that “blowout states” (where the democratic candidate was doing either
especially well or poorly) have lower turnout than other states.
The second column reports results from an identical regression except that observations are not
weighted by county population. The coefficient is once again negative and significant. It is reassuring
that the relationship between voting and the cost of religious participation is similar regardless of whether
weights are used. As suggested by the R2, the weighted model fits the data better than the unweighted
model.
The third column repeats the baseline estimation but only uses the states where Blue Laws have
changed; the regression drops western states (listed below Panel A of Table 1) which never had Blue
Laws. Since these western states do not directly contribute to the identification of the repeal dummy
coefficient, their exclusion should not diminish the results. This turns out to be the case—the repeal
dummy coefficient in the third column is similar to the coefficient in the first column.
The fourth column provides a test for whether our results are driven by pre-existing trends. For
instance, it may be the case the declining social capital in a state over time leads to less voting, and also
leads to a change in Blue Laws. The fourth column tests this story by including an “early” repeal dummy

14

that goes from zero to unity starting the election before a state repeals its Blue Laws; the early repeal
dummy stays at unity thereafter. If changes in the laws are driven by pre-existing declines in civic
participation, then this “early” repeal dummy would be negative and significant, and/or it would attenuate
the observed effect of the actual law change. But it is clear from Table 3 that this is not the case. The
coefficient on the early dummy is wrong signed, very small in magnitude, and insignificant. The result
shows that voting turnout declined immediately after Blue Laws are repealed, not before.9
The last column reports results where the dependent variable is logged (and weights are used).
Once again, the result suggests that an increase in the cost of religious participation leads to a decrease in
voter turnout. The coefficient is consistent with a 2.7 percent decline in voter turnout. As mentioned
before, the levels result in the baseline regression suggests an effect that is a little less than 3 percent of
the mean of the dependent variable. The result is thus extremely similar in magnitude regardless of
whether logs or levels are used.

C. Other Results
We have also estimated a variety of models of the impacts of the blue laws on other aspects of
voter turnout. Table 4 shows a series of such regressions.10 We first report results on turnout for
contested gubernatorial and senatorial elections between 1952 and 2000.11 The results for both
gubernatorial and senatorial elections are qualitatively similar to those on presidential elections in Table
3, but the standard errors are larger so that the findings are not significant.
One might also wonder whether changes in the opportunity cost of religion affect different types
of voters in different ways. The next two columns look at how Blue Laws’ repeal impacts the percent of
9

One difficulty with interpreting this result is that presidential elections occur 4 years apart, so that a preexisting
trend may be made manifest between two elections. However, the results of Table 2 show no evidence of a preexisting trend even with higher-frequency attendance data. This lessens the concern that the regression here is
somehow masking inter-election phenomena.
10
These results include a dummy for whether or not a presidential election was being held.
11
An election is defined as uncontested if either the Republican or Democratic candidate received above 80% or
below 20% of the vote. About 6% of the observations for both senatorial and gubernatorial elections are regarded as
participating in uncontested elections by this measure. Results using other cutoffs (or all observations) are
qualitatively similar.

15

the population voting for Republican and Democratic presidential candidates. Interestingly, we find that
the strong negative effect of the blue laws is concentrated in those voting for Democratic candidates, with
a positive and insignificant effect on voting for Republican candidates. Thus, the “marginal
churchgoers”—those whose behavior is most likely to be affected by Blue Laws—are relatively more
likely to vote for Democratic candidates.12 This finding is consistent with recent work by Brady et al
showing that the effect of church attendance on voting is greater among lower income voters than for high
income ones (Brady et al, 2008).

Conclusions
Several decades of research on political behavior has uncovered a number of strong and robust
associations between individual experiences on the one hand, and voter behavior on the other. Among the
most important findings from a generation of research are the strong positive associations between
individual voter turnout and education, union membership, and church attendance (e.g., Wolfinger and
Rosenstone 1980, Rosenstone and Hansen 1993, Verba, Schlozman, and Brady 1995.). These associations
have generally been treated as if they were causal effects. However, the foundation for this interpretation
is weak. Nearly all of the research rests on cross sectional regressions using survey data and in recent
years voting scholars (among others) have shown greater appreciation for the vulnerability of such
analysis to bias. This concern is heightened when the independent variable of interest is an individual’s
choice, such as the decision to attend church or stay in school, which may be affected by unobserved
individual attributes or circumstances correlated with political attitudes or behavior.
The U.S. is a highly religious country and religiosity is correlated with a range of positive
outcomes. There is increasing interest in converting these correlations into causal interpretations. One

12

Religion has also been linked to political preferences, though attendance has only been a strong predictor of
candidate preferences since the early 1990s. Since 1992, those who never attend church are much more likely to
vote Democratic than those who report attending church every week (ANES 2004, Cumulative file). In contrast, in
the 1960s, those who attended church regularly were no more likely to vote Democratic than those who never
attended. Our result that liberal churchgoers are on the margin is thus compatible with, but does not directly
substantiate, the observed decline in liberal religious attendance in recent US history.

16

promising strategy for doing so is to find changes in the environment which impact religious participation
but not other relevant behaviors, and then to trace through the effects on other aspects of life, such as
political participation. The repeal of the blue laws provides an excellent example of such a change.
Following Gruber and Hungerman (2008), we show that repeal of the blue laws does indeed lead to less
church attendance. We then show that repeal is associated with lower voter turnout, confirming earlier
studies that documented higher turnout for those who attend church services more often.
Beyond this methodological contribution, the finding that church attendance appears to cause a
change in turnout has important substantive implications for political theory. The “social capital” created
by citizen involvement in voluntary organizations is often credited with creating networks of
communication and fostering bonds of trust and reciprocity, which in turn provides an environment
conducive to high levels of political and economic performance. Theorists for centuries have singled out
religious practices as of special importance (see, for example, Tocqueville’s extensive discussion of
religion in Democracy in America), and have noted Americans are religious and conjectured that this
societal feature has broad implications. Despite this, there have been few previous attempts, and little
evidence to show, that church attendance actually causes mass behavior (for a recent assessment, see
Brady, Schlozman, Verba, and Luks 2008).
Social capital is sometimes treated as having a uniform influence in civic life, but changes in the
level of participation in voluntary organizations may have effects that differ markedly across citizens. We
find that the turnout effects are largest in terms of voting for Democratic candidates. The point estimates
in Table 4 imply that the net effect of the Blue Law repeal is to reduce the Democratic share of the
presidential vote by approximately one and a half percentage points. To put this magnitude in context, in
two of the last eight presidential elections the candidates were separated by about two percentage points
or less. Organizations such as unions and churches, which reach citizens across socioeconomic strata,
might serve to mobilize their membership and thereby counteract some of the class biases observed in
political participation (Brady, Schlozman, Verba, and Luks, 2008). The finding that there are partisan
implications to changes in the Blue Laws suggests partisan differences across the types of individuals

17

whose church attendance is affected by Blue Law repeal or differences in the strength of their behavioral
response to reduced church attendance. Clarifying the mechanism that produces the partisan effects is a
research question that merits further attention.

18

References

Alex-Assensoh, Yvette, and A.B. Assensoh. (2001). “Inner City Contexts, Church Attendance and
Afrincan American Political Participation,” The Journal of Politics. 63(3):886-901.
Andreoni, James, (2006) “Philanthropy” forthcoming in the Handbook of Giving Reciprocity, and
Altruism, L. A. Gerard-Varet, Serge-Christophe Kolm, and Jean Mercier Ythier, Editors,
Elsivier/North-Holland.
Associated Press, The (1984) “Columbia, S.C., Arrests 5 for Defying Blue Laws,” The New York Times,
December 25.
Bachman, Jerald, Patrick O’Malley, John Schulenberg, Lloyd Johnston, Alison Bryant, and
Alicia Merline (2002). The Decline in Substance Use in Young Adulthood: Changes in
Social Activities, Roles, and Beliefs. Mahway, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates..
Barmash, I. (1986) “Sunday Shopping: A Way of Life for Millions,” The New York Times, October 19,
pg 2.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and Mullainathan, S. (2004). “How Much Should We Trust Differences-inDifferences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249-275.

Brady, Henry E., Ken Lehman Schlozman, Sidney Verba, and Samantha Luks. (2008).
“Participatory Inequality, Income Inequality and the Role of Churches and Unions –
From the 1950’s to the 2000s.” Paper prepared for the April, 2008 Midwest Political
Science Meetings.
Cialdini, Robert B., and Noah J. Goldstein. 2004. “Social Influence: Compliance and
Conformity.” Annual Review of Psychology 55:591-621.
Cialdini, Robert B., and Melanie R. Trost. 1998. “Social Influence: Social Norms, Conformity,
and Compliance.” The Handbook of Social Psychology, 4th ed., ed. Daniel T. Gilbert,
Susan T. Fiske, and Gardner Lindzey. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Cochran, John K., Leonard Beeghley, and E. Wilbur Bock. (1992). “The Influence of Religious Stability
and Homogamy on the Relationship between Religiosity and Alcohol Use among Protestants,”
Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion. 31(4): 441-456.
Dee, Thomas. (2004). “Are There Civic Returns to Education?,” Journal of Public Economics. 8(9-10):
1697-1720
Ellison, Christopher G. (1991). “Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of Health
and Social Behavior. 32: 80-99.
Evans, T. David, Francis T. Cullen, R. Gregory Dunaway, and Velma S. Burton. (1995). “Religion and
Crime Reexamined: The Impact of Religion, Secular Controls, and Social Ecology on Adult
Criminality,” Criminology. 33(2): 195-224.
Gartner, John, Dave B. Larson, and George D. Allen. (1991). “Religious commitment and mental health:
A review of the empirical literature,” Journal ofPsychology and Theology. 19: 6–16.
Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. (2000). “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and Direct
Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment.” American Political Science Review. 94(3): 653–63..
Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Chris Larimer. (2008). “Social Pressure and Voter Turnout:
Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment,” American Political Science Review. 102: 33-48.
Goos, M. (2005) “The Impact of Shop Closing Hours on Labor and Product Markets,” Working paper.
Green, Donald P., and Alan S. Gerber. (2008). Get Out The Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout,
Second Edition. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

19

Gruber, Jon, and Daniel M. Hungerman (2008) “The Church vs. The Mall: What Happens when Religion
Faces Increased Secular Competition?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123: 831-862.
Gruber, Jonathan and Sendhil Mullainathan (2002). “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
Happier?,” NBER Working Paper #8872, April 2002.
Hansard, Donna (1985) “Retailers to Follow Crowds,” The Dallas Morning News, May 5, pg H1.
Hout, Michael, and Andrew Greeley. (2003). “Religion and Happiness in the United States,” Survey
Research Center, University of California, Berkeley, mimeo.
Huckfeldt, Robert, and John Sprague. 1993. “Citizens, Context, and Politics.” In The State of the
Discipline II, ed. Ada W. Finifter, pp. 281-303. Washington, DC: American Political Science
Association.
Hull, Brooks B. and Frederick Bold. (1995). “Preaching Matters-Replication and Extension,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization. 27(1): 143-49.
Hummer, Robert A., Richard G. Rogers, Charles B. Nam, and Christopher G. Ellison. (1999). “Religious
Involvement and U.S. Adult Mortality.” Demography. 36: 273-285
Iannaccone, Lawrence. (1998). “Introduction to the Economics of Religion,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 36: 1465-1495.
Jamal, Amaney. (2005). “The Political Participation and Engagement of Muslim Americans Mosque
Involvement and Group Consciousness,” American Politics Research. 33 (4): 521-544.
Johnson, Byron R., Spencer De Li, David B. Larson, and Mike McCullough. (2000). “A Systematic
Review of the Religiosity and Delinquency Literature: A Research Note,” Journal of
Contemporary Criminal Justice. 16(1): 32-52.
Jones-Correa, Michael A. and David. L. Leal. (2001). “Political Participation: Does Religion Matter?”
Political Research Quarterly. 54: 751-700.
Kennedy GJ. (1998). “Religion and depression.” In Handbook of Rel igion and Mental Health, ed. Harold
G. Koenig, pp. 129-145. San Diego, CA:.Academic Press..
King, Wayne (1985) “TV Moms and Chcken Dinners Employed in Blue-Law Battle” The New York
Times May 14, pg A16.
Koenig, Harold G., Linda K. George, Keith G. Meador, Dan G. Blazer, and Stephen M. Ford. (1994).
“Religious Practices and Alcoholism in a Southern Adult Population,” Hosp Community
Psychiatry. 45: 225-231.
Laband, David N., and Deborah H. Heinbuch. (1987) Blue Laws. Lexington Books: Lexington,
Massachusetts.
Lam, Desmond. (2006). “The Influence of Religiosity on Gambling Participation,” Journal of Gambling
Studies. 22(3): 205-320.
Lehrer, Evelyn L. and Carmel U. Chiswick. (1993). “Religion as a Determinant of Marital Stability,”
Demography. 30(3): 385-404.
Levin, Jeffrey S. and Linda M. Chatters. (1998). Religion, Health, and Psychological Well-Being in Older
Adults,” Journal of Aging and Health. 10(4): 504-531
Levin, Jeffrey S. and Harold Y. Vanderpool. (1987). “Is Frequent Religious Attendance Really Conducive
to Better Health?: Toward an Epidemiology of Religion,” Social Science and Medicine. 24(7):
589-600.
Lipford, Jody, Robert E. McCorkmick, and Robert D. Tollison. (1993). “Preaching Matters,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization. 21(3): 235-250.
McGee, K. (1991) “North Dakota Sends Blue Laws Packing,” USA Today, February 11.
Merry, G. (1983) “Over Clergy’s Protests, Many States Repealing Sunday Closing Laws,”
The Christian Science Monitor, March 22, pg 6.
Milligan, Kevin, Moretti, Enrico, and Philip Oreopoulos. (2004). “Does Education Improve Citizenship?
Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom,” Journal of Public Economics
88(9/10):1667-95.
National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse (2001). So Help Me God: Substance Abuse,
Religion and Spirituality. New York: Columbia University.

20

New York Times, The (1970) “‘Day of Rest Act’ Repealed in Utah,” The New York Times, May 17.
Price, J. and Yandle, B. (1987) “Labor Markets and Sunday Closing Laws,” Journal of Labor
Research 4: 407-414.
Putnam, Robert D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New
York: Simon and Shuster.
Rosenstone, Steven J. and John M. Hansen. (1993). Mobilization, Participation, and Democracy in
America. New York, NY: Macmillan.

Scheff, Thomas J. 2000. “Shame and the Social Bond: A Sociological Theory.” Sociological
Theory 18:84-99.
Theuman, J. (2005) “Validity, Construction, and Effect of ‘Sunday Closing’ or ‘Blue’ Laws—
Modern Status,” American Law Reports, ALR4th, 246-332.
Verba, Sidney, Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry Brady. (1995). Voice and Equality:
Civic Voluntarism in American Politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wallace, John M., and David Williams (1997). “Religion and Adolescent Health-Compromising
Behavior,” in J. Schulenberg, J.L. Maggs, and K. Hurrelman, eds., Health Risks and
Developmental Transitions During Adolescence. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 444-468.
Wallace, John M., and Tyrone A. Forman. (1998). “Religion's Role in Promoting Health and Reducing
Risk Among American Youth,” Health Education and Behavior. 25(6): 721-741.
Wolfinger, Raymond and Steven J. Rosenstone. (1980). Who Votes? New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press
Wong, Janelle S., Pei-te Lien, and M. Margaret Conway. (2005). “Group-Based Resources and
Political Participation Among Asian Americans,” American Politics Research. 33(4): 545-576.

21

Table 1: Blue Laws Information and Summary
Panel A: State and Year of Repeal
State
Year of Repeal
Florida
1969
Iowa
1955
Indiana
1977
Kansas
1965
Minnesota
1985
North Dakota
1991
Ohio
1973
Pennsylvania
1978

State
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington

Year of Repeal
1985
1977
1981
1985
1973
1982
1975
1966

See text for reasons why various states were not included. Eight other states which never had Blue Laws
are also included in the regressions: Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon,
and Wyoming

Panel B: Summary Statistics on GSS Data
Variable
Attendance
Age
Sex (1= female)

Mean
4.2
45.9
0.58

Std. Dev.
2.61
17.7
0.49

Observations: 16,143. The regression sample includes Catholics and Protestants, and excludes respondents
surveyed the year a state repealed its laws. For the basic results attendance is measured by an index (see
text). The percent of respondents reporting particular attendance levels are: Never (10.4) Less than Once a
Year (8.1), 1-2 Times a Year (13.2), Several Times a Year (13.1), Once a Month (7.7), 2-3 Times a Month
(9.8), About Weekly (6.2), Weekly (22.6), More Than Weekly (8.9).

Panel C: Summary Statistics on Voting Data
Variable
County Population
Percent of Population that Votes
Percent of Population that Votes for Democratic
Candidate
Percent of Population that Votes for Republican
Candidate
Percent of Population that Votes for Independent
Candidate

Mean
70,789
39.6

Std. Dev.
260,000
8.84

16.3

5.6

21.0

7.5

2.3

3.5

Total observations: 19,019. Means are unweighted. Sample includes 1,585 counties from the 1952 through
the 2000 presidential elections. Data on only 611 and 977 counties are available in 1952 and 1956,
respectively.

22

Table 2: Blue Laws and Attendance
Index
-0.245
[0.094]

Estimated Weeks
-2.456
[0.963]

Index
-0.242
[0.087]

Estimated Weeks
-2.554
[1.182]

-

-

-0.006
[0.129]

0.168
[1.391]

Age

0.007
[0.009]

0.17
[0.115]

0.007
[0.009]

0.17
[0.115]

Age squared

0.0001
[0.0001]

0.001
[0.001]

0.0001
[0.00001]

0.001
[0.001]

Dummy for Female

0.68
[0.041]

7.402
[0.472]

0.68
[0.041]

7.401
[0.471]

Dummy for White

-0.77
[0.240]

-6.354
[2.530]

-0.77
[0.240]

-6.356
[2.528]

Repeal Dummy
Early Repeal Dummy

Dummy for Black

0.034
1.064
0.034
1.063
[0.263]
[2.983]
[0.263]
[2.982]
Dummy for Married
0.505
5.287
0.505
5.287
[0.048]
[0.627]
[0.048]
[0.626]
Observations
16143
16143
16143
16143
R-squared
0.09
0.07
0.09
0.07
Robust standard errors, clustered by state, in brackets. All regressions include state dummies and year dummies, controls for
educational attainment, and controls for state-level income, unemployment, and percent foreign born. Dependent variable
“index” is a measure of how often an individual attends church, ranging from 0 (never) to 8 (multiple times a week).
Regressions omit observations in states the year that Blue Laws changed. The repeal dummy is set to unity once a state
repeals its Blue Laws. The Early Repeal dummy is set to unity two years before the Blue Laws changed. Data are from the
1973-1998 GSS.

23

Table 3: Basic Results

Repeal Dummy
Early Repeal Dummy

Baseline
-0.986
[0.573]

Only States
No Weights with Laws
-1.224
-1.226
[0.592]
[0.626]

Early
Dummy
-1.116
[0.589]

Logged,
No Weights
-0.029
[0.013]

Logged
-0.027
[0.014]

-

-

-

0.261
[0.587]

-

-

Senatorial Election Dummy

0.063
[0.189]

0.324
[0.197]

-0.014
[0.233]

0.055
[0.194]

0.055
[0.194]

0.002
[0.006]

Gubernatorial Election Dummy

-0.703
[0.703]

-0.737
[0.991]

-0.37
[0.858]

-0.731
[0.728]

-0.731
[0.728]

-0.011
[0.026]

State Share Democrat – National Share (abs. Value)

-15.247
[10.832]

-8.199
[12.445]

-7.335
[14.283]

-15.378
[10.829]

-15.378
[10.829]

-0.355
[0.310]

State Share Dem. – National Share, squared

4.375
13.46
-51.467
3.314
3.314
-0.24
[57.850]
[70.532]
[77.210]
[58.392]
[58.392]
[1.757]
Weights?
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
County Dummies?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Include All Possible States?
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Population Controls?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-by-Region Dummies?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
19019
19019
15618
19019
19019
19019
R-squared
0.88
0.85
0.88
0.88
0.86
0.88
Dependent variable is percent of population voting in presidential election. Robust standard errors, clustered by state, in brackets.
Repeal dummy equals unity if a state has repealed its Blue Laws. Early repeal dummy goes from zero to unity in the election before
Blue Laws changed, and stays at unity thereafter. States included are given in Panel A of Table 1. Population controls include county
population both in levels and in logs. Year-by-Region dummies subsume a regular set of year dummies.

24

Table 4: Additional Results

Repeal Dummy

Gubernatorial
Levels
Logs
-0.548
-0.008
[0.758]
[0.033]

Senatorial
Levels
Logs
-0.77
-0.02
[0.632]
[0.019]

Presidential
Democratic Republican
-1.224
0.339
[0.287]
[0.536]

Weights?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
County Dummies?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Population Controls?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year-by-Region Dummies?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
19243
19243
22178
22178
19019
19019
R-squared
0.91
0.89
0.89
0.91
0.87
0.86
Robust standard errors, clustered by state, in brackets. Dependent variable in the first four columns is
the percent of population voting in either a gubernatorial or a senatorial election. Regressions in the first
four columns omit “uncontested” elections; an election is defined as uncontested if either the Republican
or Democratic candidate received above 80% or below 20% of the vote; results using other cutoffs are
qualitatively similar. Repeal dummy equals unity if a state has repealed its Blue Laws. See Table 2 for
more details. The dependent variables in the last two columns is the percent of the population voting for
the Democratic and Republican candidate in presidential elections.

25

