NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RECONSIDERING THE ECONOMICS OF DEMAND ANALYSIS WITH KINKED
BUDGET CONSTRAINTS
Aaron Strong
V. Kerry Smith
Working Paper 14304
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14304

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

Partial support for this research was provided by ASU's Decision Center for a Desert City. Thanks
are due to Josh Abbott, Rob Williams, Chris Goemans, Jay Shimshack, the participants of the University
of Colorado Workshop in Environmental and Resource Economics and two anonymous referees for
comments and to Eric Moore and Jonathan Eyer for excellent research assistance and to Michael Tschudi
for developing the GIS linkages between census and PAMA water provider service areas. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Aaron Strong and V. Kerry Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Reconsidering the Economics of Demand Analysis with Kinked Budget Constraints
Aaron Strong and V. Kerry Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 14304
September 2008
JEL No. H42,Q21
ABSTRACT
This paper has two objectives. First, we identify a problem with the ability of the discrete-continuous
choice (DCC) framework and conditional demand functions to fully describe consumer preferences
in the presence of kinked budget constraints. Second, we propose and illustrate an alternative, preference
based, method for estimating consumer responses to price changes under these conditions. Our preference
based approach yields price elasticities on the order of 0.4 and a "utilities expenditure" elasticity of
near unity. This research highlights the possibility that households may be more sensitive to price
schedules than previously thought. It is recognizes commitments to commodities such as pools or outdoor
landscaping influence how water consumption responds to price changes as part of the long run adjustments.

Aaron Strong
University of Calgary
2023 Keystone Ranch Rd.
Keystone, Colorado 80435
strongaa@yahoo.com
V. Kerry Smith
Department of Economics
W.P. Carey School of Business
P.O. Box 873806
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu

I. Introduction
This paper has two objectives. First, we identify a general problem in using the
discrete-continuous choice (DCC) framework and conditional demand functions for
applied welfare analysis with changes in kinked budget constraints. To illustrate the
relevance of our argument, we consider the estimation issues that arise for the case of
models for residential water demand with increasing block rate structures. Second, we
propose an alternative, preference based, method for estimating consumer responses
under these conditions. By specifying a direct utility function and estimating its
parameters, our approach can evaluate policies that alter all the attributes of a block
pricing structure. For the case of residential water demand, in many areas of the United
States, especially in the arid Southwest, this type of change is being discussed as a
component of increased incentives for conservation.1 At a national level, it is also part of
EPA’s policy known as the “Four Pillars of Sustainable Infrastructure.”2
Conventional models for commodity demand (or labor supply) in the presence of
a piece-wise linear budget constraints use a parametric specification for the conditional
demand (labor supply) function to describe the selection of a “best facet” on the budget
constraint and with it, an amount of the commodity demanded (or labor supplied). The
choice is decomposed into the discrete and continuous components. This strategy has
been widely adopted in describing labor supply responses including differences in
participation status (i.e. working, retired, etc), and the extent of participation, part time
1

In June 2007, U.S. News and World Reports profiled the global water problem. There continues to be
professional and popular assessments raising concern about water management and availability (i.e. The
Economist, December 8, 2007 and National Geographic, February, 2008) as well as renewed interest in
economic research see Olmstead et al. [2007], Mansur and Olmstead [2006] and Chen and Hanak [2007].
2
The EPA Assistant Administrator for Water, Benjamin Grumbles in a 2006 briefing on EPA’s water
policies that current water prices signal it is available and cheap. This statement has been echoed in most
of the popular assessments.

2

vs. full time. It has also been an important component modeling of the strategies used to
consistently estimate electricity and water demands in the presence of block rate pricing
structures.
By contrast, our proposed method uses a different maintained assumption. It
specifies household preferences using a direct utility function. As a result, there are also
assumptions that underlie the model’s results. One of the important questions arises from
identification. That is, given a preference specification, a key issue concerns whether we
can identify and estimate the structural parameters using the first order conditions from
the constrained choice problem. The limited price variation usually encountered in
applying the model to households in a single region can confound the ability to observe
quantity adjustments.
We illustrate the logic for our method with an application to the residential water
demand for the Phoenix, Arizona metropolitan area. Our empirical model uses monthly
consumption data for 2005 for the “average” household (in a single family dwelling) in
the service areas of each of 43 water service providers in the Phoenix Active
Management Area (PAMA) of Arizona. By intersecting the GIS descriptions of the
water providers’ service areas with the GIS records for 2000 Census at the block group
level and the Maricopa County (the county within PAMA) parcel records, we construct a
set of economic, residential property, and demographic variables to serve as instruments.
We compare our results for the preference model with the conventional DCC framework
applied to the same sample and find the later yields insignificant income coefficients and
smaller (in absolute magnitude) conditional price elasticity estimates.

3

Section two describes the main elements of our argument. It begins by describing
the DCC framework. After that, we explain one of the issues motivating this paper –an
apparent contradiction between the Hausman [1979] interpretation of what is possible
within the DCC framework and the Bockstael-McConnell [1981] conclusion about the
difficulties facing welfare measurement with nonlinear budget constraints. With that
background, we then summarize how Reiss and White [2006] explain the appropriate
strategy for welfare measurement with nonlinear budget constraints.3 Within that
context, we describe the problems with using the DCC logic to evaluate large changes in
a block pricing structure for resources whose demands are largely determined by the
utilization of complementary goods. Section three outlines the estimation strategy.
Section four describes the data sources and five presents our results. The last section
comments on the potential role measures of the responsiveness of water demand to major
revisions in the price schedule can play in the design of policies intended to be part of
developing sustainable infrastructure.4

II.

Background and Economic Consistency
A.

Context

Water demand is one of the prominent applications for models explaining
consumer choice in the presence of kinked budget constraints. The Hewitt and Hanemann
[1995] paper is the first, and arguably the most comprehensive, application of the DCC
framework to water demand. Their analysis follows the general recommendations of

3

To our knowledge, none of the water demand models have attempted to measure the consumer surplus
associated with price changes. Most of their focus has been correctly measuring unconditional price
elasticities in the presence of kinked budget constraints.
4
For example see Hanak and Chen [2007].

4

Hausman [1979] and Moffit [1986] for these situations. A conditional demand is
specified. In their case, it is a constant elasticity function. The price and virtual income
for the conditional demand are defined by the first stage selection of an optimal budget
segment given the block pricing structure. Two errors are included in the specification.
One represents optimization error and the second captures unobserved heterogeneity.
Given assumed distributions for these errors (usually independent normality), observed
water use, and knowledge of the specific features of the pricing structure faced by
households, the framework defines the likelihood function for a sample of households’
water consumption. Variation in the pricing structures, the maintained distributions for
the errors, and the parametric specification for conditional demand function allows
statistically consistent estimates to be developed.
The DCC model characterizes consumer preferences with the specification of a
conditional demand function. The same functional form and parameterization is used to
describe all of the segments of an increasing block rate structure. This restriction assures
that the parameters can be identified. To illustrate our argument here, we selected the
simplest of the popular specifications, a linear conditional demand given in equation
(2.1):
wi = Z γ + α pi + δ mi

(2.1)

Water is assumed to be priced with an increasing block rate structure with the
nonlinear price for water defined as c( w) and the form of the relationship given in
equation (2.2). Assuming a two block pricing structure, p corresponds to the higher
marginal price (the second block) and p the initial block’s marginal price. ŵ is the

5

threshold for the change in the marginal price (the amount of water defining kink point
on the budget constraint ).

pw
if w ≤ wˆ
⎧
c(w) = ⎨
⎩ p(w - wˆ ) + pwˆ if w > wˆ

(2.2)

Z is a vector of socio-demographic and household specific attributes, pi is the
marginal price of the ith block and mi is the virtual income of the ith block. m2 , the
virtual income of the second block, is defined by equation (2.3):
m 2 = m + (p - p )wˆ

(2.3)

Following Hausman [1979], the quasi indirect utility function implied by this
conditional demand specification is derived by Roy’s identity. The first step links the
specified conditional Marshallian demand from equation (2.1) to the relationship implied
by Roy’s identity in equation (2.4). This sequence describes how the differential
equation given on the right hand side of the equation is related to the empirical demand
function.

−

Vp
Vm

=w=

dm
= α p + δ m + Zγ
dp

(2.4)

Solving this differential equation yields equation (2.5), where c is the constant of
integration:

α Zγ ⎞
⎛α
m = ce −δ p ⎜ p + 2 +
δ
δ ⎟⎠
⎝δ

(2.5)

As a rule, initial conditions help to relate c to the other factors that may influence
the quantity demanded and also serve to provide the utility index. For our purposes,

6

without loss of generality, we can write the expression for of the indirect utility function
implied by this demand using equation (2.6)5:

α
α Zγ ⎞
⎛
V ( p, m) = e −δ p ⎜ m + p + 2 +
δ
δ
δ ⎟⎠
⎝

(2.6)

A part of Hausman’s argument for the model noted that the log likelihood
function can be defined from the conditional demand functions. Thus, it is possible to
recover parameter estimates for (2.6) using the conditional demand given in equation
(2.1). It relies on the restriction of a common conditional demand specification for all
facets of the budget constraint. Moreover, it restricts the demand parameters to be equal
across all blocks. The estimator resembles one for interval censored data, adjusted to
reflect the effect of block choice on the implied virtual income (i.e. actual income
adjusted by the difference between what would be implied if all units consumed were
priced at the marginal price implied by the selected price block and what each household
actually pays as we have described in equation (2.3)). What is important about this logic
is that it would appear that the estimated parameters of the conditional demand function
contain sufficient information for welfare measurement when they are used in the scheme
outlined by Reiss and White. However, this suggestion overlooks the importance of the
assumption that conditional demand functions “look just like” unconditional demand
functions aside from the adjustment to the income term. We can investigate the
importance by examining the Reiss-White proposal in more detail.

B.
5

Welfare Analysis with the DCC Model

The direct utility function implied by equation is:

⎛ δ⎛
α
U ( w, x) = exp ⎜ − ⎜ w +
δ
⎝ α⎝

⎛ 2 ⎛ x ⎞⎞
⎛ δ ⎛α
⎞⎞
⎞⎞⎛ w α ⎞
⎟ ⎟ exp ⎜ δ ⎜ ⎟ ⎟ exp ⎜ ⎜ + Z γ ⎟ ⎟ ⎜ + 2 ⎟
⎠⎠
⎠⎠⎝ δ δ ⎠
⎝ ⎝ α ⎠⎠
⎝α ⎝ δ

7

A key conclusion of the earlier work discussing problems with applied welfare
analysis in the presence of nonlinear budget constraints is that with a nonlinear budget
constraint, the Marshallian “prices as parameters” demand function (or labor supply
function) does not exist! Bockstael and McConnell [1983] made this point in discussing
the implications of the household production function (HPF) framework for applied
welfare analysis. Reiss and White’s [2006] might seem to have proposed a resolution to
the problem. However, their derivation of welfare measures with nonlinear prices relies
on the ability to assume the existence of what appears to be an ordinary Marshallian
demand function that can be integrated back to quasi-expenditure function. The resulting
compensated demand is then used with the marginal price function to develop the welfare
measures. This marginal price function helps in describing the path of price change.
Reconciling the two disparate arguments requires understanding the role for the
assumed properties of the “Marshallian” demands defined for each value of the marginal
price. Marginal prices can be continuous in the household production case considered by
Bockstael and McConnell or they can change discretely for the kinked budget constraint
due to block rate pricing. It is this relationship that is giving rise to the nonlinearity in the
budget constraint.6 As Bockstael and McConnell demonstrate in note #1 (p. 810) with a
general nonlinear budget constraint, the features of preferences and nature of the
constraint are scrambled. In their example, each of the marginal cost functions will imply
a different slope for the Marshallian demand function. Reiss and White’s argument
requires that there exists a single Marshallian demand that describes how quantity

6

It also influences the relationship between the sum of the quasi expenditure function and the infra
marginal expenditure adjustment to derive the unobserved arguments needed for the Hicksian welfare
measure in the Reiss and White [2006] framework. See 10-11 for their discussion.

8

demand changes for each marginal price.7 This is essentially the same as what is being
assumed in the DCC framework. We must assume preferences are consistent with an
identical conditional demand for all price facets of the kinked budget constraint.
This requirement stands in contrast with conclusions from the literature on the
econometrics of kinked budget constraints that appear much more general in their scope.
For example, Hausman [1979] has argued that demand (or supply) functions can be
estimated without instrumental variables or a weighted average of prices. Roy’s identity,
together with the convexity of the budget set, assure that the choice of segment and the
quantity demanded can be based solely on the “demand functions.”8
The DCC framework describes the unconditional demand in a two step
framework. A conditional demand function is used to describe both the choice of the
“best” price segment on the kinked budget constraint as well as the quantity demanded,
given the marginal price and virtual income implied by the first selection. The
framework uses the logic implied by analytical (or numerical) solution to the differential
equation defined by Roy’s identity to compute the correct response in quantity demanded
to a movement along one segment of the faceted budget constraint. However, as Reiss
and White make clear, this result requires the assumption that a common (across facets)

7

Following Edelfsen [1981] it is possible to define a relationship (correspondence) between the marginal
price/cost implied by the nonlinear constraint for each value of this partial derivative and in principle
numerically implements the Reiss-White logic. At each of the steps of the process, define the Marshallian
relationship for that marginal price, apply a Vartian approximation and solve the implied extension to Reiss
and White’s two equation framework for a specific marginal price and utility level. A comparable issue
arises with hedonic models and the definition of “demand” functions for the characteristics of
heterogeneous goods. See Brown and Rosen [1982], Mendelsohn [1985] and Palmquist [2005] for
discussion
8
In the context of a labor supply framework, Hausman [1980] develops this conclusion directly citing his
earlier result and concludes “… an econometric model of both labor force participation and labor supply
can be based solely on a labor supply equation specification. Neither the direct not indirect utility function
is needed” (p.165) This same argument has been applied to consumer demand models where decisions
about budget segment and amount demanded parallel the choice of participation and extent of work in the
labor supply literature.

9

Marshallian conditional demand exists and describes demand responses correctly for all
the marginal prices.
This logic has been applied in modeling water and electricity demands. In these
cases, the demand is also conditional to another set of choices that are usually assumed to
be made prior to the utilization decisions giving rise to water (or, in a similar context,
electricity) usage patterns. As a rule, these cases involve equipment or durables
associated with residence. Once we acknowledge that large changes in water price
structures would influence these types of decisions then we must consider whether the
envelope condition associated with re-evaluating commitments contains sufficient
information to derive the associated “long run” demand response. In general, we cannot
be assured it will!
To the extent the nature of the price schedule affects decisions to install pools or
adopt different types of residential landscapes; those effects cannot be detected with the
estimates derived from the DCC framework. The DCC logic assumes the responses to
changes in the implied marginal price along with the infra-marginal expenditure
adjustment is all that is needed to “predict” the optimal facet for water (or electricity).
One realization of this assumption arises with the model requiring that the form of the
conditional demand function and the values for its unknown parameters are constant
across all facets of the budget constraint.
When we wish to re-design the price schedule in a general setting that assumes
commitments to complementary goods might change, we do not have enough information
to compute the marginal price and expenditure adjustments. These effects are important
because it is often the case that policy makers are selecting higher priced blocks to

10

discourage investments in high consumption complementary goods and therefore, the
associated higher water consumption.

Reiss and White [2006] demonstrate that exact welfare measures can be
derived in nonlinear pricing situations. They propose a four step logic:
(a) estimate ordinary demand functions relating quantity to the
relevant marginal prices at the observe levels of the quantity demanded;9
(b) use these demand functions from (a) to recover the quasiexpenditure function analytically (Hausman [1981]) or numerically
(Vartia [1983]) and derive the corresponding Hicksian demand; (as our
example illustrated)
(c) at the observed quantity demanded, this expression for the
Hicksian demand evaluated at an unknown constant marginal price and
utility level should equal the inverse of the marginal price schedule also
evaluated at this price; and finally,
(d) the initial level of utility realized at the initial nonlinear price
schedule should be consistent with the total expenditures implied by the
price schedule and the virtual income (i.e. Hicksian expenditures

9

This first step is the practical constraint that avoids the numerical approach proposed by Edelfsen and
described in footnote 3. To begin the process, the analyst must have an estimate of the Marshallian demand
function. Without locally constant prices and the assumption of constant parameters across all price
segments, we do not have the requisite demand function Reiss and White assume as a starting point.

11

evaluated at the initial marginal price and utility plus the income
adjustment defined earlier).10
The equations defined by steps (c) and (d) provide two relationships and two
unknowns – the initial marginal price consistent with the utility level realized and the
level for the initial utility.
With these two variables, they demonstrate compensated demand defined in terms
of an artificial constant marginal price can be used. A price schedule change is then
recovered with the initial price and utility as well as the new price. Exact welfare is the
integral under the compensated demand between the two marginal prices corrected by the
change in the adjustment to income.
Reiss and White observe a big advantage of their logic is that:
“… a researcher can begin an empirically satisfactory model for
the ordinary demand function … and then compute exact consumer
surplus under nonlinear prices without having to recover the direct utility
function.” (Reiss and White [2006] p. 12)
The problem with this logic is that it ignores the effects of changes in these
conditional demands when the modifications in the price schedule are large enough to
adjust quasi fixed goods, as we illustrate in the next section.

C.

Complementary Goods

Suppose that Z in equation (2.4) is a measure of the swimming pool or landscape
structure that a household has committed to. It is reasonable to assume there are
complementarities between either of these “goods” and water demand. The compensated
demand response implied by equation (2.5) will consistently describe household
10

This process is consistent with Epstein’s [1981] discussion of consistent application of duality with
nonlinear constraints. See his Theorem 5 and the example of household production functions.

12

responses to changes in the marginal price only if the amount of Z is consistent with
equality of the Marshallian virtual price for Z and the market price. Thus, we should
expect:
VZ
= pZ
Vm

(2.7)

with VZ and Vm the partial derivatives of equation (2.6). Using the quasi indirect utility
function (equation (2.6)) this envelop condition means γ = δ pZ . Substituting we can
write Roy’s identity for long run adjustments as:
−

Vp
Vm

=

dm
= α p + δ ( m + pZ Z )
dp

(2.8)

Suppose, however, the virtual price and market price cannot be assumed to be
equal. In this case, the conditional demand specification for water is not enough
information to describe how water demand would adjust in the long run as there are
opportunities to modify these quasi-fixed commitments. We need some basis for
describing how Z would adjust to changes in p and pZ .11 That is, to recover the full
adjustment to changes in p through the conditional demand, we are implicitly assuming
the response implied by the envelop condition fully characterizes Z’s adjustment.
Solving Roy’s identity uses changes in the water demand and p as well as initial
conditions. It tells us nothing about how Z would adjust to non-local changes in p.

11

This is not a new point. Hausman [1981] noted that we only learn about variations in the own price of
the good with the solution of the differential equation implied by Roy’s identity. As La France and
Hanemann [1989] and von Haefen [2003] document, we need additional assumptions and a line integral for
more price changes.

13

To illustrate, suppose we assumed the demand for Z was also linear and adjusted
in the “long run.”12 Yet the demand given in equation (2.1) is a short run demand for
water. Assume equation (2.9) describes the long run demand for Z. Using the envelop
condition (2.7) and (2.9) we can illustrate why the Reiss-White procedure will not reflect
the complementarities between w and Z.
Z = a + bm + cpZ − dp

(2.9)

Substituting into equation (2.8) for Z and rearranging terms, we have (2.10)
−

Vp
Vm

=

dm
= (α − δ dpZ ) p + δ (1 − bpZ ) m + δ apZ + δ c 2 pZ2
dp

(2.10)

This result illustrates how the long run demand for w would imply that the
marginal effect of p on water demand depends on pZ (i.e. the first term in equation
(2.10)).
We could, as sometimes proposed with another situation involving a nonlinear
budget constraint, assume that the nonlinearity of the conditional demand is sufficient to
identify a role for Z’s adjustment.13 However, what is estimated will be conditional to the
relationship between Z and pZ in the envelop condition.
The DCC model decomposes water demand into two steps, the choice of a best
segment and then, conditional on that selection, a demand response to changes in that
segment’s marginal price, given the adjustment to income required by the increasing
block rate structure. In principle, goods that are complements for water such as
12

Chetty and Szeidl [2007] used this argument in a dynamic setting to explain discrepancies between some
types of behavior and measures of the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Assuming two classes of goods,
food and committed consumption, they demonstrate that the income elasticity of food consumption is
larger, implying greater food consumption response to income shocks with commitments than would be
present without them.
13
This was Brown and Rosen’s [1982] argument. See Palmquist [2005] for further explanation and
Chattopadyay [1999] for an example.

14

swimming pools or landscape systems have demands that depend on the full price
schedule for the water that is utilized with them. Once these commitments are made,
they are quasi-fixed goods that influence the parameters of the Marshallian demand for
water, as our simple example illustrates. Large changes in the price schedule are likely to
change these commitments. They cannot be identified from the short run responses in the
water usage alone. We illustrated this point in very simple terms by using the envelop
condition together with an assumed demand function for one complementary good. The
bottom line is we don’t escape making additional assumptions. The single conditional
demand function is not sufficient.
Arrufat and Zabalza [1986] identify a related issue in describing advantages of
their use of a CES direct utility function to describe labor supply choices. They note that:
“… there are two reasons why, even when dealing with convex
budget sets, it may be convenient to estimate a specific utility index.
First, we may want to use our estimates to predict the effects of
introducing non-convexities in the budget constraint … unless we have at
our disposal an explicit utility index, in either direct or indirect form, we
will not be able to predict behavioral responses to these types of changes
in the opportunity set. Second, and less obvious, if there exist
optimization errors … the conventional measures of welfare change
cannot be inferred from areas under market supply curves (even if
compensated), since neither initial nor final positions will correspond to
tangency positions.” (p.48, emphasis added)
This discussion recognizes that the estimates from the demand model approach
do not permit analysis of large scale reform in pricing (or tax) structures.

III. Model

Our alternative model begins with a specification for the direct utility function.
We believe that this strategy offers a more transparent basis for characterizing

15

relationships between water and the complementary goods that influence how water is
used. This approach relies on a composite of structural restrictions as well as the need to
observe sufficient variation in the price schedules for water along with household
conditions to identify and estimate the parameters of that preference function.
As a practical matter, commodities such as water, electricity and other utilities are
associated with a small fraction of budget. Small price changes in any one of them are
unlikely to induce large re-allocation of income among all goods. This feature of demand
can compound the difficulties in estimating household demand. The effects of small
price changes may primarily induce re-allocation of the expenditures on household
utilities. Recognizing this prospect for estimation of the preference parameters using data
with limited variation in the price structures, we assume utilities enter preferences in a
separable sub-function and treat their expenditures as a fraction of income that varies
with income. Our estimates for this share are based on the Consumer Expenditure
Survey (CES) average for utilities (including water). In 2006, they identified thirteen
different income classes (see BLS [2007]).14
The preference specification describing the choice of utilities corresponds to the
von Haefen et. al [2004] direct utility function and is given in equation (3.1)15
U ( w, x) =

1

ρw

exp( Z δ + ε )(exp(qβ ) w + θ ) ρω +

1

ρx

x ρx

(3.1)

14

Our sample is composed of average consumption levels and there are no area specific measures of these
expenditure shares at the level of census data. To account for differences with income we use the census
measures of household income for each water provider’s service area along with the CES to assign one of
thirteen different values for the expenditure share ranging from about .068 to .108.
15
This is based on Hanemann’s [1984] earlier proposed model for generalized corner solution model.

16

If we assume the expenditure on this component of a household’s budget is

m = sy (with s equal to a value based on household income), then we can embed the
budget constraint into the utility function. As in equation (3.2):

U ( w) =

1

ρw

exp( Z δ + ε )(exp(qβ ) w + θ ) ρω +

1

ρx

(m − c( w)) ρ x

(3.2)

m − c( w) corresponds to a household’s virtual expenditures on the other
components of utilities and will depend on the block rate structure faced by each
household (see Hewitt and Hanemann [1995] for a detailed discussion). Z is a matrix of

socio-demographic variables, q is matrix of water specific attributes such as lot size, and
presence of a pool, θ is a demand shift parameter (e.g. similar to a threshold consumption
in a Stone-Geary specification) that also contains the identification of summer vs. winter
time span, and ρω and ρx are substitution parameters.16 The complementary goods
(treated as quasi-fixed commitments) enter the utility function as part of a scaling
function. This is consistent with the utilization logic described earlier. By specifying the
direct utility function, we include the equivalent of the information that would be needed
in the set of long run demands for complementary goods. The expression, exp(qβ ) w + θ ,
can be considered as a quality adjusted, or quantity augmentation based on prior
commitments, measure for the use of water. The first of these interpretations is similar to
that of von Haefen et al. [2004] in a recreation application.
Further intuition for these parameters, can be offered by recognizing that this
function is a variation on Mukerji’s [1963] constant ratio of elasticity of substitution
function. The Hanemann-Von Haefen et al. function can be derived using a monotonic

16

These two parameters implicitly allow for complementary or substitute relationships between the
quantity of water consumed and these other goods.

17

transformation of the Mukerji generalization of the CES function. This re-casting of the
model allows Smith’s[1974] derivation of the price and income elasticities implied by
this function to be used to describe local responsiveness within budget segments and thus
to compare the estimates implied by the function with what has been derived using
conditional demand functions within a DCC framework.17
The estimating equation for the model’s parameters uses the first order condition
for the local optimization component of the household’s budget and is given in equation
(3.3):
exp( Z δ + ε ) exp(qβ )(exp(qβ ) w + θ ) ρω −1 + c '( w)(m − c( w)) ρ x −1 = 0

(3.3)

It is able to include the implications of the kinked budget constraint by defining mi as the
virtual available income for utilities in block i and pi the relevant marginal price. The
expression is conditional on the block selected. Water demand, price, and expenditures
on remaining utilities (i.e. mi − pi w ) are all endogenous variables. Taking natural
logarithms of (3) and re-arranging terms, yields equation (3.4).
ln( pi ) = Z δ + qβ + ( ρ w − 1) ln(exp(q β ) w + θ ) + (1 − ρ x ) ln(mi − pi w) + ε

(3.4)

ε can be assumed to correspond to either optimization error or unobserved household
heterogeneity.
Our analysis does not confront the issues associated with choice at the kinks of
the budget constraint versus tangencies to a facet. As we discuss below, the use of
consumption for an “average” household implies that all choices can be interpreted as
tangencies with optimization errors that are on average zero. Our framework uses GIS

17

An analysis of the responses to changes in the full price schedule is also possible and would require
simulating the constrained optimization for different price schedules. This is outside the scope of this
paper.

18

methods to intersect water service provider service areas with Census block areas for
Maricopa County as well as with the parcel records for residential properties. These
variables characterize water providers’ customers. They are used to define instruments
for the quantity of water demanded and virtual expenditures.

19

IV. Data
A. Background

Ideally, our model (and the DCC specification) would be applied with
household level data. These data are generally not in the public domain. When studies
have had access to micro data they often span wide geographic domains with quite
different patterns of water use or they have very limited price variation. Olmstead et al.
[2007] is an example of the first situation and Pint [1999], the second.
We illustrate our model and compare it to the DCC framework using data that are
consistently in the public domain. These data are based on average household water
usage for residential customers in each of a set of water providers. We exploit the
variation in price schedules and construct the bill that would have resulted for a
household with this water usage for each provider. Thus, our example considers a
potentially important issue that is secondary to the main objective of the paper. That is,
we investigate whether differences in modeling assumptions between a preference based
formulation and the DCC model can be detected with relatively “coarse” aggregate data.

B. Data Sources

The Phoenix Active Management Area is shown in Figure 1 and corresponds to
approximately the northern two-thirds of Maricopa County. It encompasses all of what
would be considered the Phoenix Metropolitan area. The data for our application were
collected from a variety of sources. The 2005 price schedule for each water service
provider is reported by the Arizona Water Infrastructure Financing Authority. Table 1
summarizes the features of these price schedules. The first panel highlights the variation

20

in the price schedule across providers. Each element in the table displays the range of
marginal prices (per thousand gallons) for each block. The second panel provides the
average width of the blocks across the uniform, two, three and four block schedules. Each
is measured in gallons.
Information on aggregate single family consumption in 2005 and number of
single family customers was obtained from imaged records of the Arizona Department of
Water Resources’ Schedule F available for monthly water consumption by residence
type. These data allow construction of water used by an “average” single family
residential consumer. Based on that monthly water consumption and each provider’s
price schedule we can recover measures for their marginal price and expenditures on
water. These two datasets provide 516 provider/month observations for water
consumption and price schedule information.
Census data for 2000 were adapted to conform to the service areas of each of the
providers to construct measures of expenditures on utilities as well as other economic and
demographic variables characterizing their customers. This was accomplished by
intersecting the Census block groups with the water service provider areas.18 Average
household income together with the CES schedule of the proportions of income spent on
utilities by income class was used to construct the total expenditures on utilities for each
area. The parcel records from the Maricopa County Assessor were used to develop
summary statistics for housing measures at the Census block group level and ultimately

18

The construction of the demographic information required intersecting the service provider areas with the
census block groups. Two statistics were defined: (1) the percentage of each block group contained in the
service provider area; and (2) the percentage of the service provider area contained in each of the block
groups. The first was used to aggregate census variables describing distributions (e.g. income, race, etc.)
and the second for summary statistics such as means or medians

21

intersected with water service provider areas. This allows measurement of the percentage
of households with pools located in a given service provider area. To control for climatic
conditions monthly data on cooling degree days with a 65° baseline and total
precipitation during the month were obtained from the National Climatic Data Center of
NOAA for the Phoenix Sky Harbor Airport station.
There are approximately 60 water service providers that serve the Phoenix
Metropolitan area. Of these, 43 have complete records for residential customers in single
family dwellings. The first panel of Table 2 provides some summary statistics for the
demographic characteristics for the residential customers across providers. The second
panel in the table summarizes the variation in temperature and precipitation across the
months in our sample. The majority of the water service providers that we eliminated are
simply irrigation districts that may provide water to a few households usually at a fixed
cost. 19
As with most water studies such as Hewitt and Hanemann [1995] and Olmstead et
al. [2007], we are exploiting structural restrictions inherent in our model as well as the
variation across water service providers in price schedules, socio-demographic, and
housing characteristics to identify the model’s parameters. All of these water service
providers are in the Phoenix metropolitan area. There is no variation in linked weather
conditions across water service providers because they are derived from a single weather
station. Weather related variables vary with the month of consumption.

19

The only other reason a provider was deleted from consideration stemmed from the fact that they are not
required to report monthly consumption. The size of the water service provider’s service area determines
these reporting requirements.

22

V. Results

We present the estimates for the DCC model as well as our proposed alternative
framework. The findings for our model are presented first. Our alternative framework
does need to consider endogeneity of price, water consumption, and net income. Two
estimators are considered for our model. The first develops instruments for the log of the
average household’s expenditures on other utilities (taking account of the implications of
the block pricing structure for the virtual income available) and the average water
consumption by month using the predictions from first stage regression models that
include temperature degree days, total monthly precipitation, the percentage of houses
with pools, the average house value (as assessed by homeowners in the census), total
number of lots in the service area, and number of rental units. These GIS constructed
variables compromise the instruments in the first estimator. A simple model with fixed
effects for each water service providers together with the weather variables is the second.
The first stage estimates for the first of these estimators are given in Table 3.
The estimates for the preference model parameters using each of the two sets of
instruments are given in Table 4. Both models specify the Z matrix as composed of a
vector of ones (for an intercept), our temperature measure, and the number of customers
the water service provider serves. q contains the percentage of pools in the service
provider area; and θ contains a constant and dummy variables identifying whether the
monthly consumption was during the summer and winter periods.20 The shoulder period
between summer and winter is the omitted category. We estimate equation (3.4) using
non-linear least squares with each set of instruments.

20

Summer is defined as June, July, August and September where as winter is defined as December,
January, February and March.

23

The estimates based on the demographic, economic, and weather variable
instruments yield more precise results for the model. With instruments based on the
provider fixed effects we find the model attributes all the price variation to the provider
effects. This is important because differences in the price schedules along with the
variation in the average household’s water consumption in each provider’s residential
customer class provide the variation in marginal prices. With provider fixed effects used
to define instruments it appears that the variation in the price schedule is being captured
completely by these variables. As a result, it is not surprising that the parameter
estimates are not significant. A Hausman [1978] specification test decisively rejects the
fixed effects specification (χ2 = 115.83 with p-value = 0.00).21
To evaluate these estimates further, we computed the price and “utilities
expenditures” elasticities at the sample mean for the price of water and for the virtual
utilities expenditures. These results are given in panel A of Table 5. Below each estimate
we report the Z-statistic based on the asymptotic standard errors. In addition, we
computed the elasticity for each month and water provider. A summary of these results is
given in panel B –with the mean, median and the minimum and maximum values across
the providers in the summer months.
There are several caveats in interpreting these estimates. These measures are not
the estimates that would be implied with a change in the structure of the increasing block
rate structure. They apply to local changes. Our approach recovers estimates of all the
preference parameters that would be required to derive a response to a large change in the
price structure. Indeed, this is a key motivation for the model. We report these local

21

We conducted this test with and without the intercept and the results in both cases favor the model using
the GIS constructed instruments over that based on provider fixed effects.

24

price and expenditure elasticities because they are comparable to most of the literature
and are more comparable to the elasticities implied by the conditional demands estimated
with the DCC framework.22 In our case, measures of the demand responses to large
changes require computation of the solutions to the constrained optimization problems
associated with a baseline price structure and the proposed change.
Our estimates are also conditioned by the maintained separability assumption we
discussed at the outset. This restriction influences how the estimates can be compared
with findings from the existing literature. For the income elasticity, the relationship is
straightforward, provided we interpret the response to an income change as a marginal
change to a pre-existing optimal water consumption choice. σ wy = σ wsσ sy , with σ wy the
conventional income elasticity of demand; σ ws the utilities expenditure elasticity (i.e.
what we estimated); and σ sy the elasticity of the composite of utilities expenditures with
respect to household income. Using estimates for σ sy from the literature, we can adapt the
results in Table 4 to develop a measure of the income elasticity implied by our findings.
For example, Blanciforti and Green [1983] report an estimate of σ sy =0.62.23 This
implies our estimate for the income elasticity of demand for water using the measures for

σ ws of 0.63 (i.e. 0.62 * 1.02)
The price elasticities also require some adjustment ( σ wp = η wp − σ wsσ mp ) where

η wp is our estimate for the price elasticity, holding the utilities expenditures constant and
22

In their appendix, Olmstead et al. document the simulation methods used to develop measures for
elasticities for the unconditional demand.
23
More recently Taylor [2005] has estimated income elasticities using the consumer expenditure survey.
His results range from 0.31-0.42 for 1999 cross specifications for a category he designates as utilities.
Water is not separately identified in the ACCRA price indexes he uses with the expenditure survey. Water
expenditure are included in the consumer expenditure survey. So strictly speaking his price index fails to
reflect the covariation in their prices

25

σ mp is the elasticity of these expenditures with respect to the price of water, holding
income constant. Since we are expressing the price elasticities as in absolute magnitudes
these expressions imply the comparable “unconditional” price elasticity would be smaller
than our estimates.24
As noted at the outset, we estimated the DCC model using a constant elasticity
specification of the conditional demand function to compare our results. We follow
Hewitt and Hanemann [1995], Waldman [2000] and Olmstead et al. [2007] in our
structuring of the model. Table 6 shows two sets of parameter estimates for DCC model
–using the expenditure on utilities as the income measure in the first column and average
income in the second. Several aspects of the results should be noted. First, applications
of the DCC model to date have used micro data. Our findings that the variance of the
optimization error is larger than the unobserved heterogeneity ( σ η > σ ε ), are likely due to
the structure of our data. Second, the price elasticity for the conditional demand elasticity
is comparable in magnitude to our estimate of the local elasticity using the preference
model. However, there is a striking difference in the income elasticity estimates. Under
the DCC model, there is an insignificant income effect. By contrast, our estimates of the
income elasticity using the preference function are close to unity.
Comparisons of the local price elasticity measures (in Table 5) from our
preference model compared to the conditional elasticity estimates with the DCC model
indicate that they are quite consistent. While a statistical test for the difference between
these estimates is not possible, their relative proximity suggest, for practical purposes,

24

We were unable to locate estimates of the responsiveness of utility expenditures to the price of water do
not appear to have been developed.

26

they would not imply differences in local responsiveness to small changes in price. This
is not surprising since the two models are describing “average” responsiveness.
The important feature of our proposed method is the ability to recover the
structural parameters required for evaluating large scale changes. Indeed, with micro
data and greater detail on swimming pools, landscape infrastructure and variables
describing other large water using capital decisions we could relax the assumption that
the share of expenditures on utilities varies on with income and expand the range of
structural parameters estimated with the framework.

VI. Summary and Implications

This paper argues that the conventional approach for analyzing commodity
demand in the presence of kinked budget constraints cannot evaluate the implications of
large changes in the pricing structure for water. Moreover, it relies on the assumption of
a constant conditional demand function across different marginal price segments in an
increasing block rate structure. We proposed an alternative that uses a preference
specification as the primitive in estimation. It allows us to consider welfare changes to
large scale changes in the price structure. The data available for our application, while
comparable to the most common information available for characterizing water demand,
describes the “average” response rather than the individual household response.
Aggregate data for all residential customers served by 43 water service providers in the
Phoenix area are used to estimate our preference based model and a version of the DCC
model.

27

An application to the “average” residential customer based on aggregate data is of
interest because these data are what is readily available for most water demand
applications. To date, the DCC model has been exclusively associated with applications
with access to extensive household level water consumption data as well as sufficient
price variation to recover demand responsiveness. When these data do not exist, policy
analysts are forced to adapt existing (and often old estimates) to describe how
household’s water demand responds to changes in the block rate pricing structure.
Our strategy exploits the economic and demographic diversity of households
along with GIS techniques to characterize the demographic and economic features of the
spatially delineated service areas for the water providers included in our sample. In
addition, rather than derive an estimator that uses the preference function to predict the
facet of the budget constraint selected and then the amount of the commodity demanded,
we focus on developing instruments for the choice variables and estimating parameters of
the separable sub-function of preferences. With detailed micro records, our framework
could be extended using the two error framework and logic comparable to Zabalza’s
work to develop a maximum likelihood estimator. These are the types of estimates
needed to address the challenge of designing price structures that encourage water
conservation by reflecting the full costs of complementary, water using, capital goods.

28

Table 1: Summary of Price Schedules in the PAMA
Range of Prices by Price Structure
Schedule Providers
Service
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Charge
(average)
Uniform
7
14.49
1.75-2.86
Two
13
12.43
0-4.10
0.35-3.00
Block
Three
20
12.31
0-6.80
0.68-10.2
1.00-12.30
Block
Four
3
13.41
0
1.26-1.68
1.59-2.54
Block
Average Block Width by Price Structure in gallons
Providers
Block 1
Block 2
Uniform
7
Two
13
7267
Block
Three
20
6115
12335
Block
Four
3
2333
6333
Block

Block 4

2.04-3.05

Block 3

10000

Table 2: Summary Statistics for Socio-Demographic and Weather Variables
Summary Statistics for Socio-demographic variables
Variable
Mean
Mean Income
(2000 dollars)
74932.56
Number
Customers
22540.79
Average
Consumption
(gallons)
13721.19
Percentage Pools
0.2155752
Mean House
Value (2000
dollars)
164898.2
Total Residential
Lots
25235.86
Total Rental Units
7121.07
Summary of Weather Variables
Variable
Temperature
(Cooling degree
days)
Precipitation (cm)

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

41385.67

36938.75

213128.3

58141.49

20

365499

11705.32
0.1883112

2530.141
0.0375906

110690.5
0.8913924

111843.6

54761.38

539851.4

75519.2
28172.17

8.266092
0.0333717

486640.1
183255.1

Mean
392.4167

Std. Dev.
363.2004

Min
0

Max
1005

58.66667

91.56129

0

301

29

Table 3: First stage regression of expenditures and water consumption

Parameter
Constant
Temperature
Precipitation
% pools
House value
Total Lots
Rental Units
R2
a

Expendituresa
5.84
(401)
(-3.90 × 10-5)
(-2.20)
4.16 × 105
(0.59)
.694
(8.00)
7.59 × 10-7
(7.16)
2.47 × 10-6
(5.16)
-5.70 × 10-6
(-4.46)
0.76

Watera
4086
(4.45)
8.62
(7.38)
-10.40
(-2.24)
28279
(4.94)
0.00809
(1.16)
-0.0979
(-3.10)
0.231
(2.75)
0.40

The number in parentheses is the t-statistic.

30

Table 4: Estimates of Utilities Sub-functiona

Parameterb

Zconstant
ZTemp
Zno cust
qpools
θconstant
θsummer
θwinter
ρwater
ρnumeraire (utilities other
than water)

a

Provider
Households
(1)
-19.48
(-5.24)
-.65 × 10-4
(-0.52)
5.76 × 10-7
(1.91)
-3.08
(-7.08)
-1088.48
(-1.08)
314.03
(0.28)
1119.53
(1.87)
.41
(2.35)
2.94
(5.46)

Fixed Effects
(2)
-73.38
(-0.18)
.20 × 10-3
(0.30)
1.70 × 10-7
(0.58)
.14
(0.50)
-2746.21
(-0.05)
278.58
(0.08)
903.84
(0.23)
.51
(0.10)
11.75
(0.20)

The number in parentheses are the z-statistics for the null hypothesis of no association. The
estimates were derived with non-linear least squares, replacing expenditures net of water and water demand
with instruments.
b
ZTemp is cooling degree days that roughly corresponds to the effects of temperature on the growth
of grasses, Zno cust is the number of customers in the service provider area, qpools is the percentage of
residential lots with pools in the service provider area, θsummer and θwinter are dummy variables for months in
the summer and winter, respectively, with the shoulder periods between winter and summer as the omitted
category.

31

Table 5: Estimated Price and "Income" Elasticities

A. Computed elasticities at the mean value of water and utility expendituresa
Elasticity
Provider Households
Fixed Effects
(1)
(2)
Summer
Winter
Summer
Winter
Own price
0.41
0.38
.165
.125
(absolute
(7.25)
(6.38)
(0.74)
(0.50)
magnitude)
Utility
1.01
1.02
1.01
1.02
Expenditure
(1970)
(1037)
(510)
(269)
Income
0.62
0.62
0.62
0.62
B. Computed elasticities for each provider – summary for summer monthsb
Own price (absolute magnitude)
Mean
.404
.158
Median
.398
.154
Min
.341
.103
Max
.365
.302
Utility Expenditure
Mean
1.017
1.032
Median
1.013
1.014
Min
1.004
1.004
Max
1.073
1.028
a

The number in parentheses are the z-statistics for the null hypothesis of no association.
The first column corresponds to estimates using the model with instruments based on economic
and demographic characteristics of each provider service area. The second column uses the provider fixed
effects as instruments
b

32

Table 6: DCC Model Estimates

Parameter
σε
ση
Intercept
Price
Income
Temperature
Precipitation
% pools
Number of
Observations

Estimated
Estimated
Coefficient
Coefficient
with variable
without income
income sharea
sharea
0.0923
0.1803
(3.407)
(1.509)
0.4091
0.3808
(16.619)
(6.655)
2.7168
2.5688
(10.430)
(6.666)
-0.4790
-0.4913
(-5.631)
(-5.281)
-0.0283
-0.0043
(-0.713)
(-0.107)
0.1839
0.1836
(37.165)
(36.813)
-0.1895
-0.1897
(-39.249)
(-38.946)
0.4419
0.4130
(1.700)
(1.494)
516

516

a

The number in parentheses is the asymptotic t-statistic
for the null hypothesis of no association.

33

Figure 1: Water Service Providers in the Phoenix AMA

34

References
Arrufat, J.L. and A. Zabalza (1986), “Female Labor Supply with Taxation,
Random Preferences and Optimization Errors” Econometrica 54(1), 47-63.
Blanciforti, Laura and Richard Green (1983), “An Almost Ideal Demand
System Incorporating Habits: An Analysis of Expenditures on Food and
Aggregate Commodity Groups” The Review of Economics and Statistics 65(3),
511-515.
Bockstael, Nancy E. and Kenneth E. McConnell (1983), “Welfare
Measurement in the Household Production Framework” American Economic
Review 73 (4), 806-814.
Brown, J.N. and A.S. Rosen (1982), “On the Estimation of Structural
Price Models” Econometrica 50 (3), 765-768.
Bullock, David S. and Nicholas Minot (2006), “On Measuring the Value
of a Non-Market Good using Market Data,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 88(4):961-973.
Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007), “Consumer Expenditures in 2005,”
Report 998 U.S. Department of Labor.
Chattopadhyay, Sudip (1999), “Estimating the Demand for Air Quality:
New Evidence Based on the Chicago Housing Market,” Land Economics 75(Feb):
22-38.
Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl (2007), “Consumption Commitments and
Risk Preferences” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(2), 831-877.
Edlefsen, Lee E. (1981), “The Comparative Statics of Hedonic Price
Functions and Other Nonlinear Constraints,” Econometrica 49(6): 1501-1521.
Epstein, Larry G. (1981), “Generalized Duality and Integrability,”
Econometrica 49(May): 655-678.
Hanak, Ellen and Ada Chen (2007), “Wet Growth: Effects of Water Policy
on Land Use in the American West,” Journal of Regional Science 47(1): 85-108.
Hanemann, W. Michael (1984), “Discrete-Continuous Models of
Consumer Demand” Econometrica 52(3), 541-561.
Hausman, Jerry A. (1978), “Specification Tests in Economics”
Econometrica 52 (5), 1219-1240.

35

Hausman, Jerry A. (1979), “The Econometrics of Labor Supply on
Convex Budget Sets” Economics Letters 3, 171-174.
Hausman, Jerry A. (1980) “The Effect of Wages, Taxes, and Fixed Costs
on Women’s Labor Force Participation” Journal of Public Economics 14, 161194.
Hewitt, Julie and Michael Hanemann (1995), “A Discrete-Continuous
Choice Approach to Residential Water Demand under Block Rate Pricing,” Land
Economics 71(2), 173-192.
La France, Jeffrey T. and W. Michael Hanemann (1989), “The Dual
Structure of Incomplete Demand Systems,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics 76(2): 262-274.
Mansur, Erin and Sheila Olmstead (2006), “The Value of Scarce Water:
Measuring the Inefficiencies in Municipal Regulations,” Working Paper.
Mendelsohn, Robert (1985), “Identifying Structural Equations with Single
Market Data” Review of Economics and Statistics 67(3), 525-529.
Moffitt, Robert (1986), “The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget
Constraints: A Survey and Exposition of the Maximum Likelihood Method,”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4(3): 317-328.
Mukerji, V. (1963), “A Generalized S.M.A.C. Function with Constant
Ratio of Elasticity of Substitution,” The Review of Economic Studies 30(3): 233236.
Olmsted, Sheila M., W. Michael Hanemann and Robert N. Stavins (2007),
“Water Demand Under Alternative Price Structures” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 54(2): 181-198.
Palmquist, Raymond B. (2005) “Property Value Models” in Karl-Goran
Maler and Jeffrey R. Vincent, editors, Handbook of Environmental Economics,
Volume 2
(Amsterdam: North Holland) pp 764-839.
Reiss, Peter C. and Matthew W. White (2006), “Evaluating Welfare with
Nonlinear Prices,” NBER Working Paper No. 12370, July.
Smith, V. Kerry (1974), "Inter-temporal Production Externalities,
Technical Change, and Public Expenditure Analysis," Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 1(August):121-131.

36

Taylor, Lester (2005), “Price and Income Elasticities Estimates from BLS
Consumer Expenditure Surveys and ACCRA Price Data,” Cardon Research
Papers in Agricultural and Resource Economics, Discussion Paper 2004-14,
University of Arizona, revised May 2005.
The Economist, “Not Any Drop to Drink,” December 8, 2007, p. 41.
U.S. News and World Report, “Why Should You Worry About Water”
June 4, 2007, p. 37-53.
Vartia, Yrjo O. (1983), “Efficient Methods of Measuring Welfare Change
and Compensated Income in Terms of Ordinary Demand Functions,”
Econometrica 51(1):79-98.
von Haefen, Roger H. (2002), “A Complete Characterization of the
Linear, Log-Linear and Semi-Log Incomplete Demand System Models,” Journal
of Agricultural and Resource Economics 27(December): 281-319.
von Haefen, Roger H., Daniel J. Phaneuf and George R. Parsons (2004).
“Estimation and Welfare Analysis with Large Demand Systems,” Journal of
Business and Economic Statistics, 22(2), 194-205.
Waldman, Donald M. (2000). “A Discrete/ Continuous Choice Approach
to Residential Water Demand under Block Rate Pricing: Comment.” Land
Economics 76(2): 322-323.
Zabalza, A. (1983) “The CES Utility Function, Non-Linear Budget
Constraints and Labor Supply. Results on Female Participation and Hours” The
Economic Journal 93 (June), 312-330.
Zabalza, A. and J.L. Arrufat (1988), “Efficiency and Equity Effects of
Reforming the British System of Direct Taxation: a Utility-based Simulation
Methodology” Economica 55(Feb), 21-45.

37

