                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TEACHER PREPARATION AND STUDENT ACHIEVEMENT

                                            Donald Boyd
                                          Pamela Grossman
                                          Hamilton Lankford
                                            Susanna Loeb
                                           James Wyckoff

                                        Working Paper 14314
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14314


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




We are grateful to the New York City Department of Education and the New York State Education
Department for the data employed in this paper. We benefited particularly from insights and help
from Carla Asher, Vicki Bernstein, Marilyn Cochrane-Smith, David Cohen, Ronald Ehrenberg, Jennifer
Bell-Ellwanger, Robert Floden, Nicholas Michelli, Richard Murnane, Edward Silver, and Ana Maria
Villegas. We appreciate financial support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York, City University
of New York, the National Science Foundation, the Spencer Foundation and the National Center for
the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research (CALDER). CALDER is supported by IES
Grant R305A060018 to the Urban Institute. We are also grateful for the exceptional research assistance
provided by Marsha Ing, Luke Miller, Maria Perez, and Matt Ronfeldt, as well as Karen Hammerness,
Morva McDonald, and Michelle Reininger. The views expressed in the paper are solely those of the
authors and may not reflect those of the funders or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any
errors are attributable to the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Donald Boyd, Pamela Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Teacher Preparation and Student Achievement
Donald Boyd, Pamela Grossman, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 14314
September 2008
JEL No. I20,I21,I28,J24,J45

                                                ABSTRACT

There are fierce debates over the best way to prepare teachers. Some argue that easing entry into teaching
is necessary to attract strong candidates, while others argue that investing in high quality teacher preparation
is the most promising approach. Most agree, however, that we lack a strong research basis for understanding
how to prepare teachers. This paper is one of the first to estimate the effects of features of teachers'
preparation on teachers' value-added to student test score performance in math and English Language
Arts. Our results indicate variation across preparation programs in the average effectiveness of the
teachers they are supplying to New York City schools. In particular, preparation directly linked to
practice appears to benefit teachers in their first year.


Donald Boyd                                            Susanna Loeb
The Center for Policy Research                         524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
University of Albany                                   Stanford University
135 Western Ave.                                       Stanford, CA 94305
Albany, NY 12222                                       and NBER
boydd@rockinst.org                                     sloeb@stanford.edu

Pamela Grossman                                        James Wyckoff
School of Education                                    Curry School of Education
Stanford University                                    University of Virginia
Stanford, CA 94305                                     P.O. Box 400277
pamg@stanford.edu                                      Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277
                                                       wyckoff@virginia.edu
Hamilton Lankford
School of Education, ED 317
University at Albany
State University of New York
Albany, NY 12222
hamp@albany.edu
I.      Introduction

        There are fierce debates over the best way to prepare teachers to improve outcomes for the

students they teach. Some argue that easing entry into teaching is necessary to attract strong

candidates (U.S. Department of Education, 2002). Others argue that investing in high quality

teacher preparation will better serve our nation’s children (NCTAF, 1996). Even among those who

believe that high quality preparation is important, there are sharp contrasts concerning the best

approach (Levine, 2006). Most agree, however, that we lack a strong research basis for

understanding how to prepare teachers to meet the challenges of urban schools (c.f. Cochran-Smith

& Zeichner, 2005; Wilson, Floden, Ferrini-Mundy, 2001). Lack of evidence creates the opportunity

for a myriad of potential “solutions” regarding teacher preparation and little way to evaluate their

promise. This study is a first step towards developing evidence to inform these debates, looking

carefully at the ways in which teachers are prepared and the consequences of that preparation for

pupil learning.

        Teachers in New York City enter teaching through a variety of pathways, including both

more traditional and alternate routes. Even within these pathways, teachers can receive quite

different preparation opportunities, with this variation existing both between and within institutions

of higher education (Boyd, et al., 2008). Do these differences in the experiences of teachers in

teacher education programs affect the achievement of the students taught by program graduates? If

so, are there aspects of programs that are associated with greater improvements in student

achievement? We explore these questions employing a unique database on teachers, their

preparation, and the students they teach. We combine administrative data on individual teachers

and students in New York City with detailed information about the components of teacher

preparation programs as identified by an analysis of over 30 programs and a survey of all first-year




                                                                                                       1
teachers in New York City. Taken together, these data allow us to explore how the preparation of

teachers who staff a large, diverse, urban school district influences student achievement.



II.     Background

        A large extant research literature on teacher preparation provides some useful information

with which to evaluate effective preparation practices.11 However, much of the research is limited in

scope, focuses on inputs to the preparation process rather than outcomes, uses data that are only

loosely connected to the concepts being examined, or employs case-study methodologies from

which it is difficult to determine causal relationships or generalize to other populations. As a result,

there is still much to learn about effective preparation practices. In their review of the literature,

Wilson, Floden, and Ferrini-Mundy (2001) propose four research elements that would allow future

research to address important gaps in our knowledge regarding teacher preparation.

        •    Studies should compare practices across institutions as a way of identifying effective
                practice.

        •    Studies should examine the relationship between specific components of teacher
                preparation programs and specific outcomes, such as student achievement.

        •    Research should include measures that are sensitive to program content and quality.

        •    Research should have a longitudinal component and examine impacts over time.

This study addresses each of these suggestions. First, we employ a detailed analysis of 31 elementary

teacher preparation programs, each of which contribute a significant number of teachers to New

York City public schools. We include both traditional pathways to teaching and alternate pathways

so as to allow for comparisons within and between each of these routes. Using a survey of first-year


1
 For a very useful summary of the teacher preparation literature, see Wilson, Floden and Ferrini-Mundy (2001).
For other relevant work see Ball and Cohen (1999), Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy (1986),
Cochran-Smith and Zeichner (2005), Darling-Hammond (2000), Darling-Hammond & Bransford (2005), Feiman-
Nemser (1983, 1990), Goodlad (1990), Holmes Group (1986), Levine (2006), Allen (2003), and Wayne and
Youngs, (2003).


                                                                                                                 2
teachers, we also compare the experiences of teachers across all routes serving New York City public

schools, not just those routes for which we collected information from the program directly.

        To address Wilson, Floden, and Ferrini-Mundy’s second point, our analysis includes a

detailed description of the policies and practices of teacher preparation programs. We: 1) analyze

documents describing the structure and content of each preparation program, 2) interview program

directors, directors of field experiences, and other administrative staff of these programs, 3) survey

instructors of math and reading methods courses, and 4) survey program participants and graduates

of these programs. We link this information to each program participant, their career decisions, and

the outcomes for students they teach.

        To address the third point concerning the need to employ outcome measures that are

sensitive to program quality and content, we use the extensive information on program content

through our analysis of program documents, interviews, observations, and survey data. We then link

features of program content to the change in elementary school students’ achievement in math and

reading. Finally, to address Wilson, Floden, and Ferrini-Mundy’s final point about the need for

longitudinal analysis, we follow program participants through their first two years of teaching and

link them to longitudinal data on student achievement.

        A labor market perspective: This study of teacher education observes programs that

prepare teachers for New York City (NYC) schools from what we might term an aerial perspective

(c.f. Boyd, et al., 2006). Such a vantage point has its obvious disadvantages, particularly when it

comes to portraying nuances of individual programs. Our goal, however, is to develop a broader

picture of the terrain of teacher education in a single, large district, portraying, in general, how

teachers are prepared to teach in NYC public schools and how variation in this preparation affects

student learning.




                                                                                                         3
        Most prior studies of teacher education have produced case studies of individual programs,

taking a ground-level view of programs that prepare teachers (c.f. Darling-Hammond, 2000;

Goodlad, 1990). Such studies provide detailed analyses of what individual programs, often chosen

on the basis of their reputations, offer students and how they organize opportunities for learning to

teach. However, each program is situated in a broader labor market for teachers; the ability of one

program to attract participants, as well as the effectiveness of the teachers it produces, is likely to be

a function of aspects of the market as well as that program’s offerings. Very few studies of teacher

education have focused on a labor market, investigating the array of preparation programs that

provide teachers to a specific locale.

        The structure of pay; teachers’ preferences for the characteristics of a school’s students; the

geographic segmentation of students by income and race, teachers, leadership, community, and

facilities; and hiring practices including the post-and-fill system of seniority transfers all affect

teachers. Studies that compare programs across the United States might consider how the different

contexts or labor markets affect the preparation programs, but it is quite difficult to adjust for all the

differences. In addition, if we looked at a small handful of programs or programs scattered across

multiple markets, we would not be able to understand how pathways interact to fill the demand for

teachers. How effective one teacher is relative to others in the school depends not only on that

teacher’s skills and preparation, but the skills and preparation of the other teachers. By looking at all

pathways into teaching in New York City and by doing an in-depth analysis of the largest programs

and pathways, we are able to address these interactions.

        We also know that teacher labor markets are small geographically. In 2000, ninety percent of

New York teachers went to high school within 40 miles of their first job and most of these teachers

also attended college very close by (Boyd, Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff, 2005). This confirms

anecdotal accounts that most of New York City’s teachers attended New York City K-12 public



                                                                                                          4
schools, underscoring the importance of understanding and improving the quality of teacher

education received by those going through programs in and around NYC.

         Features of Teacher Education Programs: We look quite broadly at teacher preparation, guided by

the existing research literature in our selection of features of teacher education to study (Boyd, et al.,

2006; Boyd, et al., 2008). We have collected information from a broad variety of sources on five

areas identified as important indicators of program quality: program structure; subject specific

preparation in reading and math; preparation in learning and child development; preparation to

teach racially, ethnically, and linguistically diverse students; and the characteristics of field

experiences (c.f. Cochran-Smith & Zeichner, 2005; Darling-Hammond, Bransford, LePage,

Hammerness, & Duffy, 2005; Valli, Reckase, & Raths, 2003; Wilson, Floden, & Ferrini-Mundy,

2001).

         For this paper, we first estimate differences in the average effectiveness of teachers from

each program as measured by student learning gains in math and English language arts (ELA). We

then look at the relationship between teachers’ value-added in these subjects and the features of

their programs and their experiences. For this later analysis we focus primarily on elements of

preparation that are closely linked to the daily work of teachers in the classroom; reflecting the

perspective that effective professional education is grounded in the practices of the profession (c.f.

Ball & Cohen, 1999). This focus is clearly just a first step in understanding all elements of

preparation, and we do assess the effects of other measures, largely as a comparison. The scope of

possible preparation characteristics is too great to address all in a single paper.

         The use of value-added methodologies to assess teacher effectiveness has both advantages

and disadvantages. Student learning is a logical metric with which to measure the effectiveness of

teaching. However, available measures of student achievement are never perfect indicators of what

students know or what teachers have taught. Researchers have raised concerns about whether these



                                                                                                         5
tests are valid measures of the domains of knowledge that we care about, whether they reliably

measure student learning, and, even if they do, whether they reliably measure the aspects of learning

that teachers affect (see, for examples, Feldt & Brennan, 1989; Messik, 1989). An alternative would

be to analyze how preservice preparation affects teacher behaviors, such as instructional practices

and career decisions, instead of student outcomes. One benefit of this approach is that it eliminates

the need to match teachers to the students they teach. It has the clear disadvantage of not actually

measuring student progress; linkages between teacher behaviors and students needs to be established

separately. A second alternative would be to study student progress employing measures other than

test performance. Unfortunately, such measures typically are not available.

        The three questions driving the analysis are as follows.

        1.      What is the distribution of the average value-added of teachers from different
                preparation programs?

        2.      How do features of those preparation programs affect teachers’ value-added to
                student achievement gains in math and ELA?

        3.      How do teachers’ reported experiences in teacher preparation affect their value
                added?

Establishing causality is rarely easy, especially with non-experimental data. The analyses in this

report are just a first step in this direction, using regression analysis to account for possible biases;

we see our study as the beginning of a larger exploration of the impact of teacher preparation.

Despite the challenges of establishing causal linkages, the results provide evidence that focusing

more on preparation directly linked to practice can produce teachers who are more effective in their

first year of teaching.



III.    Methods

        A number of factors complicate the assessment of the effects of teacher preparation. First,

teaching candidates select their teaching pathway, preparation institution and program. This


                                                                                                            6
selection is important both because of the need to account for it in our assessment of program

effects and because by identifying the features of pathways that attract individuals with the potential

to be great teachers we can recruit more effective teachers.

        Second, different pathways into teaching can lead teachers into schools and classrooms with

different characteristics. For example, some alternative route programs place teachers exclusively in

high-poverty, underachieving schools. Again, this is important for several reasons; first, we must

account for these differences in the matching of teachers to schools if we are to accurately assess the

affect of pathway and program features; and second, if a policy goal is to improve teaching

particularly in these high-needs schools, then it useful to understand the features of programs that

are most effective for supplying good teachers specifically to these schools.

        The study comprises three separate analyses. The first analysis estimates differences in the

average value-added to student learning of teachers from different childhood teacher education

programs providing a substantial number of entering teachers to New York City schools. For this,

we look at value added to student achievement in math and ELA separately, netting out student,

classroom and school influences. The second analysis explores the relationship between student

outcomes and features of those teacher preparation programs, using data collected from programs.

The third analysis examines the relationship between student achievement and teachers’ own reports

of their preparation experiences. Information on teachers’ experiences come from a survey

administered to all first-year NYC public school teachers in the spring of 2005 and, as such, this

analysis is limited to the respondents from this single cohort of teachers.

        The model for estimating program effects is based on the following equation:

        Aijst = β0 + β 1Aijs(t-1) + Xitβ 2 + Cijstβ 3 + Tjstβ 4 + Πj + νs + ε ijst   (1)

Here, the achievement (A) of student i in year t with teacher j in school s is a function of his or her

prior achievement, time-varying and fixed student characteristics (X), characteristics of the


                                                                                                          7
classroom (C), characteristics of the teacher (T), indicator variables (fixed effect) for the childhood

preparation program the teacher completed (Π), a fixed-effect for the school (ν), and a random

error term (ε). Student characteristics include race and ethnicity, gender, eligibility for free or

reduced-price lunch, whether or not the student switched schools, whether English is spoken at

home, status as an English language learner, the number of school absences in the previous year,

and the number of suspensions in the previous year. Classroom variables include the averages of all

the student characteristics, class size, grade, and the mean and standard deviation of student test

scores in the prior year.

        Whether or not to include teacher characteristics depends upon the question at hand. If we

want to know whether teachers from one program are more effective than teachers from another

program then there is no reason to include fixed teacher characteristics, such as certification exam

scores. In fact, the benefit of one program or pathway may come from its ability to recruit and

select high quality candidates. However, if we want to separate selection from preparation aspects

of programs, then it is important to control for teachers’ initial characteristics. These controls are

particularly important for the parts of our analysis that look at the effects of program characteristics

on preparation, as opposed to programs overall. Unfortunately, we have only weak controls for

these initial characteristics, though it is unclear how well any program can do in distinguishing and

then selecting individuals who will be particularly excellent teachers. The teacher characteristics that

we include are age, gender, race and ethnicity, whether they passed their general knowledge

certification exam on the first attempt, and their score on that exam.

        We estimate Equation 1 on multiple samples of childhood education teachers: 2004-05 and

2005-06 first-year teachers, 2000-01 through 2005-06 first-year teachers, and 2000-01 through 2005-

06 second-year teachers. We also estimate models for each of these samples using two definitions of

programs. The first examines childhood-education teachers aggregated by pathway and institution.


                                                                                                          8
For example, teachers who obtained childhood-education certification through the college-

recommended pathway after attending CUNY Brooklyn would be in one group; those from

Teachers College, in another group; and those from Teach for America, in a third group. Because

programs within institutions may differ in characteristics, the second definition of program expands

these categories so that within institutions teachers who attend a master’s program at one institution

are categorized as in a different group than those who attended a bachelor’s degree program at that

same institution; those who received their preparation in neither a master’s or bachelor’s program

(e.g., a certificate program) are in a third group.

        The model for estimating the effects of program characteristics is very similar to the model

described above. As shown in Equation 2, the only difference is that in place of program fixed

effects, we include program characteristics (P) with standard errors for the estimated effects

clustered at the program level and we include pathway into teaching (college-recommended,

individual evaluation, New York City Teaching Fellows, Teach for America, and other) as an

additional teacher-level control.

        Aijst = β0 + β1Aijs(t-1) + Xitβ2 + Cijstβ3 + Tjstβ4 + Pjstβ5 + νs + εijst      (2)

The program characteristics, described in detail below, include: (1) the number of math (subject-

matter content) courses required for program entry or exit; (2) the number of English language arts

(subject-matter content such as English, writing or communication) courses required for program

entry or exit; (3) the percent of the instructors for courses in math methods, learning and

development, and English language arts methods who are tenure-line faculty; (4) program oversight

of student teaching; and (5) whether or not the program requires some sort of capstone project

(portfolio, research paper, action research project, etc.). The final two of these measures capture a

link between preparation and practice while the other measures may capture content requirements

and stability of the program.


                                                                                                        9
        The model for estimating the effects of teachers’ experiences in their teacher preparation

programs, as reported in survey responses, is again similar to the models described above. As

shown in Equation 3, the only difference is that instead of including program fixed effects or

characteristics we include teacher reports of their experiences (E). Standard errors of these

estimates are clustered at the teacher level.

        Aijst = β0 + β1Aijs(t-1) + Xitβ2 + Cijstβ3 + Tjstβ4 + Ejstβ5 + νs + εijst      (3)

The measures of self-reported features of experiences in teacher preparation come from responses

to the survey of first-year teachers described above. They include: (1) the extent to which there was

an emphasis on opportunities to engage in aspects of teaching practice during coursework, (2) the

extent to which coursework covered the New York City curriculum in math and ELA, (3) whether

the teacher had student teaching experience, (4) whether the grade and subject for which the teacher

did student teaching are similar to their current assignments, (5) opportunities to learn about

teaching math, (6) opportunities to learn about teaching ELA, and (7) opportunities to learn about

English language learners, and (8) opportunities to learn about handling student misbehavior.

Again, the first four measures, in particular, capture some aspect of the link between preparation and

practice.


IV.     Data

        We estimate Equations 1 through 3 using extensive data on individuals during their

education and their professional careers; information about the schools in which these teachers

work; and student data including test scores. Of particular note, we constructed the variables

characterizing teachers’ preparation using detailed descriptions of the 31 childhood-education

preparation programs whose graduates produce the vast majority of new teachers for New York

City public schools and through a survey of all first-year teachers in the spring of 2005. Twenty six




                                                                                                     10
of these programs are more traditional programs in which teachers complete both coursework and

student teaching prior to becoming a teacher of record; the remaining five programs are alternative-

route programs in which teachers enter the classroom after approximately six weeks of preservice

preparation and complete their coursework while teaching full-time. Four of these programs are

associated with the New York City Teaching Fellows; and one is Teach for America.

           Administrative Data on Students, Teachers and Schools: The dependent variables in our models

come from annual student achievement exams given in grades four through eight to almost all New

York City students. The student data, provided by the New York City Department of Education

(NYCDOE), consists of a demographic data file and an exam data file for each year from 2000-01

through 2005-06. Demographic files include measures of gender, ethnicity, language spoken at

home, free-lunch status, special-education status, number of absences, and number of suspensions

for each student who was active in any of grades three through eight that year.

           For most years, the data include scores for approximately 65,000 to 80,000 students in each

grade. An exception is that the files contain no scores for seventh grade English language arts in

2002, because the New York City Department of Education is not confident that exam scores for

that year and grade were measured in a manner that was comparable to the seventh grade English

language arts exam in other years. Using these data, we construct a set of records with a student’s

current exam score and his or her lagged exam score. For this purpose, a student is considered to

have value added information in cases where we had a score in a given subject (ELA or math) for

the current year and a score for the same subject in the immediately preceding year for the

immediately preceding grade. We do not include cases in which a student took a test for the same

grade two years in a row, or where a student skipped a grade.2




2
    We also exclude observations for classrooms with less than ten or more than 50 students.


                                                                                                          11
        While NYCDOE does not maintain an identifier linking students directly to their teachers,

in most cases we were able to create our own links using school and course identifiers, because the

NYCDOE’s data systems track the courses taken by each student and the courses taught by each

teacher. Based on advice from NYCDOE staff, we matched students in grades three through five,

and grade six if in an elementary school, to teachers based on the homeroom identifier. We matched

other sixth grade students and students in grades seven and eight based on the section of a course

being taught. Unfortunately, some middle schools do not participate in NYCDOE’s middle-school

performance assessment system (MSPA) and in those cases the course section identifier is not linked

centrally to teachers. Because of this, we have a lower match rate for grades six through eight than

for grades three through five, but never less than two-thirds.3 However, the focus of this analysis is

on teachers certified in childhood education, the large majority of whom teach in elementary

schools, not in middle schools.

        To enrich our data on teachers, we match New York City teachers to data from New York

State Education Department (NYSED) databases, using a crosswalk file provided by NYCDOE that

links their teacher file reference numbers to unique identifiers employed by NYSED. We draw

variables for NYC teachers from New York State data files as follows:

        • Teacher Experience: For teacher experience, we use transaction-level data from the
        NYCDOE Division of Human Resources to identify when individuals joined the NYCDOE
        payroll system in a teaching position. When this information is missing or when the value is
        less than the value in the NYSED personnel master files, we use the NYSED data.

        • Teacher Demographics: We draw gender, ethnicity, and age from a combined analysis of all
        available data files, to choose most-common values for individuals.

        • Test performance: We draw information regarding the teacher certification exam scores of
        individual teachers and whether they passed on their first attempts from the NYS Teacher
        Certification Exam History File (EHF).



3
 The average attributes of 6th through 8th grade students who are matched to teachers compared to those who are
not matched are substantially the same with a few exceptions.


                                                                                                              12
         • Pathway: Initial pathway into teaching comes from an analysis of teacher certification data
         plus separate data files for individuals who participated in Teach for America or the
         Teaching Fellows Program.

         • College Recommended: We obtain indicators for whether an individual had completed a
         college-recommended teacher preparation program and, if so, the level of degree obtained
         (bachelor’s or master’s) from NYSED’s program-completers data files.

         Using these data, we construct our indicator of the program and pathway into teaching as

follows. Any individual who is separately identified as participating in Teach for America or the

Teaching Fellows program is coded as entering teaching through that pathway, as appropriate. For

the remaining teachers, we examine certification licensure records to determine the earliest pathway

for which they had approval from NYSED prior to their first teaching job in New York State public

schools, with those pathways defined as: (1) traditional college-recommended; (2) individual

evaluation; (3) temporary license;4 (4) Other certificates, including internship certificates, other

Transitional B teachers, and those with certification through reciprocity agreements with other

states. Teachers classified as entering through the college-recommended pathway are assigned to

the program they completed based on information from the program completers file.

         New York State changed teacher certification program requirements, which took effect for

teachers receiving certification beginning in September 2004, but many programs had phased in

changes over the previous two years. The 2004-05 cohort is the first group of program completers

subject to these new requirements and thus our program and survey data collections are most

relevant to these teachers. However, because we are concerned about controlling for the

unobserved attributes of schools that affect the sorting of teachers to schools, we also estimate the

models with longer panels of teachers to allow for better statistical controls.




4
 Temporary license signifies those individuals who failed to complete one or more requirements for a teaching
certificate, but were allowed to teach under the temporary license provisions, whereby a school district can request
NYSED to allow a specific individual to teach in a specific school for a temporary period.


                                                                                                                   13
       Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the main variables used in the analyses. The first

panel gives student-level variables. The achievement scores of students in math and ELA are

standardized by grade and year to have a zero mean and a standard deviation of one. The negative

means reflect the fact that first-year teachers, on average, teach somewhat lower-performing

students than do other teachers. New York City serves a diverse group of students: 43 percent of

the students of the childhood education teachers are Hispanic, 28 percent are black, and 14 percent

are Asian. Fifty-three percent of students speak English at home, and 62 percent are eligible for free

lunch. The second panel of Table 1 reports summary statistics for the class-average measures used

in the regression models.

       The administrative data also provides information on teachers. For our sample, 61 percent

obtained certification through the college-recommended pathway, a higher percentage than for New

York City as a whole. This larger proportion is the result of limiting the sample to the programs for

which we collected information, which excludes the very large number of temporary license teachers

hired in New York City prior to 2004-05. The teacher population differs from the student

population in both race and gender. Eighty-eight percent of the teachers are female, while only 11

percent are black and 11 percent are Hispanic. Eighty-seven percent of these new teachers passed

their general knowledge certification exam on their first attempt.

       Data on programs: The information on preparation programs comes from a data collection

effort in the spring and summer of 2004 designed to characterize the preparation received by

individuals entering teaching in 2004-05. We focused specifically on the 18 institutions that prepare

about two-thirds of the college recommended teachers hired in NYC schools in recent years. Within

these institutions, we concentrated on the pre-service preparation at 26 college-recommending

childhood certification programs, as well as two large alternative route programs: the New York City

Teaching Fellows and Teach for America. Those enrolled in the NYC Teaching Fellows program



                                                                                                        14
completed their preservice coursework at one of four institutions; we treat these as separate

programs in the analysis, as the requirements differed by institution. Teach for America runs its own

summer preservice program, so we count this as one program. Altogether, the analysis includes the

preparation received by participants in 31 programs.

       We rely on a number of data sources to document information about programs: state

documents, institutional bulletins and program descriptions, NCATE documents when available,

and institutional websites to find information about requirements and course descriptions. In

documenting information about courses, whenever possible we use the information that is closest to

what is actually taught. For example, we ask programs for the names of instructors who taught

reading and math methods for the cohorts completing programs in 2004, and use this list rather than

the list of faculty included in the state documents. We also conduct faculty surveys and collect

course syllabi, and use this information to supplement course descriptions in catalogues and in state

documents. In addition, we interview program directors and directors of field experiences about the

curriculum, structure, and field experiences in their programs.

       From this program information we create a large number of variables. For this particular

analysis we choose to focus on measures that capture the link between the work teachers do in their

preparation and the day-to-day work in the classroom. The program data is not ideal for doing this

because of the rather general nature of much of the program information, but we identify whether

or not the program requires a capstone project as one measure, as these projects generally involve

connection to classroom experience, through teacher research or teaching portfolios. We also create

a composite measure of the extent to which the program maintains oversight over student teaching

experiences. In addition, for comparison to other features of the program that could influence

student outcomes, we create variables measuring the math and English content course requirements




                                                                                                     15
and the percent of the program instructors in these courses who were tenure-line faculty. Table 2

provides a description of the variables.

        The first panel of Table 2 gives the descriptive statistics for these variables. The capstone

project measure indicates whether or not a final capstone project was required for program

completion. Of these childhood programs, 13 of the 26 college-recommending programs require a

final capstone project. We also collect data on the nature of the project. In most instances, the

capstone project is either a portfolio, which captures prospective teachers’ work both in courses and

in the field over time, or an action research project, which requires prospective teachers to collect

data in their field experience around a particular question related to their practice. Both of these

options have the potential of helping prospective teachers link their work in classrooms to what they

are learning at the university and focusing their attention on issues related to classroom practice.

        The oversight-of-student-teaching variable combines three sub-measures: whether the

program requires that cooperating teachers have a minimum number of years of teaching experience

(32 percent of 24 programs), whether the program picks the cooperating teacher as opposed to

selection by the K-12 school or the student teacher (42 percent of 28 programs), and whether a

program supervisor observes their participants at least five times during student teaching (27 percent

of 30 programs). Because these measures are highly correlated, we combine these binary variables

into a single sum to measure the program’s oversight of student teaching.

        Finally, for math and ELA course requirements, programs range from no course

requirements during preservice preparation to four in math and from zero to eight in ELA. We

also measure the percentage of those teaching classes in math or ELA methods and learning and

development who are tenure-line faculty. On average 45 percent of the instructors in these areas are

tenure-line at the programs we studied. However, this varies greatly across programs (from zero to

88 percent).



                                                                                                        16
        Survey of First-Year Teachers: In the spring of 2005 we conducted a survey of all first-year New

York City teachers in which we ask detailed questions about their preparation experiences, the

mentoring they received in their first year, and their teaching practices and goals.5 The response rate

for the survey was over 70 percent. While again we focus on the extent to which programs

emphasize preparation related to classroom practice, we also create other measures. For this analysis

we have more degrees of freedom because we are not limited to teachers from the programs for

which we collected detailed program information, and because individuals’ experiences within

programs to some extent differ. Because of this, we can control for other aspects of programs,

when assessing the effects of the variables in question. For this purpose, we create measures of

opportunities to learn about teaching math; opportunities to learn about teaching ELA;

opportunities to learn about handling student misbehavior; and opportunities to learn about

teaching English language learners. We also measure the extent to which preparation included links

to practice through, for example, assignments that involve working with students; opportunities to

study the New York City curriculum; whether or not the teacher had student-teaching experiences,

not as the teacher-of-record in the classroom; and the congruence between their student-teaching

placement and their current job assignment in terms of subject matter or grade level.

        The second panel in Table 2 summarizes these variables. The ELA and Math measures are

both composites. The ELA measure (alpha = 0.96) includes opportunities to: learn about

characteristics of emergent readers; learn ways to teach students meta-cognitive strategies for

monitoring comprehension; learn ways to teach decoding skills; learn ways to encourage phonemic

awareness; learn ways to build student interest and motivation to read; learn how to help students

make predictions to improve comprehension; learn how to support older students who are learning

to read; learn ways to organize classrooms for students of different reading ability; study, critique, or

5
 The survey instrument is available at http://www.teacherpolicyresearch.org/portals/1/pdfs/Survey_of_04-
05_NYC_First_Year_Teachers.pdf


                                                                                                           17
adapt student curriculum materials; learn how to activate students’ prior knowledge; listen to an

individual child read aloud for the purpose of assessing his/her reading achievement; plan a guided

reading lesson; discuss methods for using student reading assessment results to improve your

teaching; and practice what you learned about teaching reading in your field experiences. The

answer choices were (a) none, (b) touched on it briefly, (c) spent time discussing or doing, (d)

explored in some depth, and (e) extensive opportunity. We standardize the composite variable to

have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.

        The math variable (alpha = 0.97) includes opportunities to: learn typical difficulties students

have with place value; learn typical difficulties students have with fractions; use representations (e.g.,

geometric representation, graphs, number lines) to show explicitly why a procedure works; prove

that a solution is valid or that a method works for all similar cases; study, critique, or adapt math

curriculum materials; study or analyze student math work; design math lessons; learn how to

facilitate math learning for students in small groups; adapt math lessons for students with diverse

needs and learning styles; practice what you learned about teaching math in your teacher preparation

program in your field experience. Unfortunately, this composite variable is not normally distributed.

Instead, a group of participants had very little opportunity to learn math methods. As a result we

split the composite variable into four groups: those teachers with a 1.0 ranking of opportunities (no

opportunity), from 1.0 to 2.5 (little opportunity), 2.5 through 3.5 (some opportunity), greater than

3.5 (extensive opportunity).

        Our measure of the link to practice is a composite of teachers’ responses to three survey

questions from the math and ELA composites: In your teacher preparation program, prior to

September 2004, how much opportunity did you have to do the following? (1) Listen to an

individual child read aloud for the purpose of assessing his/her reading achievement, (2) Plan a

guided reading lesson, and (3) Study or analyze student math work. For each of the three elemental



                                                                                                        18
measures, we create a difference between the teacher’s response to that question and his or her

average response to all questions asking about opportunities to learn in their preparation program.

The measures then reflect the relative emphasis of individuals’ opportunities, rather than the level of

the response to the relevant question alone. We then simply average these difference measures and

standardize the result. As a specification check, we use the average of the elemental measures (not

differenced). Whether we use the average response or the differenced response makes little

difference in the effects observed in the analyses.

           Our measure of the focus on the New York City curriculum comes from two questions

similar to the ones above. The survey asks teachers about their opportunities to: (1) Review New

York City’s reading curriculum, and (2) Review New York City mathematics curriculum. We

similarly difference the responses to these questions from each teacher’s average response to

questions about opportunities to learn about teaching reading and math, respectively; and then sum

them to create the variable used in the analysis. The measure not differenced, again, provides similar

results.

           The two variables addressing student-teaching experience also come from teachers’

responses to the survey. All teachers responded to these questions about field experience, unlike the

curriculum and practice specific questions, which were directed only at elementary school teachers.

One measure assesses whether the teacher participated in student teaching: (1) How much actual

time did you spend student teaching as part of your teacher preparation prior to becoming a fulltime

classroom teacher (assume one day is equivalent to 6 hours)? Student teaching is a type of field experience

involving taking full or partial responsibility for the classroom under the guidance of a full-time classroom teacher or

supervisor. Only 11.6 percent of the sample did not. A second set of questions measures the

congruence between the teacher’s current job and his or her field experience: My experiences in schools

were similar to my current job in terms of grade level and my experiences in schools were similar to my current job in



                                                                                                                           19
terms of subject area. Responses for both questions are on a five point scale, from strongly disagree to

strongly agree. For all teachers, we average these two measures and standardize the composite to

have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. For this sample of childhood teachers, the

mean is slightly higher (0.07); and the standard deviation slightly lower (0.80), which is not surprising

because they are all childhood teachers and so their subject area is less likely to be far out of field

compared to high school teachers.

           Finally, we construct a measure of opportunities to learn about learning and the relative

emphasis placed on (1) opportunities to study how to handle student misbehavior and (2)

opportunities to study teaching of English language learners, as perceived by program completers.

The learning composite is made up of opportunities to: (a) study stages of child development and

learning, (b) develop strategies for handling student misbehavior, (3) develop specific strategies for

teaching English language learners, (4) develop specific strategies for teaching students identified

with learning disabilities, (5) develop specific strategies for teaching students from diverse racial and

ethnic backgrounds, and (6) develop strategies for setting classroom norms.



V.         Results

           Program Effects: Programs vary in the effectiveness of the teachers they prepare, as measured

by student test-score gains. Figure 1a plots the average value-added to student achievement of

institutions that produced at least 40 different first-year New York City teachers with value-added

measures between 2000-2001 and 2005-2006.6 The point (0, 0) is for the average of all institutions.

Three results emerge from the figure. First, there is meaningful variation across institutions in

average value-added. In all models the indicator variables for preparation institutions are jointly

significant at traditional levels. The difference between the average of the institutions and the


6
    Institutions might include an undergraduate program, a graduate program and/or an alternative route program.


                                                                                                                   20
highest value-added institution is approximately 0.05 standard deviations in math and 0.04 standard

deviations in ELA. This magnitude is about the same size as difference in average learning between

students eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch and those who are not. It is also about the same

size as the difference in effectiveness between first-year and second-year teachers. Second, the

variation in average teacher effectiveness across institutions is approximately the same in math and

ELA. Finally, on average, institutions that produce teachers who are more effective at increasing

student learning in math are also more effective in ELA (correlation of 0.60).

        Figure 1b replicates Figure 1a but instead of institution effects show program effects. For

this analysis, institutions are separated into childhood bachelor’s programs, childhood master’s

program, and other childhood programs (e.g., certificate programs leading to certification). The

differences in effects across programs are somewhat larger in math with a range of approximately

0.18 standard deviations than in ELA with a range of 0.10. Again, programs that produce effective

teachers in ELA also, on average, produce effective teachers in math (correlation 0.73).

        Programs are likely to change over time, particularly with the recent focus on standards and

aligning teacher education to state goals. As a result, a program that was effective in 2000 may be

more or less effective in 2005. Figure 2 plots the institution effects for first-year teachers in the

years 2004-05 and 2005-06 only. Again, similar patterns are evident (correlation between math and

ELA of 0.52). The correlation between the point estimates for the fixed-effects in the current

period and the full period is 0.65 for math and 0.42 for ELA.

        The figures so far are based on models that do not include measured characteristics of

teachers. The logic of this approach is that pathways and programs can supply high quality teachers

by a combination of recruitment and selection of potentially excellent teaching candidate and by

adding value to the teaching ability of its participants. By controlling for teacher characteristics we

would understate the effects of those programs that put effort into, and are successful at, effective



                                                                                                        21
recruitment and selection. However, we are also interested in the variation across programs in

value-added to teaching ability and for that we control for teachers’ background characteristics.

Moreover, in the analyses that follow, we want to identify the influence of particular aspects of

teacher preparation on teaching. For that, we also will want to control for teacher characteristics.

Figure 3 plots the estimates of program effects in Math controlling and not controlling for teacher

age, gender, race/ethnicity, whether they passed the general knowledge certification exam on the

first attempt, and the score on the exam. Our controls for teacher attributes make little difference.

The correlation between observations with and without measured teacher attributes is 0.98. The

data on ELA test performance produces the same patterns; there is little difference in the

distribution of programs effects estimated with and without controls for other measured teacher

characteristics.

        Program Features: Figures 1-3 demonstrate some systematic differences across programs and

institutions in the average value-added of their program completers. Table 3 reports estimates of the

relationship between particular features of those preparation program and teachers’ value-added to

student achievement in math using the 2000-01 through 2005-06 and the 2004-05 and 2005-06

samples, respectively. Because of the small number of programs, the estimation relies on a small

number of degrees of freedom. As a result we estimate the models entering one program feature at

a time. Thus, Table 3 reports the coefficients and standard deviations for the program feature from

30 different estimations (five program features and three samples each for Math and ELA). We do

not include models with all the features entered together because we do not have the degrees of

freedom to support that analysis; however, while less stable across specifications, the estimated

effects in most cases are similar when the measures of program characteristics are included in the

same model.




                                                                                                       22
        As described above, the five measures of program features are the extent to which the

program oversees the field experiences of its students; whether or not the program requires a

capstone project, which is often a portfolio of work done in classrooms with students; content

knowledge requirements as measured by content courses in math and ELA; and the percent of

tenure-line faculty, a potential proxy for program stability and the extent to which institutions value

teacher preparation. We collapse individual variables to these five measures because some of the

component features are highly correlated, and thus measure very similar concepts. For example, this

is why we use one measure of program oversight of teacher education, instead of entering each of

the element measures separately. Doing so results in point estimates that are statistically significant,

but we cannot tell which of the components of the constructed index drives the effect since the

three are correlated.

        The two measures of the link between program experiences and the practice of teaching are

significant for first-year teachers for both math and ELA, for both the 2001-2006 sample and the

2005-2006 sample. The coefficients are also quite large – at least .04 for the capstone project in

both ELA and math, and 0.04 in math and 0.01 in ELA for oversight of student teaching. Caution

in the interpretation of these results is warranted. Since estimates for program features are estimated

singly, the coefficients may reflect these variables and any omitted but correlated variables. As we

show below, we find similar results in models that employ teacher survey data, which allow us to

control for many preparation attributes simultaneously. As a result, we believe the results presented

here warrant attention. However, the positive estimates do not hold for either outcome for second

year teachers. This result is not surprising given that teachers are likely to learn quite a bit about

practice during their first year of teaching and thus first-year differences converge as teachers acquire

relevant knowledge and skills on the job.




                                                                                                         23
        Interestingly, the content-specific coursework requirements work in a different way. For

math, math coursework is positively associated with teachers’ value-added in the second year, but

not consistently in the first year with small effects (about .02). Similarly for ELA student

achievement, ELA coursework has a small positive and significant effect in the second year, but not

in the first year. This is consistent with some qualitative research on the effect of methods

coursework, which also found a one-year lag in the impact of methods courses (e.g. Grossman,

Valencia, Evans, Thompson, Martin, & Place, 2000). Tenure status does not appear to be important

for either first or second-year teachers in math or reading.

        Teacher’s Reports of Experiences / Survey Results: Tables 4a and 4b give the results for the survey

analysis for the 2004-2005 cohort of New York City teachers in their first year for math and ELA,

respectively. Because the variables are at the teacher level instead of the program level, we have

more degrees of freedom, even though we are now working with only one cohort of teachers

(instead of two and six in the program features analyses).

        The first two variables in Table 4a, practice and New York City curriculum, are measures of

how closely the preparation links to the work that teachers do in their first year. For a description of

the components of each variable see Appendix Table 2. They are both positively and significantly

related to value-added in math in all specifications, both for the full sample and for a sample limited

to teachers who obtained their initial certification through a traditional preparation program. The

magnitude of the practice effect suggests that a standard deviation increase in the focus on practice

is associated with value-added being higher by 0.03 to 0.06 standard deviations, approximately the

same effect as the gain from the first year of teaching experience. A similar increase in emphasis on

the NYC curriculum is associated with value-added being higher by approximately 0.03 standard

deviations.




                                                                                                         24
        The two measures of field experience – whether or not they student taught and the

congruence between the context in which they had their field experiences and their current teaching

position – are also positive in most models, though the student teaching measure is not stable. The

0.02 to 0.06 point estimates for congruence are similar in magnitude, again, to the first year of

teaching experience. None of the other measures show consistent effects for first-year teachers and

value-added in math.

        Table 4b provides similar results for ELA. Here the findings are less clear. The full sample

shows no consistent results. However, when the sample is limited to college recommended

teachers, the practice and curriculum measures, again, are positive in all specifications. It is not

uncommon in recent estimations of the effects of teacher characteristics on student learning to find

larger effects in math than in ELA. The difference may be driven by schools having a greater effect

on math learning than on reading learning. Students are probably more likely to be involved in

activities outside school that contribute to reading learning than to math learning.

        Tables 5a and 5b present similar results for second year teachers. The patterns are similar to

those found in the program feature analysis. With the exception of studying curriculum used in New

York City, none of variables that characterize the work of teachers are consistently significant. Some,

in fact, have perverse signs in some specifications, but these unexpected results never are found in

both the full and College Recommended samples. However, there is some evidence that second-

year teachers who have additional courses in math content and math pedagogy have students with

higher math value-added. This, too, echoes the results from the program features analysis presented

in Table 3. No such evidence exists for ELA.

        A new paper by Boyd, Grossman, Lankford, Loeb and Wyckoff (2008) shows that effect

sizes as typically measured, including those reported here, understate the extent to which teacher

attributes and other factors affect actual gains in student achievement. Judging such effects relative



                                                                                                       25
to the dispersion in achievement gains instead of relative to the dispersion of achievement levels and

netting out that portion of the dispersion in test score gains attributable to measurement error

results in effect sizes that are larger by a factor of four. Rather than having an effect size of 0.01 to

0.04 relative to the standard deviation in student test scores, as reported above, program attributes

have an effect of four to 16 percent of a standard deviation of the true gain in students’

achievement over the course of a school year.



VI.     Conclusions

        In summary, the results suggest that there is variation across programs in the average

effectiveness of the teachers they are supplying to New York City schools, with some programs

graduating teachers who have significantly greater impact on student achievement. On average,

programs that produce childhood certified teachers who are more effective in math also produce

teachers who are more effective in ELA; though, there are some programs that are stronger in one

area than in the other. The results also suggest that features of teacher preparation can make a

difference in outcomes for students. One factor stands out. Teacher preparation that focuses more

on the work of the classroom and provides opportunities for teachers to study what they will be

doing produces teachers who are more effective during their first year of teaching. This finding

holds up across various model specifications and both for measures created from data on the

requirements of programs and for measures created from surveys of teachers. Thus, similar

measures created from two independent data collection efforts reach a shared conclusion.

        As an example, programs that provide more oversight of student teaching experiences or

require a capstone project supply significantly more effective first-year teachers to New York City

schools. Teachers who have had the opportunity in their preparation to engage in the actual

practices involved in teaching (e.g., listening to a child read aloud for the purpose of assessment,



                                                                                                        26
planning a guided reading lesson, or analyzing student math work) also show greater student gains

during their first year of teaching. Similarly, teachers who have had the opportunity to review

curriculum used in New York City perform better in terms of student test score gains in both math

and ELA. Student teaching and the congruence of the student teaching placement are also

positively associated with student learning in ELA and math, for first-year teachers.

        The estimated effects of many of the measures of teacher preparation are educationally

important, about the same size as the effect of the first year of teaching experience. As noted in

Boyd et al. (2008) effect sizes estimated relative to the standard deviation of overall student

achievement and with measurement error are roughly one quarter as large when measured relative to

student achievement gains adjusting for measurement error. Thus, making such an adjustment

increases estimated effect sizes presented in this paper by a factor of four.

        We also find some support for the hypothesis that math content preparation improves the

outcomes of students of second-year teachers, but not first-year teachers. This result is supported

by statistically significant and meaningful estimates across the measures created from the program

requirements and from the teacher surveys, but the effects in some specifications are estimated

imprecisely. Taken with the findings on the actual work of teachers, these estimates suggest that

inexperienced teachers may make use of their preparation sequentially. Teachers with stronger

preparation in day-to-day issues are relatively more effective in their first year, while those with

stronger content knowledge are able to make use of that knowledge by their second year.

        Finally, we fail to find consistent support for any of our other teacher preparation

hypotheses. For example, our results do not support the hypothesis that greater opportunities to

learn how students learn influences student achievement among first-year or second-year teachers.

        We urge caution in interpreting these results as they represent only the first stage of research

exploring the relationships between preparation programs and the subsequent impact of graduates



                                                                                                       27
on pupil achievement. Research analyzing such relationships is still in its infancy. Our study

suggests that programs may indeed affect the quality of teachers; however, it also points to some of

the challenges of trying to make such linkages. We put substantial effort into collecting information

on programs but we may not have collected the right information. In addition, some of the

measures may be proxies for underlying characteristics or correlated unmeasured features. For

example, the requirement of a capstone project may simply be a proxy for a program’s rigor or of

the engagement of its faculty, just as the percent of tenure-line faculty teaching core courses may be

a proxy for institutional commitment to professional preparation.

        Similarly, if features did not have significant effects in our analysis, it may not mean those

features are not important in the preparation of teachers. We may not have sufficient variation in

some of these features for them to emerge as significant. Teacher certification requirements in New

York State are among the most demanding in the U.S., particularly for alternative route programs,

and thus our study does not include individuals who have low absolute levels of many preparation

attributes (Boyd et al., 2008). It is also possible that we simply measure the features of teacher

education poorly. Well-tested instruments for describing preparation did not exist when we began

this study, requiring us to develop the instruments used in this analysis. While we piloted the

measures, they have not been validated for this purpose. In addition, the results presented here

focus on teachers from childhood education programs, who typically teach elementary students.

Some preparation attributes may be important for middle or high school teachers but not for

elementary teachers.

        Finally, our measures of student learning deserve the same caveats as exist for all such

studies. We are not sure the extent to which the value-added measures of student achievement are

actually good measures of either the range of student learning that we care about or of teachers’

impact on learning. First, so many other things affect student learning that we have to be careful to



                                                                                                         28
adjust for other factors. However, removing all this variation, may also remove the variation in

actual effectiveness. This would happen, for example, if teachers sorted perfectly by effectiveness

across schools, and we then identified our results from only within-school variation. Second, the

tests themselves may be misleading measures of the learning that policymakers desire. Nonetheless,

the results presented here are an initial indication that pre-service preparation can influence teacher

effectiveness, particularly the effectiveness of first-year teachers.




                                                                                                      29
                                                    References

Ball, D.L., & Cohen, D. (1999) Developing practice, developing practitioners. In L. Darling-
        Hammond & G. Sykes (Eds.), Teaching as the learning profession: Handbook of policy and practice
        (pp. 3-32). San Francisco: Jossey Bass Publishers.

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Hammerness, K., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., McDonald, M., Reininger, M,
       Ronfeldt, M., & Wyckoff, J. (forthcoming). Surveying the Landscape of Teacher Education
       in New York City: Constrained Variation and the Challenge of Innovation. Education
       Evaluation and Policy Analysis.

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2008). Measuring effect sizes: The
       effect of measurement error. Working Paper prepared for the National Conference on
       Value-Added Modeling University of Wisconsin-Madison April 22-24, 2008.

Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2005). The draw of home: How teachers’
       preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and
       Management, 24(1), 113-132.

Boyd, D., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Michelli, N., & Wyckoff, J. (2006). Complex by
       design: Investigating pathways into teaching in New York City schools. Journal of Teacher
       Education, 57(2), 155-166.

Cochran-Smith, M., & Zeichner, K. (Eds.). (2005). Review of research in teacher education. Washington
      D.C.: American Educational Research Association.

Darling-Hammond, L. (Ed.). (2000). Studies of excellence in teacher education. Washington D. C.:
       American Association of Colleges of Teacher Education.

Darling-Hammond, L., Bransford, J., LePage, P., Hammerness, K., & Duffy, H. (Eds.). (2005).
       Preparing teachers for a changing world. San Francisco: JosseyBass.

Feldt, L., & Brennan, R. (1989). Reliability. In R.L. Linn (Ed.), Educational Measurement (3rd ed., pp.
        105-146). New York: Macmillan.

Goodlad, J. I. (1990). Teachers for our nation’s schools. San Francisco: Jossey Bass.

Grossman, P. L., Valencia, S. W., Evans, K., Thompson, C., Martin, S., & Place, N. (2000).
      Transitions into teaching: Learning to teach writing in teacher education and beyond. Journal
      of Literacy Research, 32, 631-662.

Levine, A. (2006). Educating school teachers. New York: The Education Schools Project.

Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R.L Linn (Ed.), Educational Measurement (3rd ed., pp. 13-103). New
       York: Macmillan.

National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future. (1996). What matters most: Teaching for
       America’s future. Woodbridge, VA: National Commission on Teaching and America’s


                                                                                                          30
        Future. Retrieved on August 6, 2008, from
        http://www.nctaf.org/documents/WhatMattersMost.pdf

U.S. Department of Education. (2002). Meeting the highly qualified teachers challenge. U.S. Department of
       Education, Office of Postsecondary Education, Office of Policy Planning and Innovation.
       Retrieved on August 6, 2008, from
       http://www.ed.gov/about/reports/annual/teachprep/2002title-ii-report.pdf

Valli, L., Reckase, M., & Raths, J. (2003, April). Teacher education, program outcomes, teaching
         practice, and pupil achievement on state tests. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the
         American Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL.

Wilson, S., Floden, R., & Ferrini-Mundy, J. (2001). Teacher preparation research: current knowledge,
       gaps, and recommendations. Center for the Study of Teaching and Policy, University of
       Washington. Retrieved on August 6, 2008, from
       http://depts.washington.edu/ctpmail/PDFs/TeacherPrep-WFFM-02-2001.pdf




                                                                                                       31
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: For 2001-2006 program features (Math sample)

          Students                                 Mean        Stan Dev     # of student
          ELA Standardized Score                    -0.14         0.93         23549
          Math Standardized Score                   -0.12         0.96         27027
          Female                                     0.50                      27048
          Hispanic                                   0.43                      27048
          Black                                      0.28                      27048
          Asian                                      0.14                      27048
          Other Non-White Race/Ethnicity             0.01                      27048
          Home Language English                      0.53                      27048
          Receive Free Lunch                         0.62                      27048
          Receive Reduced-Price Lunch                0.08                      27048
          Lunch Missing                             0.19                       27048
          Entitled to ELL per lab                    0.15                      27048
          Days absent in previous year              11.17        10.84         17858
          Days suspended in previous year            0.01         0.13         17858
          Classroom Averages                       Mean        Stan Dev     # of student
          Asian                                      0.14         0.21         27048
          Black                                      0.28         0.30         27048
          Hispanic                                   0.43         0.29         27048
          Other                                      0.01         0.02         27048
          Class Size                                23.91         4.81         27048
          Entitled to ELL per lab                    0.15         0.22         27048
          Receive Free Lunch                         0.62         0.28         27048
          Receive Reduced-Price Lunch                0.08         0.09         27048
          Home Language English                      0.53         0.29         27048
          Days absent in previous year              12.05         6.41         22744
          Days suspended in previous year            0.02         0.08         22744
          Math scores from previous year            -0.04         0.53         18425
          English scores from previous year         -0.08         0.56         17956
          Standard dev: prior Math scores            0.72         0.20         18425
          Standard dev: prior ELA scores             0.69         0.19         17822
          Teachers                                 Mean        Stan Dev.    # Teachers
          Path - College Recommended                 0.61                        773
          Path - IE                                  0.08                        773
          Path - TFA                                 0.05                        773
          Path - NYCTF                               0.19                        773
          Path - Other                               0.06                        773
          Black                                      0.10                        762
          Hispanic                                   0.11                        762
          Other                                      0.06                        762
          Female                                     0.87                        784
          Age                                      29.16          7.05           784
          Liberal Arts and Sciences Test Passed      0.87                        784
          Liberal Arts and Sciences Test Score     250.67        27.30           771




                                                                                           32
Table 2: Program Characteristics and Education Experiences of Teachers

                                                                  Standard
                      For Program Features               Mean
                                                                  Deviation
                      Number of Math courses              1.16       1.13
                      Number of ELA courses               1.29       1.74
                      Proportion with capstone project    0.50       0.51
                      Proportion tenure track             0.45       0.23
                      Oversight of Student Teach.         0.95       1.07
                                                                  Standard
                      For survey analysis                Mean
                                                                  Deviation
                      Practice                             0.07      0.51
                      NYC Curriculum                      -0.42      0.85
                      Congruence with Job                  0.07      0.80
                      No Student Teaching                  0.09      0.29
                      Math                                 0.19      0.96
                      ELA                                  0.12      0.91
                      Exp handling misbehavior             0.22      0.74
                      Exp to teach ELs                    -0.55      0.83
                      Basic Skills                         0.11      0.31


Table 3: The Effects of Program Characteristics

                                            Math                                  ELA
                          2001-06      2005&06      2001-06       2001-06     2005&06      2001-06
                          1st Year     1st Year     2nd Year      1st Year    1st Year     2nd Year
Capstone project          0.0410**     0.1216**        -0.0077    0.0496***      0.1019*    -0.0271
                          (0.0159)     (0.0545)       (0.0221)     (0.0112)     (0.0501)    (0.0178)
Oversight                  0.0324***    0.1240***      -0.0145     0.0122~      0.1038**     0.0022
                            (0.0075)     (0.0345)     (0.0125)     (0.0073)     (0.0387)    (0.0138)
Math courses              0.0239***    0.0098         0.0225**      -0.0034       0.0014     0.0011
                          (0.0062)     (0.0174)       (0.0091)     (0.0084)     (0.0200)    (0.0088)
ELA courses               -0.0026      -0.0272***       0.0087    -0.0091**      -0.0060   0.0113**
                          (0.0050)     (0.0085)       (0.0056)     (0.0039)     (0.0096)    (0.0051)
Percent Tenure            0.1184**     0.0614           0.0857      0.0184       -0.0478     0.0077
                          (0.0503)     (0.1242)       (0.0805)     (0.0338)     (0.0874)    (0.0548)




                                                                                                 33
  Table 4a: Effects of First-Year Teachers’ Experiences in Teacher Preparation, Math

                                        Full Sample                          College Recommended
                              Fixed-      Random-       OLS          Fixed-         Random-        OLS
                              effects      effects                   effects         effects
Practice                       0.061        0.044        0.027        0.122           0.053       0.033
                           (0.011)***    (0.011)***   (0.007)***   (0.016)***      (0.012)***  (0.008)***
Curriculum                     0.025        0.028        0.026        0.029           0.025       0.044
                            (0.012)**     (0.011)**   (0.007)***    (0.017)*        (0.015)*   (0.009)***
No Student Teaching           -0.088        -0.015       0.056       -0.026           0.052       0.116
                            (0.039)**      (0.038)     (0.024)**     (0.044)         (0.052)   (0.033)***
Congruence                     0.072        0.038        0.024        0.059           0.050       0.042
                           (0.013)***    (0.011)***   (0.007)***   (0.017)***      (0.016)***  (0.010)***
Math 2                        -0.072        -0.023       -0.016       0.022           0.033       -0.012
                              (0.046)      (0.045)      (0.030)      (0.083)         (0.079)     (0.047)
Math 3                        -0.114        0.000        0.034        0.013           0.015       0.010
                             (0.060)*      (0.053)      (0.032)      (0.093)         (0.081)     (0.048)
Math 4                        -0.114        0.010        0.014       -0.123           0.022      -0.010
                             (0.062)*      (0.056)      (0.034)      (0.085)         (0.085)     (0.049)
Learning                       0.011        -0.005       -0.001       0.044          -0.012       0.007
                              (0.014)      (0.013)      (0.008)    (0.017)***        (0.017)     (0.010)
ELL                            0.032        0.005        0.001        0.086           0.029       0.013
                            (0.014)**      (0.012)      (0.008)    (0.021)***       (0.017)*     (0.010)
Misbehavior                    0.019        0.016        0.017       -0.007           0.017       0.012
                              (0.012)      (0.012)     (0.007)**     (0.030)         (0.018)     (0.011)
Observations                   7037          7037         7037        4482            4482         4482
Number of schools               233          233                       162             162
R-squared                      0.526                    0.629         0.524                       0.622




                                                                                                    34
  Table 4b: Effects of First-Year Teachers’ Experiences in Teacher Preparation, ELA

                                       Full Sample                         College Recommended
                             Fixed-     Random-         OLS         Fixed-        Random-       OLS
                             effects     effects                    effects        effects
Practice                      0.001       0.010          0.009       0.037          0.021      0.022
                             (0.013)     (0.009)       (0.007)     (0.020)*       (0.010)** (0.008)***
Curriculum                   -0.010       0.015          0.019       0.036          0.027      0.030
                             (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.008)**     (0.024)       (0.013)** (0.009)***
No Student Teaching          -0.062      -0.028         -0.006      -0.111           0.027     0.066
                             (0.051)     (0.033)       (0.024)      (0.073)        (0.039)   (0.033)**
Congruence                    0.004      -0.005         -0.005      -0.018          -0.000      0.003
                             (0.015)     (0.011)       (0.007)      (0.021)        (0.014)    (0.009)
ELA                           0.001      -0.012         -0.020      -0.033          -0.022     -0.035
                             (0.021)     (0.013)      (0.010)**     (0.034)        (0.016)  (0.012)***
Learning                     -0.004       0.011          0.013      -0.015           0.010     0.024
                             (0.014)     (0.012)       (0.009)      (0.021)        (0.015)   (0.011)**
ELL                           0.031       0.004         -0.005       0.024           0.012      0.002
                           (0.015)**     (0.012)       (0.009)      (0.029)        (0.015)    (0.011)
Misbehavior                   0.025       0.014          0.010      -0.022           0.010      0.006
                            (0.015)*     (0.012)       (0.007)      (0.026)        (0.015)    (0.010)
Observations                  7112        7112           7112        4735            4735       4735
Number of schools              238         238                        167             167
R-squared                     0.479                    0.617         0.494                      0.623




                                                                                                 35
         Table 5a: Effects of Second-Year Teachers’ Experiences in Teacher Preparation, Math

                                          Full Sample                          College Recommended
                               Fixed-       Random-       OLS          Fixed-        Random-         OLS
                               effects        effects                  effects          effects
Practice                        -0.016        -0.009       -0.012        0.027          -0.024      -0.032
                               (0.023)        (0.015)      (0.008)     (0.033)          (0.019)  (0.010)***
Curriculum                      0.053          0.035        0.024       0.073            0.046       0.045
                              (0.025)**     (0.017)**   (0.009)***    (0.037)**       (0.021)**  (0.011)***
No Student Teaching             0.129          0.106        0.102       -0.110           0.069       0.073
                              (0.058)**    (0.040)***   (0.024)***     (0.124)          (0.050)   (0.033)**
Congruence                      -0.031        -0.025       -0.036       0.006           -0.026      -0.029
                              (0.015)**      (0.015)*   (0.008)***     (0.024)          (0.018)  (0.010)***
Math 2                          0.323          0.163        0.040       0.071            0.154       0.081
                             (0.098)***    (0.063)***      (0.034)     (0.148)         (0.082)*     (0.056)
Math 3                          0.312          0.188        0.087       -0.067           0.113       0.092
                             (0.089)***    (0.067)***    (0.037)**     (0.142)          (0.077)     (0.058)
Math 4                          0.377          0.197        0.040       0.051            0.174       0.100
                             (0.103)***    (0.072)***      (0.038)     (0.154)        (0.086)**    (0.060)*
Learning                        -0.063        -0.024        0.017       0.007           -0.016      -0.000
                             (0.023)***       (0.018)     (0.009)*     (0.037)          (0.021)     (0.012)
ELL                             -0.043        -0.028       -0.036       -0.004          -0.031      -0.034
                              (0.020)**      (0.015)*   (0.009)***     (0.035)         (0.018)*  (0.011)***
Misbehavior                     0.061          0.013       -0.015       0.092            0.026      -0.011
                              (0.029)**       (0.021)      (0.010)   (0.032)***         (0.027)     (0.014)
Observations                     6119          6119         6119         4126            4126        4126
Number of group(sdbn4)            215           215                       155             155
R-squared                        0.553                    0.628          0.547                       0.622




                                                                                                          36
       Table 5b: Effects of Second-Year Teachers’ Experiences in Teacher Preparation, ELA

                                       Full Sample                         College Recommended
                            Fixed-      Random-        OLS           Fixed-       Random-       OLS
                            effects      effects                     effects        effects
Practice                     -0.011      -0.006        -0.009        -0.092         -0.014     -0.012
                            (0.024)      (0.014)       (0.009)    (0.032)***        (0.017)    (0.011)
Curriculum                   -0.024       0.022         0.026        -0.143          0.016      0.028
                            (0.028)     (0.014)*     (0.009)***   (0.040)***        (0.019)  (0.011)**
No Student Teaching          -0.046       0.025         0.041         0.206          0.074      0.041
                            (0.053)      (0.027)       (0.026)     (0.080)**       (0.040)*    (0.036)
Congruence                    0.020      -0.008        -0.010        -0.032         -0.017     -0.013
                            (0.016)      (0.011)       (0.008)      (0.017)*        (0.014)    (0.010)
ELA                          -0.010       0.009         0.009         0.035         -0.001      0.002
                            (0.025)      (0.016)       (0.012)       (0.039)        (0.022)    (0.015)
Learning                      0.012       0.014         0.010        -0.033          0.021      0.009
                            (0.026)      (0.014)       (0.010)       (0.024)        (0.018)    (0.013)
ELL                          -0.013      -0.024        -0.018         0.017         -0.027     -0.021
                            (0.026)      (0.015)      (0.010)*       (0.023)        (0.018)   (0.012)*
Misbehavior                   0.060       0.014         0.008         0.101          0.015      0.024
                           (0.024)**     (0.015)       (0.010)    (0.034)***        (0.021)   (0.013)*
Observations                  6560        6560          6560          4462           4462       4462
Number of schools              221         221                         164            164
R-squared                     0.486                    0.587          0.493                     0.587




                                                                                                         37
 Figure 1a: Institution effects in Math (x-axis) and ELA (y-axis) for first-year teachers 2000-01
through 2005-06 (institutions with 40 or more teachers with value-added estimates).
                                              0.06


                                              0.04


                                              0.02


                                              0.00
     -0.060         -0.040        -0.020         0.000          0.020          0.040         0.060
                                              -0.02


                                              -0.04


                                              -0.06


                                              -0.08


                                              -0.10



Figure 1b: Program effects in Math (x-axis) and ELA (y-axis) for first-year teachers 2000-01 through
2005-06 (institutions with 40 or more teachers with value-added estimates).
                                                0.08


                                                0.06


                                                0.04


                                                0.02


                                                      0
        -0.120        -0.080        -0.040            0.000      0.040         0.080         0.120

                                               -0.02


                                               -0.04


                                               -0.06




                                                                                                     38
Figure 2. Institution effects in Math (x-axis) and ELA (y-axis) for first-year teachers 2004-05 and
2005-06 (institutions with 20 or more teachers with value-added estimates).

                                    0.120



                                    0.080



                                    0.040



                                    0.000
    -0.08             -0.04                0.00               0.04           0.08              0.12

                                   -0.040



                                   -0.080



                                   -0.120



Figure 3. Program effects in Math with no controls for teacher characteristics (x-axis) and controls
for teacher characteristics (y-axis) first-year teachers 2000-01 through 2005-06 (programs with 40 or
more teachers with value-added estimates).

                                                  0.120



                                                  0.080



                                                  0.040



                                                  0.000
    -0.120         -0.080         -0.040              0.000          0.040     0.080          0.120

                                              -0.040



                                              -0.080



                                              -0.120




                                                                                                      39
                                               Appendix

Table A1: Sample Results for Math with Pathway / Institution Effects

  Lagged value of standardized math score        6.09E-01    grade 5        1.02E-01
                                                  [126.15]                    [11.30]
  lagstdmscore2                                  -2.50E-02   grade 6         2.13E-01
                                                    [7.02]                    [10.08]
  Lagged value of standardized ELA score          1.43E-01   grade 7        2.59E-01
                                                   [40.46]                    [10.57]
  lagstdescore2                                   9.32E-03   grade 8        1.38E-01
                                                    [4.94]                     [5.15]
  changed schools                                -2.71E-02   pathinst==0    -7.14E-03
                                                    [3.63]                     [0.24]
  female                                         -4.11E-02   pathinst==1     7.80E-02
                                                   [10.79]                     [2.23]
  Hispanic                                       -5.89E-02   pathinst==2    -4.71E-02
                                                    [7.31]                     [0.83]
  African American                               -7.66E-02   pathinst==3     4.93E-02
                                                    [8.92]                     [0.82]
  Asian                                           1.29E-01   pathinst==4    5.38E-02
                                                   [13.22]                     [1.78]
  Other                                           3.66E-02   pathinst==5     2.21E-02
                                                    [1.30]                     [0.57]
  home language is English                       -6.36E-02   pathinst==6     1.99E-03
                                                   [13.08]                     [0.05]
  received free lunch                            -5.23E-02   pathinst==7     1.10E-02
                                                    [6.90]                     [0.31]
  received reduced lunch                         -1.78E-02   pathinst==8     4.82E-02
                                                    [1.98]                     [0.74]
  Missing information for free/reduced lunch     -5.57E-02   pathinst==9     3.93E-02
                                                    [4.84]                     [1.03]
  Entitled per IEP or lab exam                   -5.71E-02   pathinst==10    9.74E-03
                                                    [3.92]                     [0.33]
  NOT entitled to ELL, per IEP or category U     -8.85E-02   pathinst==11   -1.18E-02
                                                    [0.71]                     [0.26]
  ELL-entitled per the school                    -6.04E-01   pathinst==12   -1.66E-02
                                                    [2.12]                     [0.42]
  days absent in previous year                   -2.91E-03   pathinst==13    3.81E-02
                                                   [15.30]                     [0.96]
  days suspended in previous year                -1.96E-02   pathinst==14    1.42E-02
                                                    [1.52]                     [0.49]
  math class Asian                                1.54E-02   pathinst==15    5.83E-02
                                                    [0.22]                     [1.22]
  math class African American                    -2.16E-01   pathinst==16    8.94E-03
                                                    [3.35]                     [0.37]
  math class Hispanic                            -1.92E-01   pathinst==17    4.40E-01
                                                    [3.24]                     [6.32]
  math class other ethnicity                     -4.53E-01   pathinst==18    1.19E-03


                                                                                        40
                                                      [1.93]                     [0.05]
average math class size                            -8.09E-04   pathinst==19   -1.41E-02
                                                      [0.86]                     [0.55]
math class entitled to IEP or lab exam              6.29E-03   pathinst==20   -5.04E-03
                                                      [0.15]                     [0.16]
math class free lunch                              -3.57E-02   pathinst==21   -1.15E-03
                                                      [1.60]                     [0.05]
math class reduced lunch                            9.30E-02   pathinst==22    5.85E-03
                                                      [1.65]                     [0.22]
math class english as home language                -2.38E-02   2002            6.77E-03
                                                      [0.59]                     [0.57]
math class absent in previous year                 -4.18E-03   2003            3.41E-02
                                                      [3.30]                     [2.62]
math class suspended in previous year              -5.59E-02   2004            3.17E-02
                                                      [0.58]                     [2.28]
math class ELA standard score from previous year    6.98E-02   2005            9.62E-03
                                                      [6.40]                     [0.66]
SD of prior-year ELA scores for math class         2.01E-02    2006           2.14E-02
                                                      [1.08]                     [1.32]
Observations                                          89221    Constant       2.38E-01
Number of group(sdbn4)                                 857                       [3.57]
R-squared                                              0.54
Robust t statistics in brackets




                                                                                          41
      Table A2: Description of Variables

For Program Features
Math courses         Number of math courses the program required for entry or exit in math (subject matter content)
ELA courses          Number of English/Language arts courses the program required for entry or exit in reading or
                     language arts (English, writing communication)
Capstone project     Whether the program required some sort of capstone project (portfolio, research paper, action
                     research project, etc.) for exit
Percent Tenure       Percent Math, English, Learning/Development faculty who were listed as tenure line faculty
Oversight of Student Whether the program requires a minimum number of years of teaching experience for its
Teach.               cooperating teachers, picks the cooperating teacher as opposed to the K-12 school or the
                     student teacher selecting, supervisor observes their participants a minimum of five times during
                     student teaching
For Survey Analysis
Practice             In teacher preparation program, prior to September 2004, the amount of opportunity for
                     practical coursework (listen to individual child read aloud for the purpose of assessing his/her
                     reading achievement, planning a guided reading lesson, study or analyze student math work)
NYC Curriculum       In teacher preparation program, prior to September 2004, the amount of opportunity to learn
                     about New York City’s curriculum (review reading and math curriculum)
Basic Skills         Whether teacher placed high amount of emphasis on basic skills (reading, writing, math,
                     speaking) and mastery of subject matter/academic excellence
Misbehavior          Prior to becoming a teacher, the amount of opportunity to develop strategies for handling
                     student misbehavior
Exp to teach ELs     Prior to becoming a teacher, the amount of opportunity to develop specific strategies for
                     teaching English language learners (those with limited English proficiency)
ELA                  In teacher preparation program, prior to September 2004, the amount of opportunity to learn
                     how to teach reading/language arts. This is factor created by responses to the following
                     questions: learn about characteristics of emergent readers, learn ways to teach student meta-
                     cognitive strategies for monitoring comprehension, learn ways to teach decoding skills, learn
                     ways to encourage phonemic awareness, learn ways to build student interest and motivation to
                     read, learn how to help students make predictions to improve comprehension, learn how to
                     support older students who are learning to read, learn ways to organize classrooms for students
                     of different reading ability, study, critique, or adapt student curriculum materials, learn how to
                     activate students’ prior knowledge, listen to an individual child read aloud for the purpose of
                     assessing his/her reading achievement, plan a guided reading lesson, discuss methods for using
                     student reading assessment results to improve your teaching, and practice what you learned
                     about teaching reading in your field experiences
Math                 In teacher preparation program, prior to September 2004, the amount of opportunity to learn
                     how to teach mathematics. This is factor created by responses to the following questions: learn
                     typical difficulties students have with place value, learn typical difficulties students have with
                     fractions, use representations to show explicitly why a procedure works, prove that a solution is
                     valid or that a method works for all similar cases, study, critique, or adapt math curriculum
                     materials, study or analyze student math work, design math lessons, learn how to facilitate math
                     learning for students in small groups, adapt math lessons for students with diverse needs and
                     learning styles, and practice what you learned about teaching math in your teacher preparation
                     program in your field experience
Congruence with Job  Degree of similarity between supervision and feedback received during experience in schools as
                     part of preparation to become a teacher and prior to becoming a full-time classroom teacher;
                     and experience in schools in terms of grade level and subject area
No Student Teaching  No actual time spent student teaching as part of teacher preparation prior to becoming a full-
                     time classroom teacher.


                                                                                                              42
