                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT ACT AND THE CHALLENGE
                          OF POPULATION AGING

                                            David Neumark

                                         Working Paper 14317
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14317


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




This research was supported by the AARP. The AARP had no control over its content, for which
I am fully responsible. I am grateful to Ronald Edwards for providing information on EEOC enforcement
activity, and to Scott Adams, Joanna Lahey, and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act and the Challenge of Population Aging
David Neumark
NBER Working Paper No. 14317
September 2008
JEL No. J14,J71,J78

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper reviews evidence on age discrimination in U.S. labor markets and on the effects of the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) in combating this discrimination. It focuses on the challenge
of population aging facing the U.S. economy in coming decades. Combating age discrimination is
likely to help in meeting this challenge by encouraging employment of older individuals. But the paper
also explores how rapid aging of the population protected by the ADEA might inhibit the ADEA's
effectiveness, and raises questions about possible changes in age discrimination policies and enforcement
that could enhance the ability of the ADEA to mitigate some of the adverse consequences of population
aging.


David Neumark
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and IZA
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
I. Introduction

       The Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) was passed 40 years ago. The

original Act prohibited discrimination on the basis of age for those aged 40-65. Subsequent

amendments raised the upper age limit to 70 and then eliminated it altogether, ending mandatory

retirement for nearly all workers. In this review I take stock of how successful the ADEA has

been at achieving its intended goals. I also discuss important changes in the context in which the

ADEA will operate, to assess how well the ADEA will continue to achieve its goals in that

changing context, and to contemplate how it might be made more effective. In particular, I focus

on the challenges posed by an aging population in the United States. I consider the role the

ADEA – perhaps with some adaptation – might play in meeting these challenges, as well as the

potential consequences of an aging population for the effectiveness of the ADEA. My review

touches on many aspects of the ADEA, but emphasizes the issues that seem most relevant to the

effectiveness of the ADEA in the context of an aging population.1 Because these are primarily

economics issues, the review emphasizes findings from the economics literature.

II. Assessing the ADEA in Light of the Aging of the U.S. Population

       The aging of the population in the United States will pose significant public policy

challenges over the next few decades. Most significantly, population aging means that public

policy must be increasingly concerned with the employment of older individuals, because

continued employment implies lower dependency ratios, greater income, more tax revenues, and

decreased public expenditures on health insurance, retirement benefits, and income support

(depending on the age of the individual and their economic circumstances). In light of these

concerns, perhaps the most important lens through which it is useful to view the ADEA is its

potential to encourage the continued employment of those older Americans who desire to

continue working, or, conversely, to discourage discriminatory behavior that might reduce

                                                1
employment of these individuals. The potential for the latter type of discrimination is real,

although as discussed in greater detail later in this paper, harder to establish in fact.

        Until recently, the large cohorts of the Baby Boom were passing through the prime ages

of adulthood. As shown in Figure 1, across the years 1990 and 2000, the share of the population

in the 45-64 range grew somewhat, and the share in this age group was quite a bit larger than the

share in the group aged 65 and over. Those aged 45-64 were likely to be strongly affected by the

ADEA, which covered workers aged 40 and over. On the other hand, in the next few decades

(after 2010) there will be a declining share aged 45-64 and a rapidly increasing share aged 65

and over, with the two shares approaching equality by the middle of the century. These shifts in

the age structure of the population suggest that to the extent that the ADEA has a role to play in

maintaining or encouraging employment of older workers, its impact on those beyond what has

been considered the “normal” retirement age of 65 will become relatively more important than it

has been in the past. This has important implications for age discrimination policy.

        First, employment rates of those under age 65 are already quite high (in 2006, 77.8

percent for 20-44 year-olds, and 71.9 percent for 45-64 year-olds); in contrast, employment rates

of those aged 65 and over are low (15 percent in 2006).2 Thus, if the ADEA has the potential to

boost employment of older individuals, its greatest potential lies among those past the normal

retirement age, both because of the population shift into this age group, and because of its low

baseline employment rate. Second, given that ADEA enforcement has tended to focus on

terminations, it seems likely that, in recent decades, its impact has centered more on continued

employment of those younger than the normal retirement age. Without suggesting that this is

becoming less important, it seems clear that if age discrimination plays any role in suppressing

employment of those older than age 65, then figuring out how the ADEA can contribute to

rooting out discrimination against these older individuals becomes of prime policy importance.

                                                   2
       Second, a sizable share of any increases in employment among those aged 65 and over is

likely to come not from continued employment in their long-term careers, but rather from part-

time or shorter-term jobs, perhaps at subsequent employers, in the form of what has sometimes

been labeled “partial retirement” (e.g., Gustman and Steinmeier 2000) or bridge jobs (e.g.,

Cahill, Giandrea, and Quinn 2005). On the other hand, Abraham and Houseman (2005) present

evidence that older workers face difficulties in moving from a longer-term career job to new

employment characterized by partial retirement, and may consequently end up retiring before

they might otherwise have done. Abraham and Houseman do not necessarily attribute these

problems to age discrimination in hiring, but they suggest it may be a contributing factor. If

older individuals are increasingly likely to look for a bridge job after leaving their full-time

career, which Cahill et al. predict, then the focus of ADEA enforcement on terminations might

not serve the nation as well going forward. Instead, it might become relatively more important to

figure out how to ensure that age discrimination also does not deter hiring of older individuals

seeking employment subsequent to leaving career jobs.3

       The third implication of an aging population for age discrimination policy is that efforts

to reduce age discrimination contrast with other policy responses to an aging population in an

important way. In particular, policies that reduce incentives for retirement, increase retirement

ages by fiat, and reduce the value of private and public pensions, especially after some

retirement-related decisions have been made, likely result in reduced economic well-being for

older individuals. In contrast, to the extent that age discrimination acts to deter employment of

older individuals, efforts to reduce its influence – assuming they do not impose undue costs – can

increase the welfare of those individuals who wish to keep working and are enabled to do so,

while at the same time helping to achieve the broader goal of keeping Americans at work longer

(not to mention protecting the civil rights of older individuals). Moreover, the ability of older

                                                  3
individuals to respond to policy changes intended to increase incentives for employment will be

enhanced if discrimination that otherwise deters this employment can be reduced; this implies

that more effective efforts against age discrimination may enable policymakers to meet the

challenges of an aging population with less drastic changes in retirement policies and incentives.

       On the other hand, the ADEA also has its critics. Some charge that age discrimination is

overstated and that the ADEA instead simply benefits older workers at the expense of other

workers. Others stake out a less extreme view, but nonetheless argue that the ADEA has adverse

unintended consequences (e.g., Friedman 1984; Lahey, forthcoming). These more critical

perspectives suggest that an aging population may exacerbate the problems generated by the

ADEA, becoming more a hindrance than a help in coming decades. Consequently, this paper

also assesses the evidence pertaining to these critiques of the ADEA.

III. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) Enforcement Activity

       The EEOC is responsible for federal enforcement of the ADEA.4 An individual wanting

to pursue a claim must first file a charge with the EEOC (or, in states with similar statutes, with

state Fair Employment Practices (FEP) commissions or agencies).5 The EEOC may choose to

investigate based on the facts presented, dismissing the case if it does not see a violation of the

law. For charges not dismissed, the EEOC can seek a settlement or mediation, and if these are

unsuccessful it may choose to file suit, which happens in a very small share of cases – in general

for larger cases likely to involve a sizable class. The individual retains a right to sue after the

EEOC process has run its course, regardless of the EEOC’s determination. Information on

charges brought to the EEOC and on EEOC litigation provides some idea of the landscape of

enforcement of the ADEA, and how it compares to other anti-discrimination laws.6

       Tables 1 and 2 give information on the types of discrimination that are alleged in charges

received by the EEOC and in EEOC litigation. Table 1 reports the breakdown of bases or issues

                                                   4
alleged in charges in total and under the ADEA, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), and

Title VII (which covers discrimination based on race, sex, ethnicity, etc.). Table 2 gives similar

information on the types of discrimination alleged in suits brought by the EEOC in 2006. These

are grouped not by statute, but by the type of discrimination alleged. Table 1 shows that charges

related to discharges and layoffs are more common in ADEA cases than in Title VII cases, while

Table 2 shows that they are also more common in age cases than in race or sex cases that are

litigated. Charges related to involuntary retirement, while not common, are largely confined to

ADEA claims, while wage cases are relatively uncommon – not surprisingly, given that older

workers are on average more highly paid than younger workers, although obviously this masks a

great deal of heterogeneity.

        The tables also show that hiring cases, in general, are much less common than discharge

or layoff cases, although they do constitute a larger share of ADEA charges than of ADA or Title

VII charges, or of issues alleged in race and sex cases that are litigated. The paucity of hiring

relative to discharge or layoff cases could reflect the actual nature of the types of discrimination

being experienced. But it may also reflect consequences of the legal structure. First, hiring

cases are more difficult to prove, because it is more difficult to identify a class of affected

workers. In contrast, in discharge or layoff cases the class typically consists of a group of

workers previously employed at a firm. Second, damages may be considerably higher in

discharge or layoff cases, since workers lose jobs, and for older workers the job may have been

relatively high paying and there is evidence of difficulties finding new jobs; in addition, there

can be substantial lost pension wealth accruals. In contrast, damages in a hiring case may be

quite small, because an individual not hired by one employer may soon be hired subsequently by

another employer. Finally, injunctive relief in hiring cases – hiring the worker who filed the

claim – is unlikely to be attractive to a plaintiff.7

                                                    5
        These barriers to pursuing claims of hiring discrimination are potentially quite important

in light of the evidence noted earlier that workers aged 65 and over, often working in jobs

subsequent to a long-term career, are an increasing source of potential employment growth. If

the distribution of cases under the ADEA reflects “structural” problems in combating age

discrimination in hiring relative to discharges or layoffs, then the ADEA may become a less

useful tool in the future than it has been in the past, when the bulge of protected workers was in

the age range in which they were likely to be employed in – and perhaps fired from – their career

jobs.

IV. Key Issues and Recent Changes in Interpreting the ADEA

        Two recent changes in the interpretation of the ADEA may be particularly significant for

future developments, and influence how well the ADEA serves the nation’s needs in coming

decades. First, in 2004 the EEOC approved a rule regarding health benefits that eased the

restrictions imposed by an earlier ruling (Erie County Retiree’s Association v. County of Erie

2000). The 2004 rule, subsequently upheld by the courts, made it easier for employers to

coordinate retiree health benefits with Medicare – mainly by not requiring employers to show

that the benefits are identical to benefits received by early retirees who are not eligible for

Medicare. It was a response to fears among employer and worker organizations that the Erie

ruling would lead to the elimination of retiree health plans to avoid the risk of violating the

ADEA.8

        Although this ruling applies to retirees, related issues can potentially arise for employees

aged 65 and over who are eligible for Medicare. Currently, EEOC regulations allow employers

to coordinate with Medicare, as long as doing so does not result in a reduction of benefits of any

type.9 However, as indicated by the difficulties to which the EEOC responded after the Erie

decision, employers may be wary of trying to coordinate Medicare coverage with their group

                                                  6
health plans for employees aged 65 and over. I return to this issue below.

        Second, because of the “reasonable factors other than age” exception, which recognizes

that factors other than age can lead to the appearance that age drove an employment-related

decision, a sequence of court rulings – most notably the U.S. Supreme Court in Hazen Paper Co.

v. Biggin, in 1993 – had made it considerably more difficult to use disparate impact as the basis

of age discrimination claims.10 However, in Smith v. City of Jackson (2005), the Supreme Court

ruled that the ADEA allows disparate-impact claims, although the standard for such a claim is

higher than in Title VII cases, requiring that plaintiffs also be able to identify specific practices

that have an adverse impact on older workers, and putting less burden of proof on the defendant

to establish that there is a business justification for the practice.11 It is likely that this decision

will make it easier for plaintiffs to pursue age discrimination claims. This may be particularly

true with regard to hiring of individuals in the older age ranges that will see population growth in

the decades ahead, given that hiring cases are likely to argue based on disparate impact.

V. Evidence on Age Discrimination

        If age discrimination persists in U.S. labor markets, then continued vigilance with

regarding to enforcing the ADEA is likely to prove helpful in meeting the challenges of

population aging – especially if coupled with creativity in thinking about how the law and its

enforcement might be modified to better meet these challenges. On the other hand, there is

research that contends that enforcement of the ADEA has some harmful effects for older

workers, or for economic efficiency generally, and in the extreme argues that the ADEA does

more harm than good and perhaps even addresses a non-existent age discrimination problem.

Thus, in assessing the effectiveness of the ADEA, it is important to focus on both the need for

policies to combat age discrimination and on the effectiveness of these policies (if they are

needed). This section, which considers recent evidence on age discrimination, and the next

                                                    7
section, which looks at the effects of laws prohibiting age discrimination, takes up these issues.

       Overall, it is no easy matter to establish the existence of age discrimination, except for

rare cases of overt expressions of discriminatory intent. This is little different from the case for

race and sex discrimination, about which labor economists (and others) still argue. And

detecting evidence of age discrimination is a bit more difficult because there are legitimate, non-

discriminatory reasons why age may affect labor market outcomes – principal among them

considerations suggested by the human capital model.

        Prior to the ADEA, two sets of facts were emphasized as evidence of age discrimination,

both of which pertained to discrimination in hiring. First, Miller (1966) argued that older

workers who lost their jobs had more difficulty finding new jobs than did prime-age workers,

based on both higher unemployment rates and longer durations of unemployment. Second, the

original U.S. Department of Labor report (1965) arguing for passage of the ADEA cited

evidence from the late 1950’s of widespread prevalence of upper age limits for new hires. The

report interpreted this overt discriminatory behavior as stemming form incorrect negative

stereotypes regarding older workers.12

       The passage of the ADEA has surely resulted in the elimination of explicit upper age

limits for jobs. It is less clear that longer unemployment durations for older individuals

disappeared. As shown in Table 3, BLS data indicate that older individuals are still considerably

more likely to have long unemployment durations. However, these longer durations do not

necessarily reflect discrimination against older workers. Moreover, unemployment rates of older

individuals are lower than those of other age groups, and substantially lower than those of young

individuals. This remains true even if we count discouraged workers as unemployed, although it

is possible that other older individuals simply decide to retire because of poor job prospects and

no longer report themselves as available to work or discouraged.13

                                                  8
       It is harder to establish what has happened with respect to negative stereotypes about

older workers. A large body of research studies whether there are negative stereotypes about

older workers that appear to adversely affect them in the labor market, with many researchers

concluding that there is such evidence (e.g., Finkelstein, Burke, and Raju 1995; Kite et al. 2005).

More recently, however, Gordon and Arvey (2004) suggest that negative age stereotypes may

have declined, perhaps due to EEOC policy as well as improved relative performance of older

workers among more recent cohorts. If EEOC policy has helped to break down negative

stereotypes by leading to more objective appraisals of workers, then the law may have become

less necessary, unless in its absence employers would resort to using age as a screening device.

On the other hand, we do not really know from the existing research whether negative

stereotypes have declined with respect to those in the 65 and over age category who will be an

increasing share of older potential workers in coming decades. If past policy has done little to

address stereotypes about this older group, then it may still have a quite important role to play.

       Ultimately, though, negative stereotypes are important only insofar as they affect labor

market outcomes, and age differences in labor market outcomes do not necessarily imply age

discrimination. In addition, there may be reasons for age discrimination other than negative

stereotypes. Thus, to better understand the role of age discrimination in labor markets, we

require evidence on age-related differences in labor market outcomes that try account for non-

discriminatory explanations of these differences.

       In recent years “audit studies,” in which pairs of matched applicants are sent to apply for

jobs, and outcomes are compared, have been used to test for age discrimination; in this context,

applicants are matched on all characteristics except for age. A closely related method is a

“correspondence study,” which relies instead on sending out resumes and measuring outcomes in

terms of being invited in for an interview or other expressions of interest in hiring.14 The first

                                                  9
versions of these studies for the United States were by Bendick and co-authors, who did a

correspondence study of hiring in three white-collar occupations (Bendick, Jackson, and Romero

1996), and an audit study in the Washington, DC metropolitan area of hiring in entry-level

management and sales positions (Bendick, Brown, and Wall 1999). Both studies found evidence

consistent with age discrimination against older workers.

       However, a fundamental problem with using these methods to study age discrimination is

that there is no natural way to make older and younger workers identical in all respects other

than age. We would expect an older worker to have more experience than a younger worker. If

the information on the resumes or conveyed by the testers reveals this, then we might find more

favorable outcomes for the more-experienced worker, irrespective of the other influences of age.

To account for this, Bendick et al. try to hold human capital constant by giving the older and

younger applicants (aged 32 and 57) the same number of years (ten) in the occupation for which

they were applying, with the older applicants indicating that they had been out of the labor force

raising children, working as a high school teacher, or in the military, depending on the job for

which they were applying and the sex of the applicant pool. But this other fictitious experience

could be viewed negatively by employers, as perhaps suggesting that interests lie elsewhere,

work is not a priority, etc., and this could explain adverse outcomes for older applicants.

       A more recent correspondence study by Lahey (2008) focuses on women in two urban

labor markets, and also finds evidence consistent with age discrimination. Lahey attempts to

address the difficulty of making older and younger applicants alike in a number of ways. She

studies women, for whom she suggests time out of the labor force (even if only inferred by

employers) is less likely to be a negative signal of ability, motivation, etc., than for men. She

also studies entry-level jobs (really the only possibility in correspondence studies), so one might

think previous experience is a bit less of an issue.

                                                 10
       Perhaps most important, the resumes she uses include only a 10-year job history, which

Lahey argues is the “current resume standard.” However, it is unclear how the “missing” history

for older applicants affects employers’ assessments. If all employers ever see are resumes with

10-year job histories, then they can only make assumptions about what the older applicant was

doing in the long period not covered by the job history. If the employer assumes the applicant

was working, then the presumption might be that she has more experience, perhaps working in

favor of older applicants. But if the employer assumes the applicant was not working, this could

be viewed as a negative signal about productivity. On the other hand, if employers expect a

longer job history for older applicants, then its absence may be viewed as a negative signal about

older applicants. Lahey cites conversations with three human resource managers, stating: “They

all said that ten-year histories are the current gold standard for resumes, although they get many

resumes that do not look like the standard” (Lahey 2008:34, note 10). However, this does not

establish that earlier job history information would not convey useful information, or that its

absence would not be perceived negatively. Moreover, since younger individuals are much more

likely to be applying for jobs than are older workers, perceptions regarding the so-called “gold-

standard” for resumes may be shaped by the fact that the sample of resumes that tends to be

observed is biased toward younger applicants who rarely have more than ten years of experience.

       This discussion emphasizes that there are inherent limitations in using audit studies to

study age discrimination. Nonetheless, these limitations do not necessarily bias the results

towards finding evidence of discrimination against older workers. In sum, the

audit/correspondence studies should probably be viewed as providing at most suggestive

evidence of age discrimination in hiring.

       Although recent empirical work has focused on hiring, it is clear from ADEA

enforcement activity that there are also at least allegations of age discrimination based on

                                                11
discharges, layoffs, promotions, and other outcomes. Adams (2002) tries to assess evidence on

how discrimination in promotions affects workers. Using self-reported information on perceived

age discrimination in the HRS, he finds that older workers reporting that their employer gives

preference to younger workers in promotions have lower wage growth and a reduced expectation

of working past the early or normal social security retirement ages. Of course self-reports can

reflect negative outcomes other than discrimination, which Adams tries to account for by

including controls for the perceived work environment and fairness of the respondent’s pay.

Although in light of this problem evidence from self-reports is far from decisive, this research

provides suggestive evidence that employers may discriminate in promotions, with deleterious

effects on older workers, including leaving the labor force.15

       The preceding review of the literature on age discrimination is not comprehensive. But

my view of the overall evidence (see also Neumark 2003 and 2008) is that it is more likely than

not that labor markets were and still are characterized by discrimination against older workers.16

With respect to the issue of population aging, and in particular the burgeoning share of the

potential workforce aged 65 and over, an important limitation of the existing literature on age

discrimination is that it does not focus on this group. Indeed, the research typically focuses on

“younger” older workers, or broader older age groups extending down to younger ages.

VI. The Effects of the ADEA and State Age Discrimination Laws

       Neumark and Stock (1999) study the effects of both the federal ADEA and state laws

barring age discrimination. State variation prior to the federal variation is useful in disentangling

the effects of the legislation from other changes affecting older versus younger individuals in the

same period, such as social security, pensions, and health. A potential limitation of this approach

is that state laws and federal laws do not necessarily have the same effects. However, the results

suggest – as do those in Adams (2004), discussed below – that quite similar answers are obtained

                                                 12
from variation in state laws and variation in federal laws.

       Using Census data covering 1940-1980, for white men, Neumark and Stock find that age

discrimination laws boost employment rates of the entire group of protected workers only

slightly; but employment rates of protected workers aged 60 and over are increased substantially

(by 6 percentage points). However, prohibitions of mandatory retirement did not boost

employment of older workers affected by the change, although the data are not very informative

about this issue. Adams (2004) uses a similar research design, focusing on the mid-1960s when

a number of states passed age discrimination statutes and then the federal legislation took effect;

he uses CPS data and also studies white men. He finds larger employment effects for protected

workers as a whole, with a 2.75 percentage point increase in their employment rate. For those

aged 60 or 65 and older, he finds more substantial increases of 3.6 to 4.1 percentage points. The

results are similar for the effects of state anti-discrimination statutes passed prior to the ADEA

and the introduction of the ADEA in the other states. He also finds that age discrimination laws

are associated with lower probabilities that older protected individuals are retired.

       Adams also uses this approach to try to study how age discrimination laws affect hiring

(as an increase in hiring could explain lower retirement). However, his analysis is hampered

because he does not use longitudinal data. His best evidence examines how age discrimination

laws affect the probability that individuals not employed at some time during the previous year,

but looking for work, are employed in the current year. The results point to negative but

insignificant effects on hiring of protected workers overall, although a more disaggregated

analysis suggests a large (16 percentage point) negative hiring effect for the oldest protected

individuals (aged 65 and over), significant at the 10-percent level. Although in general this and

other evidence he presents on hiring is weak, Adams concludes that “One thing is clear … There

is no evidence that suggests that there are positive effects for protected workers” (Adams

                                                 13
2004:237).

       Lahey (forthcoming) uses a different identification strategy to estimate the effects of age

discrimination laws. In particular, she focuses on the effects of state age discrimination laws

relative to the federal law. She argues that workers in states with their own age discrimination

laws are protected by stronger laws than are workers in states without their own laws, for two

reasons. First, in states with their own laws workers have longer to file age discrimination

claims.17 And second, FEP agencies in these states may be able to process claims more quickly

than the EEOC; however, she presents no evidence that states are more effective or efficient than

the EEOC. It is also important to clarify that what Lahey is calling an effect of an age

discrimination law might more correctly be thought of as an effect of lengthening the period

during which one can file an age discrimination claim (and having the option to file with the

state as well), which simply may not be the same thing.18

       Looking first at the period prior to 1978, before the Department of Labor gave

administrative responsibility for ADEA enforcement to the EEOC, Lahey finds little evidence

that state laws affected older workers. In the subsequent period, however, her evidence suggests

that state age discrimination laws reduced weeks worked of white men older than 50 years of

age, made such individuals more likely to be retired, and reduced hiring of them (which she

measures better than Adams by using matched CPS files). Note that the employment (actually,

weeks worked) results and the retirement results are the opposite of those in Adams’ work, and

the employment results also contrast with those in Neumark and Stock. In addition, the

conclusions about adverse hiring effects are stronger than those Adams draws. She suggests that

because the ADEA makes it difficult to terminate the employment of older workers, it ends up

deterring their hiring in the first place. This may be exacerbated by the difficulty of bringing suit

over age discrimination in hiring, as discussed earlier.

                                                 14
       Lahey characterizes the pre-1978 period as one in which the ADEA had little effect,

which is why she splits the sample into the pre-1978 period and the subsequent period.

However, the results in Neumark and Stock indicated little difference between the effects of the

ADEA on employment of older covered workers in the pre-1978 and post-1978 periods, with at

most slightly larger impacts in the latter. Nonetheless, if we were to accept Lahey’s

characterization of the federal law as becoming effective (to a large extent) in 1978, then there is

an important source of identifying information that she ignores – namely, the extension of the

federal law to states without anti-discrimination laws. Her evidence shows that between the pre-

1978 and the 1978-1991 period, the employment of worker over 50 years of age fell in states

with their own age discrimination laws, relative to the states without their own laws (her Table

2); there was no such change for those aged 50 and under. This implicit difference-in-difference-

in-differences estimator suggests that when the federal law became more effective, employment

of those older than age 50 increased precisely in the states that did not previously have state age

discrimination laws. This would seem to imply that age discrimination laws – at least the federal

law – boosted employment of protected workers, contrary to Lahey’s conclusions.

       Overall, then, I do not regard this study as establishing that age discrimination laws act to

deter hiring of older workers. However, the logic of the argument, and hence the hypothesis that

age discrimination laws deter hiring of older workers, may still be correct. And recall that the

evidence in Adams (2004) does not suggest any beneficial hiring effects of age discrimination

laws, and perhaps the opposite, especially for those aged 65 and over.

       The evidence regarding hiring is discouraging for two reasons. First, as noted earlier, the

clearest indications of age discrimination prior to the ADEA, and during the period it has been in

effect, concern hiring discrimination. Yet the evidence points to no impact of age discrimination

laws with regard to hiring, and possibly adverse effects. Second, the evidence on changing

                                                 15
population structure and the labor force behavior of older individuals suggests that the most

significant challenge in coming decades concerns barriers to hiring of older workers. If, in fact,

age discrimination laws – and the ADEA in particular – seem to deter hiring of older workers,

then it seems difficult to see how the ADEA, at least as it is currently implemented and enforced,

is going to help solve this problem. Moreover, even if the ADEA (and state discrimination laws)

do not deter hiring of older workers, they may do little if anything to help encourage such hiring

or to break down discriminatory barriers to such hiring.

       Neumark and Stock (1999) also focused on the longer-term effects of age discrimination

laws. In Lazear’s (1979) seminal model of the employment relationship, firms find it difficult or

costly to monitor workers’ effort, and hence use pay schemes to create incentives to work hard.

In particular, workers and firms enter implicit long-term contracts that pay workers wages lower

than their productivity when they are young, in order to motivate them to work hard, and make

up the shortfall by paying workers wages higher than their productivity when they are older

(more-tenured).19 The key implication of Lazear’s model is that such implicit contracts lead to

mandatory retirement, at the date when the present value of the streams of earnings and

productivity are equal. Furthermore, a contract with mandatory retirement is acceptable to

workers ex ante, because the contract leads to higher productivity and earnings. However,

mandatory retirement occurs when the wage a worker is paid exceeds the value of their leisure

time, so at the mandatory retirement age workers find mandatory retirement undesirable, and it

may therefore appear discriminatory. Based on this model, Lazear was strongly critical of the

ADEA, focusing on amendments that raised the age of mandatory retirement and subsequently

eliminated it. In particular, he conjectured that the ADEA would serve mainly to give a windfall

to older workers through the elimination of mandatory retirement – which was not

discriminatory in the first place – while imposing longer-run efficiency costs.

                                                16
       Neumark and Stock (1999) re-examined this critique of the ADEA. They began by

considering the other problem posed by Lazear contracts – the incentive for firms to renege on

these long-term contracts when workers are relatively older, terminating their employment

before the mandatory retirement date and hence “cheating” workers out of the promised higher

wage payments. This behavior that would likely be construed as age discrimination – and could

explain the high incidence of termination charges and cases under the ADEA.20 They argue that

the main effect of the ADEA could have been to deter this kind of reneging, strengthening the

ability of workers and firms to take advantage of these contracts,21 and they present evidence

suggesting that this was the effect of age discrimination laws, in the form of steepening earnings

profiles for cohorts entering the labor market subsequently. Thus, the evidence presented in

Neumark and Stock casts the effects of age discrimination laws in a more favorable light,

arguing that such laws help to resolve problems with respect to terminations on career jobs.

       At the same time, Neumark and Stock’s (1999) findings attest to the importance of

Lazear contracts. As such, Lazear’s model may also help in understanding hiring difficulties

faced by older workers looking for employment subsequent to their career jobs. In order to

create sufficient back-loading of pay to elicit effort from workers, an older worker seeking a new

job may need to be paid much less than the wage on a longer-term career job he recently left.

However, the worker may not be willing to accept such a low wage, especially a worker in his

60’s, for example, who might have considerable uncertainty about how long he will work

subsequently. Moreover, with relatively short expected tenure at the new job, losing the job may

not be very costly to the worker, implying that an even lower initial wage may be needed to

create the right incentives. This can explain why certain jobs may not be amenable to the hiring

of older workers; indeed Hutchens (1986) and Hirsch, Macpherson, and Hardy (2000) present

evidence suggesting that jobs with characteristics associated with Lazear-type contracts are in

                                                17
fact less likely to be those into which older workers get hired. This potential barrier to the hiring

of older workers is problematic in light of the desirability of boosting hiring of older workers in

coming decades.

       Another issue related to Lazear contracts that bears on the coming challenge of

population aging stems from the shift from defined-benefit (DB) to defined-contribution (DC)

pension plans.22 Lazear (1979) originally argued that mandatory retirement is used to enforce

termination of the employment relationship at the appropriate time. Later, though, he noted that

a DB pension plan could be structured that will induce retirement at the same date, by setting the

maximum present value of the pension to peak at that date (Lazear 1995). If employers

previously used DB pension formulas to induce mandatory retirement, then as more and more

workers arrive at older ages with DC plans, employers may find it more difficult to induce older

workers to leave employment. It is possible therefore that the shift toward DC pension plans

may lead to a need for increased vigilance regarding age discrimination in terminations of older

workers. This has to be weighed against any other possible reasons for shifting the focus of age

discrimination enforcement toward the hiring side. That is, the aging of the population – which

this paper emphasizes – is not the only change buffeting U.S. labor markets, and attention must

be paid to other trends that have implications for age discrimination legislation and enforcement.

VII. Age Discrimination-Related Challenges on the Horizon

       In this section, I touch briefly on what I see as two key issues that are likely to become

increasingly important regarding age discrimination laws and employment of older individuals,

focusing in large part, but not exclusively, on employment of those aged 65 and over.

Health Care Costs

       The relentless increase in health care costs and the costs to employers of providing health

insurance are well-known. Because health insurance costs are higher for older individuals and

                                                 18
workers (Lahey 2007; Sheiner 1999), rising health insurance costs seem poised to become an

increasing drag on employment of older individuals.23 As discussed earlier, the EEOC

(following the Erie decision) made it easier to incorporate Medicare into health insurance

packages for retirees without running afoul of the ADEA, by reducing concerns about equality

of benefits between those under age 65 and those aged 65 and over who are eligible for

Medicare. With a growing share of the potential workforce aged 65 and over in coming decades,

being able to employ older workers and cover them through Medicare obviously becomes

increasingly attractive.

       One option worth considering is to extend EEOC rules regarding retirees to employees

who are eligible for Medicare, making it easier for employers to cover workers eligible for

Medicare under a combination of their own group health plans and Medicare, even if that might

sometimes entail reductions in benefits and almost certainly would generate some differences in

health insurance benefits for older and younger workers. Current rules stipulate that for

employers with 20 or more employees, if workers are covered by employer-sponsored group

health plans, the group plan is the primary payer and Medicare is the secondary payer covering

expenses not covered by the group plan.24 Thus, under present Medicare rules employers could

mainly cut health insurance costs for Medicare-eligible workers only by reducing group health

benefits offered to older workers and letting Medicare pay these instead. A simpler solution

would be to make Medicare the primary payer, in which case group health plans would not have

to delineate benefit differences between those eligible and those not eligible for Medicare, and

indeed as long as the group health plan paid any benefits not covered by Medicare that would be

paid to younger workers, issues of differences in treatment of younger and older workers would

not arise. The alternative is to continue to insist on equal benefits paid by employers, which

could either reduce offerings of health insurance by employers that employ an older workforce,

                                                19
or simply discourage the employment of workers aged 65 and over.25

       On the other hand, the current law allowing companies to offer health insurance to full-

time but not to part-time workers (working fewer than 20 hours per week) might help mitigate

the effects of rising costs to employers of providing health insurance, among older workers

looking for employment subsequent to their career jobs, who are largely looking only for part-

time work and have Medicare coverage. At the same time, the ability to avoid providing health

insurance to part-time workers might lead to more part-time work as health insurance costs rise

(Baicker and Chandra 2005), including among older workers. Thus, rising health care costs

coupled with difficulties of combining group health insurance plans and Medicare will likely

pose problems for workers who reach age 65 and want to continue working full-time.

Age and Disability

       Because work-limiting disabilities rise with age (e.g., Stock and Beegle 2004),

population aging implies that in coming decades more workers with age discrimination claims

may also have the option of pursuing claims under the ADA as well as the ADEA. The ADEA,

like Title VII, includes an exception for bona fide occupational qualifications that can, in limited

circumstances, be used to justify a relationship between age and labor market outcomes. In

contrast, the ADA offers no such exception. As a result, the ADA may offer greater protection

to older workers suffering some of the milder adverse consequences of aging that, under the

ADEA, might be grounds for discharge or failure to hire (Posner 1995), but still be judged as

amenable to “reasonable accommodation” by employers, in the language of the ADA.

       One implication of this line of reasoning is that population aging may interact with

disability and protection under the ADA so as to provide more protection for older workers.

However, the greater protection of older workers because of the ADA can cut both ways. Some

research suggests that the ADA reduced employment among disabled individuals (Acemoglu and

                                                 20
Angrist 2001; Deleire 2000), possibly stemming from both firing costs associated with wrongful

termination suits, as well as difficulties in reducing discrimination in hiring or the costs of

accommodating disabled workers. If this is in fact the case, then the likelihood that older

workers are more likely to be disabled and hence able to file suit under the ADA, coupled with

the possibility of greater success under the ADA than under the ADEA, may deter employers

from hiring them even if they are not disabled at the time of hire, out of a fear that they will

subsequently become disabled and impose firing costs.

       Other research on the effects of state disability discrimination laws challenges the

conclusions of the studies cited above, failing to find evidence of disemployment effects (Beegle

and Stock 2003; Jolls and Prescott 2005).26 However, the research on disability laws does not

focus on workers aged 65 and older. Thus, the evidence from this research may speak more to

the consequences of disability-related discrimination laws for those with “traditional” disabilities

unrelated to age rather than to those that are more the result of aging. In addition, what we face

going forward is the existence of both age discrimination and disability discrimination laws, and

the research discussed above does not estimate their joint impact.

       Stock and Beegle (2004) study the joint impact of age and disability discrimination laws,

based on state variation. They find that for disabled individuals aged 40-64, when the two types

of laws are combined, the employment effect is negative, relative to an age discrimination law

alone. Again, though, this evidence does not address those aged 65 and over. However, they

present results for this age group that do not distinguish by disability status of the individual, and

here they find marginally significant evidence of employment reductions overall, and relative to

40-64 year-olds. Thus, it seems that there is some likelihood that the increasing share of older

and disabled individuals in the population, coupled with the availability of disability-related

discrimination claims for a growing share of workers protected under the ADEA, could

                                                  21
undermine some of the potentially beneficial effects of the ADEA as the population ages.

VIII. Conclusions and Discussion

       A number of conclusions can be drawn from the existing research on age discrimination

and the effectiveness of the ADEA. First, there is little doubt that the ADEA was a response to

age discrimination. This discrimination was more likely reflective of negative stereotypes about

older workers than simply animus (“distaste”) towards older workers that affected hiring. It may

also have reflected employers’ incentives to renege on long-term commitments to workers.

Second, enforcement of the ADEA has focused on terminations much more than hiring. To

some extent, this likely reflects the difficulties and potential rewards with regard to claiming

discrimination in terminations versus hiring. On the other hand, there is reason to believe that

there has been discrimination – as defined by the law – with respect to terminations. There is

evidence suggesting continued discrimination against older individuals in hiring and other

employment-related decisions such as promotions, although important challenges remain in

establishing decisive evidence of age discrimination.

       Age discrimination laws – both state laws and the ADEA – boost the employment of

older protected workers. Although there is some contrary evidence on this point, it is less

convincing. There is some evidence suggesting that banning mandatory retirement had little

effect on employment of older workers, but also some evidence to the contrary, and the jury is

probably still out; there is also some evidence that age discrimination laws reduced retirement.

There is no evidence indicating that the ADEA increased employment via increased hiring, and it

is possible that it reduced hiring of older workers, perhaps because of increased costs of

terminating such workers. Finally, some evidence suggests that the principal effect of the ADEA

was to strengthen the bonds leading to long-term employment relationships, by reducing the

incentives for firms to terminate older employees who might be at the part of the employment

                                                 22
relationship where pay is higher than productivity.

       The conclusions just summarized are retrospective. This paper has also offered a more

speculative, prospective assessment, exploring how well the ADEA is likely to serve in

addressing the future challenge of population aging. This assessment and related considerations

leads to a number of conclusions, and some thoughts about how age discrimination law might

help meet the challenges likely to arise from an aging population.

       First, the coming decades will witness sizable increases in the share of the population

aged 65 and over, an age range in which many workers leave their longer-term career jobs and

move into part-time or shorter-term jobs. As a consequence, potential problems stemming from

age discrimination in hiring may became more important than they have been in past decades,

when the baby boom was moving through the 40-64 age range – particularly in light of a public

policy imperative to encourage continued employment of older individuals. The evidence on

both enforcement and effectiveness of the ADEA is troublesome in this regard, because it

suggests that the ADEA may be relatively ineffective with regard to hiring of older workers.

There may be limitations on how effectively the regulatory and legal system addresses

discrimination in hiring, and it would be useful to consider whether this effectiveness can be

increased. The structure of civil rights laws and regulations provides not only for the same legal

remedies available with regard to age discrimination, but also for affirmative action intended to

actively encourage hiring of groups that have experienced discrimination in the past. While

controversial, this does at least provide an example of how hiring discrimination can be

addressed more directly. On the other hand, in crafting any policy changes intended to boost

hiring of older workers, it is important to be mindful of underlying economic barriers to this

hiring, and to try to focus on rooting out only the discriminatory behavior.

       Second, with an increasing share of the population aged 65 and over, an increasing

                                                23
number of workers will be eligible for Medicare. Coupled with rising health insurance costs,

increasing the ability of employers to rely on Medicare for health insurance for eligible workers

seems likely to make workers aged 65 and over more attractive. Recent EEOC regulations have

made it easier to wrap health insurance benefits around Medicare for retiree health plans. There

may be some merit to thinking about whether similar accommodation should be made for current

employees eligible for Medicare. However, if most workers in this age group seek and can find

part-time work without health insurance benefits, then the problem may be mitigated.

       Third, because disability rates rise with age, the aging of the population implies that a

rising share of workers covered by the ADEA may also experience work-limiting disabilities.

Hence employers may have to be concerned with discrimination claims brought under the ADA

as well as the ADEA, especially because claims brought under the ADA may be more likely to

be successful. There is some evidence that the combined impact of workers being protected by

both laws is to reduce employment for those aged 65 and over, in which case the ADA may to

some extent put a brake on the ability of the ADEA to help meet the challenge of trying to

increase employment in an aging population. There is not an obvious simple way out of this

conundrum, but if further investigation reveals it to be real problem, then an important challenge

will be thinking creatively about how to continue to protect the aged and disabled from

employment discrimination while not scaring employers away from hiring older workers who are

relatively likely to experience some disability as they age.




                                                 24
                                         References

Abraham, Katharine G. and Susan N. Houseman. 2005. “Work and Retirement Among Older

  Americans.” Pp. 70-91 in Reinventing the Retirement Paradigm, edited by Robert L. Clark

  and Olivia S. Mitchell. New York: Oxford University Press.

Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist. 2001. “Consequences of Employment Protection? The

  Case of the Americans with Disabilities Act.” Journal of Political Economy 109:915-957.

Adams, Scott J. 2007. “Health Insurance Market Reform and Employee Compensation: The

  Case of Pure Community Rating in New York.” Journal of Public Economics 91:1119-1133.

------. 2004. “Age Discrimination Legislation and the Employment of Older Workers.” Labour

  Economics 11:219-241.

------. 2002. “Passed Over for Promotion Because of Age: An Empirical Analysis of the

  Consequences.” Journal of Labor Research 23:447-461.

Baicker, Katherine and Amitabh Chandra. 2005. “The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health

  Insurance Premiums.” NBER Working Paper No. 11160.

Beegle, Kathleen and Wendy A. Stock. 2003. “The Labor Market Effects of Disability

  Discrimination Laws.” Journal of Human Resources 38:806-859.

Bendick, Marc, Jr., Lauren E. Brown, and Kennington Wall. 1999. “No Foot in the Door: An

  Experimental Study of Employment Discrimination Against Older Workers.” Journal of

  Aging & Social Policy 10:5-23.

Bendick, Marc, Jr., Charles W. Jackson, and J. Horacio Romero. 1996. “Employment

  Discrimination Against Older Workers: An Experimental Study of Hiring Practices.” Journal

  of Aging & Social Policy 8:25-46.

Bloch, Farrell. 1994. Antidiscrimination Law and Minority Employment. Chicago, IL: University

  of Chicago Press.
Cahill, Kevin E., Michael D. Giandrea, and Joseph F. Quinn. 2005. “Are Traditional Retirements

  a Thing of the Past? New Evidence on Retirement Patterns and Bridge Jobs.” Unpublished

  manuscript, Tinari Economics Group, New York.

Cornwell, Christopher, Stuart Dorsey, and Nasser Mehrzad. 1991. “Opportunistic Behavior by

  Firms in Implicit Pension Contracts.” Journal of Human Resources 26:704-725.

Deleire, Thomas. 2000. “The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with Disabilities

  Act.” Journal of Human Resources 35:693-715.

Finkelstein, L. M, M. J. Burke, and N. S. Raju. 1995. “Age Discrimination in Simulated

  Employment Contexts: An Integrative Analysis.” Journal of Applied Psychology 80:652-663.

Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb. 2003. “Retirement and the Evolution of Pension

  Structure.” NBER Working Paper No. 9999, Cambridge, MA.

Friedman, Lawrence M. 1984. Your Time Will Come: The Law of Age Discrimination and

  Mandatory Retirement. Social Research Perspectives Occasional Report. New York: Russell

  Sage Foundation.

Goda, Gopi Shah, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2007. “A Tax on Work for the

  Elderly: Medicare as a Secondary Payer.” NBER Working Paper No. 13383, Cambridge, MA.

Gordon, Randall A. and Richard D. Arvey. 2004. “Age Bias in Laboratory and Field Settings: A

  Meta-Analytic Investigation.” Journal of Applied Social Psychology 34:468-492.

Gottschalk, Peter T. 1982. “Employer-Initiated Job Terminations,” Southern Economic Journal

  49:35-44.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2000. “Retirement Outcomes in the Health and

  Retirement Study.” Social Security Bulletin 63:57-71.

Heckman, James J. 1998. “Detecting Discrimination.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:101-

  116.
Hellerstein, Judith and David Neumark. “Production Function and Wage Equation Estimation

  with Heterogeneous Labor: Evidence from a New Matched Employer-Employee Data Set.”

  Pp. 31-71 in Hard-to-Measure Goods and Services: Essays in Memory of Zvi Griliches, edited

  by Charles Hulten and Ernst Berndt. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Hirsch, Barry T., David A. Macpherson, and Melissa Hardy. 2000. “Occupational Age Structure

  and Access for Older Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 53:401-418.

Hutchens, Robert M. 1987. “A Test of Lazear’s Theory of Delayed Payment Contracts.” Journal

  of Labor Economics 5:S153-S170.

------. 1986. “Delayed Payment Contracts and a Firm’s Propensity to Hire Older Workers.”

  Journal of Labor Economics 4:439-457.

Issacharoff, Samuel and Erica W. Harris. 1997. “Is Age Discrimination Really Age

  Discrimination? The ADEA’s Unnatural Solution.” New York University Law Review 72:780-

  840.

Johnson, Richard W. and David Neumark. 1997. “Age Discrimination, Job Separations, and

  Employment Status of Older Workers.” Journal of Human Resources 32:779-811.

Jolls, Christine. 1996. “Hands-Tying and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.” Texas

  Law Review 74:1813-1846.

Jolls, Christine and J. J. Prescott. 2005. “Disaggregating Employment Protection: The Case of

  Disability Discrimination.” Harvard Public Law Working Paper No. 106, Cambridge, MA.

Kite, Mary E., Gary D. Stockdale, Bernard E. Whitley, Jr., and Blair T. Johnson. 2005.

  “Attitudes Toward Younger and Older Adults: An Updated Meta-Analytic Review.” Journal

  of Social Issues 61:241-266.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Jagadeesh Gokhale. 1992. “Estimating a Firm’s Age-Productivity

  Profile Using the Present Value of Workers’ Earnings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
  107:1215-1242.

Lahey, Joanna. 2008. “Age, Women, and Hiring: An Experimental Study.” Journal of Human

  Resources 43:30-56.

------. 2007. “Does Health Insurance Affect the Employment of Older Workers?” Issue Brief 08,

  The Center on Aging & Work at Boston College, Chestnut Hill, MA.

------. “State Age Protection Laws and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.”

  Forthcoming in Journal of Law and Economics.

Lazear, Edward P. 1995. Personnel Economics. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

------. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy 87:1261-

  1284.

Lazear, Edward P. and Robert L. Moore. 1984. “Incentives, Productivity, and Labor Contracts.”

  Quarterly Journal of Economics 99:275-296.

Miller, D. 1966. “Age Discrimination in Employment: The Problem of the Older Worker.” New

  York University Law Review 41:383-424.

Neumark, David. 2008. “Reassessing the Age Discrimination in Employment Act.” AARP

  Public Policy Institute, Washington, DC.

------. 2006. “Productivity, Compensation, and Retirement.” Pp. 721-739, in The Oxford

  Handbook of Pensions and Retirement Income, edited by Gordon L. Clark, Alicia H. Munnell,

  and J. Michael Orszag. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

------. 2003. “Age Discrimination Legislation in the United States.” Contemporary Economic

  Policy 21:297-317.

------. 1996. “Sex Discrimination in Restaurant Hiring: An Audit Study.” Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 111:915-91.

Neumark, David and Wendy A. Stock. 1999. “Age Discrimination Laws and Labor Market
  Efficiency.” Journal of Political Economy 107:1081-1125.

Papke, Leslie E. 1997. “Quantifying the Substitution of 401(k) Plans for Defined Benefit Plans:

  Evidence from Ongoing Employers.” National Tax Association 89th Annual Conference on

  Taxation, pp. 136-44.

Penner, Rudolph G., Pamela Perun, and Eugene Steuerle. 2002. “Legal and Institutional

  Impediments to Partial Retirement and Part-Time Work by Older Workers.” Washington, DC:

  Urban Institute.

Posner, Richard A. 1995. Aging and Old Age. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Riach, P. A. and J. Rich. 2002. “Field Experiments of Discrimination in the Market Place.”

  Economic Journal 112:F480-F518.

Scott, Frank A., Mark C. Berger, and John E. Garen. 1995. “Do Health Insurance and Pension

  Costs Reduce the Job Opportunities of Older Workers?” Industrial and Labor Relations

  Review 48:775-791.

Sheiner, Louise. 1999. “Health Care Costs, Wages, and Aging.” Unpublished paper, Federal

  Reserve Board of Governors, Washington, DC.

Spero, Donald J. 2006. “Smith v. City of Jackson: Does It Really Open New Opportunities for

  ADEA Plaintiffs to Recover Under a Disparate Impact Theory?” University of Memphis Law

  Review 36:183-216.

Stock, Wendy A. and Kathleen Beegle. 2004. “Employment Protections for Older Workers: Do

  Disability Discrimination Laws Matter?” Contemporary Economic Policy 22:111-126.

U.S. Department of Labor. 1965. The Older American Worker. Washington, DC: Government

  Printing Office.

Wiatrowski, William J. 2001. “Changing Retirement Age: Ups and Downs.” Monthly Labor

  Review 124:3-12.
                                       Figure 1: Actual and Projected Population Shares of Those Aged 20+ by Age
                                                                Actual and Projected Population Shares, All
  Percentage of population aged 20+



                                      100%

                                      80%

                                      60%                                                                                   65+
                                                                                                                            45-64
                                      40%                                                                                   20-44


                                      20%

                                       0%
                                             1990      2000           2010          2020           2030       2040   2050



                                                               Actual and Projected Population Shares, Men
 Percentage of population aged 20+




                                      100%

                                      80%

                                      60%                                                                                   65+
                                                                                                                            45-64
                                      40%                                                                                   20-44


                                      20%

                                       0%
                                             1990      2000           2010          2020           2030       2040   2050



                                                              Actual and Projected Population Shares, Women
 Percentage of population aged 20+




                                      100%

                                      80%

                                      60%                                                                                    65+
                                                                                                                             45-64
                                      40%                                                                                    20-44



                                      20%

                                       0%
                                              1990     2000           2010           2020           2030      2040   2050


Source: U.S. Census Bureau Population Estimates (www.census.gov/popest/archives/1990s/nat-
agesex.txt, viewed August 13, 2007), and U.S. Census Bureau Interim Projections
(www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj, viewed August 8, 2007).
Table 1: EEOC Receipt of Discrimination Charges, 2006 Fiscal Year
                             Totala    ADEA        ADA      Title VII
                               (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)
                 b
Total allegations           143,686    22,931     23,708     96,070
Issues alleged (percent)c
Benefits                        .9       1.5        1.4         .7
Demotion                       1.8       2.7        1.4        1.7
Discharge                     31.6      36.8       35.9       29.5
Discipline                     5.3       4.8        4.1        5.7
Harassment                    16.1       8.6        8.0       20.0
Hiring                         4.2       8.4        4.9        3.1
Layoff                         1.6       3.6        1.7        1.2
Promotion                      4.6       6.0        1.7        5.0
Reasonable accommodation       3.3                 18.3         .5
Retirement-involuntary          .2        .6         .2        .04
Severance pay denied           .05        .1        .08        .03
Terms/conditions              13.1      12.4        9.3       14.3
Wages                          4.1       3.3        1.3        4.2
Waivers                        .09       .15        .13        .06
Other                         13.1      11.2       11.6       14.0
Discharge + layoff            33.2      40.4       37.6       30.7
Source: Data supplied by the EEOC. Cases can be filed under multiple statutes, such
as the ADEA and the ADA.
a
  Total also include Equal Pay Act and a handful of unspecified charges.
b
  Total allegations can exceed number of charges, because a charge can include
allegations under more than one statute.
c
  All issues that appear for age cases, as well as “Reasonable accommodation,” are
shown.
                   Table 2: EEOC Litigation Activity, 2006 Fiscal Year
                                                       Bases allegeda
                               Total       Age      Disability    Race                    Sex
                                (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)                    (5)
Merit filingsb
Total                                383          43            49            81          180
Individual                           244
Class                                139
Issues allegedc
Benefits                              5            4
Demotion                              9            3                           1          2
Discharge                           239           24            28            32          61
Discipline                           15            1             2             5
Harassment                          160           7                           37          105
Hiring                               50           10            10             7           20
Layoff                               14            4                           3            6
Promotion                            22           5             2             10           5
Reasonable accommodation             29                         19
Retirement-involuntary                2            2
Severance pay denied                  1            1
Terms/conditions                     33            4                          12          13
Wages                                13                                        5
Waivers                               3            1                                      7
Other                                39                         3             9           6
Discharge + layoff %                66%          65%           57%           43%         37%
Hiring %                            13%          23%           20%           9%          11%
Source: Data supplied by the EEOC. There are other bases not included in this table, so the
second through fifth columns do not add up to the first. On the other hand, a suit may allege
multiple bases for discrimination.
a
  There are also numerous “retaliation” cases, which charge discrimination “against
individuals who oppose unlawful discrimination or participate in an employment
discrimination proceeding” (www.eeoc.gov/types/retaliation.html).
b
  Merit filings include mainly direct lawsuits, and a handful of other interventions and actions
to enforce conciliation agreements.
c
  All issues that appear for age cases, as well as “Wages” and “Reasonable accommodation,”
are shown.
  Table 3: Unemployment Durations by Age, 2006
            Percentage with unemployment duration
             <5        5-14      15-26      > 27
            weeks      weeks     weeks     weeks
              (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)
All
16-19        46.9       33.2      10.7       9.2
20-24        41.6       30.1      13.9      14.5
25-34        36.9       31.4      15.5      16.2
35-44        34.1       29.8      15.9      20.2
45-54        30.0       29.9      17.3      22.9
55-64        31.8       25.0      15.3      27.9
65+          38.4       27.0      13.8      20.8
Men
16-19        46.1       32.3      11.1      10.6
20-24        40.0       29.4      14.2      16.6
25-34        36.8       31.1      15.7      16.4
35-44        34.1       29.9      15.3      20.6
45-54        30.1       28.3      17.2      24.6
55-64        31.4       24.2      15.1      29.2
65+          39.8       25.0      12.5      22.7
Women
16-19        48.0       34.3      10.3       7.5
20-24        43.6       31.1      13.4      11.7
25-34        37.1       31.6      15.3      15.9
35-44        33.9       29.7      16.6      19.8
45-54        30.0       31.7      17.4      21.2
55-64        32.5       26.0      15.5      26.4
65+          38.0       29.6      15.5      18.3
Source: Employment and Earnings
(www.bls.gov/cps/home.htm#annual, viewed August 8,
2007).
                                             Endnotes

1
    I provide a broader review of age discrimination legislation in the United States and related

research in Neumark (2003); here, I emphasize newer research.
2
    See www.bls.gov/cps/home.htm#annual, viewed August 8, 2007.
3
    A related concept is that of “phased retirement” (e.g., Wiatrowski 2001), whereby older

employees continue with their current employer but are rehired as consultants or part-

time/seasonal workers, reduce their hours, enter job-sharing arrangements, or move to less

stressful jobs, etc., while partially drawing on their pensions. The ability of employers to

implement phased retirement probably depends more on ERISA and the IRS code, although

Penner et al. (2002) suggest that murkiness in the ADEA’s treatment of retirement benefits

could deter employers from implementing phased retirement.
4
    For details, see http://www.eeoc.gov/charge/overview_charge_filing.html and

http://www.eeoc.gov/charge/overview_charge_processing.html, viewed October 22, 2007.
5
    According to EEOC regulations, when there is a state age discrimination law, the charge is

“dual filed” with the EEOC if the individual files a charge with the FEP, and vice versa. The

intent is to reduce duplication of effort. However, the charge is usually retained by the

jurisdiction with which the charge is filed. (See

www.eeoc.gov/charge/overview_charge_filing.html, viewed October 23, 2007.) Because of

differences in state laws, there may sometimes be a better chance of prevailing by filing under

a state law. For example, in some states age discrimination is covered under a human rights

statute with no provision for a defense that outcomes correlated with age are based on

“reasonable factors other than age”

(http://www.dorsey.com/publications/legal_detail.aspx?FlashNavID=pubs_legal&pubid=1880
61603, viewed October 23, 2007).
6
    Of course EEOC litigation represents only a fraction of the total number of discrimination-

related lawsuits, which includes a much larger number brought by private attorneys. On the

other hand, according to the EEOC the success rate of their lawsuits is far higher than that in

suits brought by private attorneys (www.eeoc.gov/press/8-13-02.html, viewed August 23

2007), which likely reflects the EEOC choosing the strongest cases that it thinks it can win, as

well as perhaps the greater difficulty of prevailing against the EEOC.
7
    For discussion of these issues, see, e.g., Bloch (1994), Issacharoff and Harris (1997), and

Posner (1995).
8
    See www.eeoc.gov/policy/regs/retiree_benefits/qanda-retireehealthbenefits.html, viewed

August 15, 2007.
9
    Code of Federal Regulations, Title 29, Section 1625.10.
10
     “Disparate impact” refers to practices that may not have discriminatory intent, but have an

unjustified adverse impact on members of a protected class.
11
     Note that some state laws, such as in Minnesota, explicitly allowed disparate impact cases

before (see www.humanrights.state.mn.us/rsonline7/overview.html, viewed August 29, 2007).
12
     The report argued that age discrimination was not driven by animus toward older workers,

but rather by assumptions “about the effect of age on [workers’] … ability to do a job when

there is in fact no basis for those assumptions” (p. 20, bracketed phrase added).
13
     Note, though, that even if we view the data on durations as possibly indicating

discrimination against older individuals looking for work, the problem is not most severe for

those aged 65 and over – the group that will represent a growing share of the potential

workforce in coming decades.
14
     Earlier research used these methods to study discrimination by race, ethnicity, and sex. See,

e.g., Fix and Struyk (1993), Heckman (1998), Neumark (1996), and Riach and Rich (2002).
15
     Johnson and Neumark (1997) studied self-reported age discrimination in earlier work.
16
     In addition to the types of evidence discussed here, one might note that the large volume of

age discrimination litigation decided in favor of plaintiffs suggests the existence of such

discrimination. This argument has some merit, although it at best can establish isolated cases

of discrimination, rather than telling us anything about the pervasiveness of such

discrimination.
17
     In particular, in states that do not have their own statutes, workers must file a claim with the

EEOC within 180 days, whereas when the state has its own statute and an FEP commission or

agency, the worker has 300 days to file with the state’s FEP agency or the EEOC. Lahey

argues that that law has permitted workers to file with both the EEOC and the state FEP within

300 days. However, some states have shorter filing deadlines, and it is not apparent that a

claim filed after the state deadline will be considered by the state FEP.
18
     As noted earlier, state laws also sometimes differ in terms of the types of defenses they

allow. This variation is conceivably more important than differences in the length of time to

file claims.
19
     There is a good deal of research documenting evidence consistent with Lazear’s model,

including, for example, evidence presented in his original paper, as well as in Lazear and

Moore (1984), Hutchens (1987), Kotlikoff and Gokhale (1992), and Hellerstein and Neumark

(2007).
20
     Lazear does not explicitly label reneging on long-term implicit contracts as “age

discrimination.” But this kind of firm cheating has been characterized as discrimination in
other work, such as Gottschalk (1982), who explores the conditions under which this is more

or less likely to occur, and Cornwell, Dorsey, and Mehrzad (1991), who focus on age

discrimination in terminations.
21
     Jolls (1996) makes a similar argument. Neumark and Stock also contend that the increase in

the mandatory retirement age was less important, based on earlier work suggesting it had little

effect on retirement behavior.
22
     See, e.g., Papke (1997) and Friedberg and Webb (2003). Neumark (2006) discusses some

of the hypotheses regarding why this change occurred.
23
     On the other hand, increases in state health insurance mandates – such as for infertility

treatment – or policy changes such as the introduction of pure community rating (Adams

2007) – which prevents insurance carriers from charging different premiums based on the ages

of a firm’s workforce – may increase the relative cost of insuring younger workers.
24
     In contrast, for retiree health plans Medicare is the primary payer.
25
     Scott et al. (1995) present evidence from the 1979-1991 period that firms offering health

care plans were less likely to hire workers aged 55-64. See also Goda et al. (2007), who

suggest that the Medicare as Secondary Payer rule leads to lower wages for workers aged 65

and over, which in turn reduces labor supply substantially.
26
     Jolls and Prescott’s conclusions are more mixed. However, they find no longer-term

disemployment effects.
