NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIED WAGE—HOURS OFFERS AND
THE ENDOGENEITY OF WAGES

Shelly Lundberg

Working Paper No. 1131

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cainbride, MPL 02138
August 1984

This research reported here was conducted at the Hoover Institution
and the University of Pennsylvania. Helpful comnients have been

received from S. Allen, W. Dickens, R. Engel, J. Kennan, G.
MacDonald, P. Taubman, R. Startz, and an anonymous referee.

Any

remaining errors are mr own. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1431
August 1984

Tied Wage—Hours Offers and the
Endogeneity of Wages

ABSTRACT

In the standard model of labor supply, each worker is a price taker,

where the relevant price is an hourly wage rate which is fixed in the
short run, and which does not depend upon the number of hours supplied.

With this basic assumption, the wage can be regarded as exogenous for the

purpose of estimating a labor supply function. This paper proposes and
implements a pair of tests for the exogeneity of wages in a longitudinal
labor supply model, and for the particular failure of exogeneity associated
with jobs that offer wage—hour packages.

The first test is very simple——it amounts to a test of whether hours

Granger—cause wages at the individual level. The second test involves a
simultaneous estimation of labor supply and wage offer equations. Both
tests indicate that the offered wage is related to hours worked, though the

offer locus is, for this sample, very flat. The principal conclusion is
that labor supply equations cannot properly be estimated in isolation from
the process generating wages, even when long time series are available
on a sample of individuals.

Shelly Lundberg
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195

TIED WAGE—HOURS OFFERS AND THE
ENDOGENEITY OF WAGES

I. Introduction

In the standard model of labor supply, each worker is a price taker. The
relevant price for each individual is an hourly wage rate which is fixed in
the short run, and which does not depend upon the number of hours supplied.
With this basic assumption, the wage can be regarded as exogenous for the
purpose of estimating a labor supply function, and the process by which wages

are determined need not be specified. This paper proposes and implements a
test for the exogeneity of wages, and for the particular failure of exogeneity
associated with jobs that offer wage—hour packages.

With cross—sectional data, wage exogeneity is not a plausible assumption

and is seldom invoked as such. In the long run, individuals may influence
their own earning power via investment in human capital. Thus the wage in a
cross—section labor supply equation is likely to be correlated with the
stochastic term due to unobserved tastes and abilities which have helped to

determine the wage, as well as current labor supply. A longitudinal analysis,
in which wages and hours are observed for the same sample over a number of
time periods, can avoid the resulting simultaneity bias by eliminating

individual coustants in the labor supply equation. As long as wages are
exogenous to the individual in the short run, we can proceed to estimate labor
supply functions using the "within" variation in wages and hours.
This requirement may not be met if the wage is part of a 'package deal'

associated with a particular job. Most jobs appear to permit very limited

2

variation in hours worked at the discretion of the employee (though

absenteeism may generate some short—run flexibility). This suggests that
fixed hours per week may be part of a package which includes the wage rate and
other working conditions, but labor supply analysis need not change as long as

there is no systematic relationship between hours and wages. If a continuum
of hours are offered by firms, each worker simply chooses a job which imposes

desired hours. However, if market equilibrium generates a locus of wage/hours
combinations representing different jobs, each individual must optimize

subject to this constratht, and the wage will be endogenous. At present we
have little evidence regarding the existence, or the shape, of such a locus.
Previous studies have relied upon cross—section wage equations, in which the
simultaneity of wages and hours is likely to be a problem if preferences are
heterogeneous.

1

The manner in which such a choice set may be established will not be

analyzed here. Suffice it to say that employers may wish to make tied offers
of hourly wage and work week if production or other costs vary with shift

length or with days worked. Such cost differences could arise from fixed
costs of shift changeover, hiring and training, or from a non—constant
marginal product as an individual worker puts in more hours per week.2 The
wage will be endogenous whenever the slope of the wage—hours offer locus is
non—zero.

1 H. Rosen (1976) estimated a sizable positive relationship between wages and
hours for married women, while Abowd and Ashenfelter (1981) found that wages
are negatively related to expected hours per year for stably employed white
men. Ehrenberg and Schumann (1981) conclude that, on average, workers do not
receive higher straight—time wages for mandatory overtime.

2 Market equilibria in which jobs have multiple characteristics are analyzed
by S. Rosen (1974) and by Lewis (1969), who suggested that a "market
equalizing wage curve" is likely to be associated with variation in hours
worked. Also see Penman for a survey of work on the standard 40—hour week.

3

This paper devises a pair of tests for a non—horizontal wage—hours offer

locus using monthly longitudinal data on a sample of married men. The first

test is very simple —

it amounts to a test of whether hours Granger—cause

wages at the individual level. The second test involves a simultaneous
estimation of labor supply and wage offer equations, with all variables
expressed as deviations from individual means of a three—year time series.
Both tests provide evidence for the existence of tied wage—hours offers,
though the second indicates that the offer locus is, for this sample, very
flat.

4

II. Labor Supply and Wage Offers for an Individual

Let each individual i solve in period t the following maximization
problem:

max Ui(YjujXj) subject to

WjHi

where Y is income, W is the hourly wage rate, and H is hours worked. X is a
vector of exogenous variables which affect the supply price of labor, such as

age and number of children. If the wage is exogenous, we can specify a labor

supply function Hit

h(a.

where aj is an individual effect which

is constant over time.3 Since a is unobservable and is likely to be
correlated with W, longitudinal data is required to estimate this labor
supply function. With a simple linear specification of h(.), we can take
deviations from individual means, and the fixed effect a1 will drop out.
To introduce tied wage—hours offers, we assume that the wage faced by
person I in period t Is generated by:

(1)

Wit = d1 +

+ uit

The wage is a linear function of hours worked, a fixed individual effect, and

a random shift parameter. Corresponding to the wage offer schedule is a
"marginal wage income" schedule with slope 2f, as shown in Figure 1. This
shows the effective tradeoff between leisure and income faced by the worker,

A similar labor supply function would result from an intertemporal problem
in which the individual faces a lifetime budget constraint. Additive
intertemporal preferences must be assumed, however, since there is no direct
dependence of labor supply on wages in other periods, except as they enter
through ai.

5

and is analogous to the marginal revenue function of the monopolist.
This is clearly a spot—market specification of hours and wages; multi—

period employment contracts introduce a significant complication. In the
extreme case where the wage is simply "an installment payment on the firm's
long—term obligation to the worker" (Hall, 1980), the current wage need not
respond to current hours at all.4

w

MRS

_v10

Figure 1

With tied offers, hours worked will be a function of the parameters of
the wage—hours offer locus. Assume, for simplicity, that the marginal rate of
substitution between income and leisure (MRS in Figure 1) is linear in hours

worked. A worker who may choose any wage—hours package from the offer locus
will set hours so that marginal wage income is equal to the marginal rate of

Kennan (1983) includes a "wage smoothing" specification in his analysis
of aggregate employment—wage movements. Abowd and Card (1983) interpret
individual wage—hours variations in the context of a similar model.

6

substitution. Solving for equilibrium hours as a function of the shift in the
offer locus, we have

(2)

+ 8—2f )ui + yX + v1

11i

incorporates d, as well as differences in preferences and lifetime

where

budget constraints,

is the coefficient on hours in the MRS and all other

parameters may also be functions of f. An individual equilibrium at finite
hours requires that the slope of the MRS be greater than the slope of the
> 2f

marginal wage income schedule, or

Taking deviations from the individual means of a time—series on a cross—
section, (1) and (2) become

+

hit = 3—2f )ui ÷

(3)

(4)

fhi + Uit

wit

so that

and di disappear.

Substituting in for u in (3) gives a final system of (4) and

hit =

where b =

1/(

bwi + cx + ej

(5)

—

f),

c =

— 2f)/(

—

f),

and

(8 —

2f)2/(8

—

f)2

Equation (5) is the "hours function" in Figure 2, which traces out equilibrium
wage—hours packages as the offer locus shifts over time.

7

MWI
V4 O
—

tA\jJI0

',JOo

Figure 2

Some obvious generalizations of this hours equation and their implications for

the identification of the model will be discussed in section 4. The linearity
assumption, however, will be maintained throughout.

The absence of tied wage—hours offers corresponds to the restriction

f=O. If hours do not enter the wage equation, then the individual faces a
perfectly elastic demand curve for hours worked and (5) is an ordinary labor

supply equation. In this case, the parameter b is equal to 1/s, and a
consistent estimate can be acquired without estimation of the wage offer
equation.

If the restriction f = 0 holds, can we say that wages are exogenous?

Employing the concept of weak exogeneity set Out by Engle, Hendry, and Richard
(1983), wages are weakly exogenous to hours with respect to the parameter b
only if b can be estimated consistently and efficiently without reference to

8

the wage equation. Wage exogeneity, in this sense, is more restrictive than
the absence of tied offers, since consistency requires that the shocks eit and
Uit be uncorrelated as well as f

0.

Estimation of the wage—offer equation (4) depends upon the vector x.
Candidates for exogenous shifters of the labor supply schedule are somewhat
limited, since all characteristics which do not vary for an individual over

the sample period will have been included in the fixed effect. In most
samples, income from non—labor sources and number of children are the only
observable possibilities for x.

In fact, however, the behavior of the errors e and u provides an

alternative method of identification. Both h and w exhibit strong serial
correlation, a pattern which can be interpreted as the result of shocks to the
individual's supply price, or to their offered wage schedule, which are

autocorrelated. As an illustration, first order autocorrelation of the form,

e = pet_i+

qu...1 +

ut =

yields a system,

(6)

hit =

Wit

bwit +

= fhit +

p(hj_i

—

q(wj_1 —

it—l +
fhjt_i)

+

It is assumed, for the remainder of the paper, that e and u are not causally
related, though the innovations c and i may be correlated.

9

III. Do Hours Cause Wages?

Equations (6—7) suggest a very simple and very general test for tied

wage—hours offers. The reduced form of the wage equation is,

w1 = f(bwit + p(hi_i — bwft i +e) + q(w11 —

fhi1)

+

If f=O, then the current wage depends only upon past wages and the innovation

If f

0 ,

then past hours should help to predict the current wage.

Thus the presence of tied offers implies that hours cause wages, where
causality is of the type described by Granger (1969).

"...We say that

is causing X if we are better able to

predict X using all available [past] information than if the
information apart from [past] Y had been used" (p. 428),

The tests reported here are similar to those employed by Sargent

(1976). The restriction f = 0 implies that E(wjtwi...i)

E(witIwjt_i,hi_i),

which must hold if hours do not Granger—cause wages. A failure of the
necessary condition for non—causality will thus imply the presence of tied

offers in this case. This result will generalize to higher order
autocorrelation of the demand and supply shocks, so an ordinary least squares
regression of wages on lagged hours and lagged wages provides the basis of the

first test. Note that the validity of this test does not depend at all upon
the specification of the labor supply function.
This regression employed 48 months of wage and hours data from a
longitudinal sample of low—income married men in the control group of the

Denver Income Maintenance Experiment. From the set of 580 who reported

10

employment information for the duration of the experiment, a subsample was

chosen who reported positive hours worked in each month. This left 204 men
between the ages of 18 and 58, who earned an average hourly wage below $4.00

(1972 dollars) but experienced reasonably stable employment. Deviations from
individual means were calculated for monthly hours adjusted for seasonal
variations, and for the straight—time hourly wage deflated by the Denver CPI

and seasonally adjusted. The last 36 months of data were employed to allow
for 12 monthly lags.5

Lagged hours are highly significant in the wage equations for both the

full sample and the subsample of job changers. We can thus reject the
exclusion of lagged hours, and reject Granger non—causality of wages by

hours. This test provides some evidence that tied wage—hours offers are being
faced by the men in this sample. A symmetric test for wages causing hours
leads to the expected conclusion that lagged wages do help to predict current
hours •

6

This lag length was chosen arbitrarily. A four month lag was attempted
later, but this did not affect the results. It was hoped that 12 months would
be sufficiently long that no omitted lags would be included in the error term.
In fact, there is no evidence of autocorrelation in the residuals. Estimation
of partial correlation functions (for up to six lags) yields no significant
coefficients, and the Q statistic from the sample autocovariances for lags one
through six is 6.26, which is x(6) and insignificant.
6 An alternative test for Granger—causalitY has been employed by Sims (1972)
and others. In this context, it consists of regressing hours on past,
current, and future values of the wage, and testing for the significance of
future wages. This test was also implemented, using eight past and four
future lags. Future wages were significant in the hours equation, confirming
the above result that hours Grangercause wages.

11

TABLE 1

F—Tests on Twelve Lagged Months

F—ratio

Hours in wage equation

2.88

Wages in hours equation

3.50

Critical value for F99(12,

2.18

)

It is perhaps worth noting that this causality test would fail if the
innovations in the wage—offer and hours equations followed very similar serial

correlation patterns. If p = q, then lagged hours will have a coefficient of
zero in the wage equation even if

f * 0.

12

LV.

Simultaneous

Estimation

Since the presence of tied wage—hours offers cannot be dismissed on the
basis of a causality test, we now investigate the slope of the offer locus

through a simultaneous estimation of the wage and hours equation. In OLS
regressions similar to those reported in the previous section, variables which
were expected to affect the supply price of labor only and thus identify the
wage offer equation, such as non—labor income, did not have a significant

impact on hours. Similarly, the unemployment rate in Denver should have been
included in the offer equation, but displayed very little variation over the
sample period (1972—1974).

However, with first order autocorrelation specified for both e and u, the

system (6—7) is just identified — the four reduced form parameters can be
translated into the four structural parameters through non—linear

restrictions. Unfortunately, the supply and demand equations are symmetric
and, as Kennan (1983) notes with respect to a similar structure in an

aggregate model, we cannot tell which parameters belong to the wage offer
locus and which to the labor supply function, though all are identified.

However, we can assume a priori that the slope of the offer locus is less than
the slope of the labor supply function, since this is implied by the

restriction that the slope of the marginal wage income schedule be less than
the slope of the MRS.

In practice, a fourth order autocorrelation scheme is specified for both

equations,

so that the system is overidentified. Full—information maximum

likelihood was used to estimate the parameters of the two equations. This
method will generate consistent and efficient estimates if the innovations

13

c and i are normally distributed.7 Fourth order autocorrelation of the
errors e and u cannot be rejected as a restriction on a twelfth order process,

so only results from the former are reported. The wage data are in dollars
per hour and represent the regular straight—time wages only, not overtime

payments. Hours are hours per month, adjusted for seasonal variations. All
observations are again deviations from individual means, and 36 observations

for each individual in the sample are used. The standard deviation of monthly
hours is 20.5 hours, and of wages, $0.51 per hour.
The final results, with standard errors in parentheses, follow.
Labor supply:

hit

l9.3O25*w1 +
(0.9037)

O.4813*ejt_l + 0.1029*ej
(0.0106)

2 +

(0.0118)

O.O469*ejt3
(0.0118)

+ O.O2l8*ejt...4

(0.0105)

Wage offer:

w1 0.0024*hjt + O•5604*Uit 1 +Ol34l*Ujt 2 + O.O495*Ui3
(0.0002)

(0.0108)

(0.0122)

(0.0123)

+ OØO471*Uit4
(0.0110)

2

=

s

338.998

—3.308

N = 7344

0.129
1.1

7See Axnemiya (1977). Non—linear two—stage least squares produced very similar
results.

14

The estimated slope8 of both the labor supply function and the wage offer

locus are positive and significantly different from zero. In particular, the
estimate of f (the coefficient on hours in the wage offer equation) is very

precisely estimated, though very small. These results suggest that
individuals face, in the short run, a slightly upward—sloping choice locus of
wage—hours combinations, even when overtime rates are ignored.
The labor supply response is similar to that found in other longitudinal

studies (see, for example, MaCurdy).8 One dollar per hour yields
approximately 4.5 extra hours of work per week, a mean elasticity of about

O.4O. The offer curve, however, is extremely flat; the same 4.5 extra hours
per week will yield only 4.6 cents per hour, give or take .4 cents. The
random components of the supply and demand curves have a contemporary
covariance which is significantly negative.
Since the model estimated here is overidentif led, it may be useful to

consider which of the many possible generalizations will still permit

identification of the wage—hours offer locus. The current restrictions placed
on the labor supply function are perhaps most difficult to justify. With
intertemporal substitution of leisure, a direct dependence of current hours on
lagged hours would be introduced and, if expectations regarding lifetime

8 Recall that the hours equation is not a proper labor supply function. From
is the labor
, where
equation (5), the coefficient on wages is b —

4

supply response to a shift in the wage offer locus.

of f is so small, however, b is very close to 4.

Mean hours per month are 181.6, mean wages $3.78.

Since the estimated value

15

income respond to realized wages, current hours may

depend

upon lagged

innovations in the offer locus as well. With a labor supply function of the
form:

hj biwj +

b2w1

+ b3h1

1

+ ej

the parameters b1—b3 will not be identified.

However, if the simple structure

of the wage—offer locus is maintained, its serial

correlation structure, as

well as the parameter f which indicated the presence of tied offers, will be

identified. The type of test performed in this section, therefore, will be
valid for more general specifications of labor supply.

16

V. Conclusion

The two tests reported in this paper decisively reject the proposition
that wage rates available to an individual in the short run are exogenous with

respect to hours worked. Both indicate that the offered wage is related to

hours worked —

this

Is interpreted here as evidence of job "packages" in

which wage and hours are tied together. The second test indicates that the
two are positively related, even when overtime rates are not included, but
that most of the positive covariance between hours and wages is due to supply
response, not to tied offers.

The principal conclusion is that labor supply equations cannot properly
be estimated in isolation from the process generating wages, even in the ideal
situation where long time series are available on a sample of individuals.
The negative correlation between innovations in the demand and supply
equations and the presence of tied wage—hours offers insures that an estimate
of the wage elasticity of labor supply will fail to be unbiased. The
quantitative results, particularly the size of the straight—time wage premium
f or extra hours, should be regarded as representative of this sample only.

Both tests, however, can be easily applied to longitudinal data on other types
of workers.

17

References

Abowd, John and Orley Ashenfelter, "Unemployment and Compensating Wage
Differentials," in Studies in Labor

Markets,

edited by Sherwin Rosen,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981.

Abowd, John and David Card, "Intertemporal Substitution in the Presence of
Long—Term Contracts," NORC Working Paper, 1983.

Amemiya, Takeshi, "The Maximum Likelihood and the Nonlinear Three—Stage Least

Squares Estimator in the General Nonlinear Simultaneous Equation Model"
Econotuetrica, 45 (1977), pp. 955—968.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Paul L. Schumann, "Compensating Wage Differentials
for Mandatory Overtime," NBER Working Paper #805, 1981.

Engel, Robert, David Ilendry and Jean—Francols Richard, "Exogeneity,"
Econoiuetrica, 51 (1983), pp. 277—304.

Granger, C. W. J., "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
Cross—Spectral Methods," Econometrica, 37 (1969), pp. 424—438.

Hall, Robert, "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, (1:1980), pp. 91—123.

Kennan, John, "An

Econometric

University of Iowa miuteo,

Analysis of Labor Market Fluctuations,"

1983.

18

Lewis, H. Gregg, "Employer Interests in Employee Hours of Work," mimeo, 1969.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle

Setting," Journal of Political Economy, 89 (1981), pp. 1059—1085.

Mundlak, Y., "On The Pooling of Time—Series and Cross—Section Data,"
Econometrica, 46 (1978), pp. 69—85.

Penman, Richard. Labor Theory, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1969.

Rosen, Harvey S., "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hours

Determination," Econometnica, 44 (1976), pp. 485—507.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets," Journal of Political
Economy, 82 (1974), pp. 34—55.

Sargent, Thomas J., "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United
States," Journal of Political Economy, 84 (1976), pp. 207—237.

Sims, Christopher A., "Money, Income, and Causality," American Economic
Review, 62 (1972), pp. 540—552.

