                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               NEW KEYNESIAN MODELS:
                          NOT YET USEFUL FOR POLICY ANALYSIS

                                              V.V. Chari
                                           Patrick J. Kehoe
                                          Ellen R. McGrattan

                                         Working Paper 14313
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14313


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2008




We thank the NSF for financial support and Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for excellent editorial assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by V.V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
New Keynesian Models: Not Yet Useful for Policy Analysis
V.V. Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan
NBER Working Paper No. 14313
September 2008
JEL No. E32,E58

                                             ABSTRACT

Macroeconomists have largely converged on method, model design, reduced-form shocks, and principles
of policy advice. Our main disagreements today are about implementing the methodology. Some think
New Keynesian models are ready to be used for quarter-to-quarter quantitative policy advice; we do
not. Focusing on the state-of-the-art version of these models, we argue that some of its shocks and
other features are not structural or consistent with microeconomic evidence. Since an accurate structural
model is essential to reliably evaluate the effects of policies, we conclude that New Keynesian models
are not yet useful for policy analysis.


V.V. Chari                                          Ellen R. McGrattan
Department of Economics                             Research Department
University of Minnesota                             Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
1925 Fourth Street, South                           90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55455                               Minneapolis, MN 55480
chari@res.mpls.frb.fed.us                           and NBER
                                                    erm@mcgrattan.mpls.frb.fed.us
Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us
       Viewed from a distance, modern macroeconomists, whether New Keynesian or neo-
classical, are all alike, at least in the sense that we use the same methodology, work with
similar models, agree on which reduced-form shocks are needed for models to fit the data,
and agree on broad principles for policy. Viewed up close, however, we disagree considerably.
This disagreement revolves around a set of shocks and other features that have recently been
introduced into New Keynesian models. Here we argue that the new shocks are dubiously
structural and that the other new features are inconsistent with microeconomic evidence.
Until these issues are resolved, we conclude, New Keynesian models are not useful for policy
analysis.
       This critique should not diminish the fact that the areas of agreement among macro-
economists are now significant. In terms of methodology, we agree that in order to do se-
rious policy analysis, we need a structural model with primitive, interpretable shocks which
are invariant to the class of policy interventions being considered. In terms of the models
themselves, most macroeconomists now analyze policy using some sort of dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium (DSGE) model. This type of model can be so generally defined that
it incorporates all types of frictions, such as various ways of learning, incomplete markets,
imperfections in markets, and spatial frictions. The model’s only practical restriction is that
it specify an agreed-upon language by which we can communicate, a restriction hard to argue
with. An aphorism among macroeconomists today is that if you have a coherent story to
propose, you can do it in a suitably elaborate DSGE model.
       Macroeconomists are also beginning to agree on the nature of the reduced-form shocks
needed to be included in a model in order for it to fit the data. In our 2007 work (V. V.
Chari, Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan, henceforth CKM ), we have argued that
two particular reduced-form shocks play a central role in generating U.S. business cycle fluc-
tuations. The eﬃciency wedge, at face value, looks like time-varying productivity. The labor
wedge distorts the static relationship between the marginal rate of substitution of consump-
tion for labor and the marginal product of labor. A consensus appears to be emerging on
the importance of these two reduced-form shocks over the business cycle. This emerging
consensus implies that we need to develop structural models which generate these wedges
from primitive, interpretable shocks.
       Macroeconomists also now broadly concur on two desirable properties of monetary
policy. One is that the success of policy depends on policymakers’ commitment; the other,
that interest rates and inflation rates should be kept low on average. More practically, most
macroeconomists are comfortable with some form of inflation target with well-defined escape
clauses.
       Despite all that agreement, however, we do diﬀer strongly on some practical issues.
Most of our disagreement stems from our diﬀerent preferred traditions of model building and
assessment.
       The tradition favored by many neoclassicals (like us) is to keep a macro model simple,
keep the number of its parameters small and well motivated by micro facts, and put up with
the reality that no model can, or should, fit most aspects of the data. Recognize, instead,
that a small macro model consistent with the micro data can still be useful in clarifying how
to think about policy. Typical examples of work in this tradition are the general equilibrium
models of optimal fiscal policy pioneered by Robert E. Lucas and Nancy L. Stokey (1983),
which elucidate general principles, such as the optimality of smoothing distortions over time
and across states. When this type of model is implemented quantitatively, a simple rule of
thumb guides modelers: every time a new parameter is added, some new micro evidence to
discipline that parameter must be added as well. This tradition, therefore, discourages free
parameters, or those not explicitly supported by micro data.
       The competing tradition is favored by many New Keynesians. Typified recently by the
work of Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans (2005) and Frank
Smets and Raf Wouters (2007), this tradition emphasizes the need for macro models to fit
macro data well. The urge to improve the macro fit leads researchers in this tradition to add
many shocks and other features to their models and then to use the same old aggregate data
to estimate the associated new parameters. This tradition does not include the discipline of
microeconomic evidence; so free parameters commonly abound in New Keynesian models.
       Obviously, these two traditions conflict. Our main concern with the New Keynesians’
preferred tradition is that it leads to models that simply cannot be relied on for policy analysis.
Here we make this concern concrete by critiquing the recent New Keynesian literature as
typified by the model of Smets and Wouters (2007). We focus on this particular model


                                                2
because it is widely considered the state-of-the-art New Keynesian model. Indeed, a version
of the Smets-Wouters model is now being used to inform policymaking at the European
Central Bank.
       Proponents of the New Keynesian model in general argue that it is promising for two
reasons. It represents a detailed economy that can generate the type of wedges we see in
the data from primitive, interpretable shocks, and it has enough microfoundations that both
its shocks and its parameters are structural, in that they can reasonably be argued to be
invariant to monetary policy shocks.
       We agree that a model with both of those features would be potentially useful for
monetary policy analysis. The New Keynesian model, however, does not fit that description.
We argue that this model cannot generate the type of wedges we see in the data from primitive,
interpretable shocks. And we doubt that some of the key shocks and other features added
in the quantitative implementation of the model are actually structural or consistent with
micro data. Hence, we think that New Keynesian models are not yet reliable guides for policy
analysis.
       Our critique focuses heavily on the dubiously structural shocks. That includes four
of the shocks in the New Keynesian Smets-Wouters model: shocks to wage markups, price
markups, exogenous spending, and risk premia.
       As it appears in the Smets-Wouters model, the wage-markup shock is highly ques-
tionable. This shock is modeled by Smets and Wouters as arising from fluctuations in the
elasticity of substitution across diﬀerent types of labor. That interpretation makes little
sense. When expressed in units of a markup, the shock has a mean of 50 percent and a
standard deviation of over 2,500 percent. Clearly, this level of volatility is absurd when it
is interpreted as reflecting variations in the elasticity of substitution between workers like
carpenters, plumbers, neurosurgeons–and even economists.
       We show that introducing the wage- and price-markup shocks amounts to mechanically
inserting a labor wedge into the model which can be interpreted in more than one way. These
shocks are equally interpretable, for example, as fluctuations in the bargaining power of
unions or as fluctuations in the value of leisure of consumers–not a sign of a structural
feature. Furthermore, both of these interpretations seem strained. In the bargaining power


                                              3
view, a contagious attack of greediness among workers leads them to demand higher wages.
In general equilibrium, this attempt is frustrated, and workers simply bid themselves out of
jobs. In the fluctuating value of leisure view, a contagious attack of laziness among workers
leads them all to take vacations by quitting, thus causing an economic downturn. Many
macroeconomists will find both interpretations unpalatable and, hence, should reject this
model for policy analysis.
       The other two Smets-Wouters shocks we discuss here are also dubiously structural.
In the model, the exogenous spending (or government spending) shock has little to do with
actual government spending, since it has 3.5 times the variance of measured government
spending in the U.S. data. Rather, the shock is defined residually from the national income
identity and includes variables such as net exports, which are clearly not invariant to monetary
policy. The Smets-Wouters risk premium shock is enormous (has six times the variance of
short-term nominal rates) and has little interpretation as it stands. We think this shock may
be best interpreted as a flight-to-quality shock that aﬀects the attractiveness of short-term
government debt relative to other assets. Such a shock is unlikely to be invariant to monetary
policy either.
       Beyond the Smets-Wouters shocks, we examine two other dubious features in this New
Keynesian model: backward indexation of prices and the common specification of the Taylor
rule as the central bank’s optimal policy. We argue that neither feature belongs in a structural
model because both are inconsistent with the data. The backward indexation of prices is a
mechanical way to make the New Keynesian model match the persistence of inflation in the
U.S. data. We show that this feature is flatly inconsistent with the micro data on prices. So,
it turns out, is the model’s monetary policy specification. The Taylor rule is a specification
of how the Federal Reserve sets the short-term nominal rate as a function of what it observes.
The Smets-Wouters specification of this function follows a long tradition in assuming that
the short rate is stationary and ergodic. But, as we show, this specification cannot generate
anything close to the observed behavior of the long-term nominal rate. Since the behavior of
the long-term rate reflects how the policy instrument, the short rate, aﬀects the real side of
the economy, misspecifying this relationship leads to an inaccurate assessment of policy.
       We argue that these last two dubious features are linked. As Timothy Cogley and Argia


                                               4
M. Sbordone (2005) have shown, once the Fed’s policy is specified as having a random walk—
like component, the resulting model can fit the aggregates without backward indexation. In
particular, the persistence of inflation seen in the data naturally follows from the persistence
of policy, instead of having to be mechanically tacked onto the model.
       Getting the true structure of the economy correct in a model is critical for policy
analysis. For example, with backwardly indexed prices, the model says the costs of an abrupt
disinflation are huge; without them, it says the costs are tiny. Thus, even though tacking on
mechanical, dubiously structural features may improve a model’s fit, it does so at the cost of
reliable policy analysis.
       Although we have argued that the New Keynesian model as typified by the Smets-
Wouters model is not yet useful for policy analysis, we still maintain that neoclassical econo-
mists and New Keynesian economists broadly concur in their policy recommendations. This
fact becomes clear when we step back for some historical perspective. Until recently, the
major conflicts in macro policy in the postwar era were between the Old Keynesians and the
neoclassicals. The Old Keynesian view is eloquently and forcefully summarized by Franco
Modigliani (1977, p. 1), who argues that the fundamental practical policy implication that
Old Keynesians agree on is that the private economy “needs to be stabilized, can be stabilized,
and therefore should be stabilized by appropriate monetary and fiscal policies” (emphasis in
original). The neoclassical economists, of course, recommend quite diﬀerent policies: com-
mitment to low average inflation rates on the monetary side and tax-smoothing on the fiscal
side. Moreover, neoclassicals argue that even eﬃcient allocations could fluctuate sizably.
       Something insuﬃciently appreciated today is that even though the New Keynesian
model has many elements of the Old Keynesian stories, such as sticky prices, the New Key-
nesian policy implications are drastically diﬀerent from those of the Old Keynesians and are
remarkably close to those of the neoclassicals. If you doubt that, take a look at the work of
Isabel Correia, Juan P. Nicolini, and Pedro Teles (2008), which shows that given a suﬃciently
rich set of instruments, optimal policy is exactly the same in a sticky price model as in a
neoclassical flexible price model.
       That result is consistent with our explanation for the convergence in policy recom-
mendations among macroeconomists. Generally, Keynesians, in shifting from their old to


                                               5
their new views, have ended up basically where the neoclassicals have been all along, at least
on the essentials. Most modern macroeconomists of both traditions use equilibrium models
with forward-looking private agents, so a commitment to rules is essential for good economic
performance. Even in the frictionless version of modern models, eﬃcient allocations fluctuate
sizably, so even under optimal policy, a model will display sizable business cycle fluctuations;
eliminating all of them is considered bad policy. And finally, New Keynesian models typically
incorporate sticky prices or wages, but like neoclassical models, their optimal monetary policy
is typically to keep inflation low and stable in order to avoid sectoral misallocations.
       As we have said, despite our critique of these New Keynesian models, we agree with the
principles behind their policy recommendations. That alone gives us optimism that changing
the practical methods we have criticized may someday make the New Keynesian models useful
for policy analysis.

I.   Setting Up Our Critique
       Here we use our CKM framework of business cycle accounting to make two points
that set up our critique of the New Keynesian model. First, we show that a particular shock,
referred to as the labor wedge, plays a central role over the U.S. business cycle, especially in
accounting for employment fluctuations. Then we show that the precise sense in which the
labor wedge is a reduced-form shock by showing that two structural models with diﬀerent
policy implications are consistent with the same labor wedge.
       In our critique here, we will argue that the wage-markup shock in the New Keynesian
model is essentially the labor wedge in our accounting framework. As such, not surprisingly, it
plays an important role in accounting for employment. We argue that the wage-markup shock
is no more structural than the labor wedge. That result suggests that the New Keynesian
model is not useful for policy analysis. We show that similar arguments apply to other shocks
in that model.

A. Reduced-Form vs. Structural Shocks
       We begin by clarifying the distinction between reduced-form and structural shocks.
This distinction is critical because in order to do policy analysis, we need to be able to predict
the consequences of changes in policy, both for outcomes of the standard economic variables


                                                6
and for welfare. Such a prediction is possible only with a structural model.
       Specifically, a structural model must have two properties. The relevant elements of
the model–including the shocks–must be invariant with respect to the policy interventions
considered. And the shocks must be interpretable, so that we know whether they are what
could be thought of as good shocks that policy should accommodate or bad shocks that policy
should oﬀset. Shocks which have both of these properties are referred to as structural; those
that do not, as reduced-form.
       CKM argues that a simple business cycle model augmented with several reduced-
form shocks, referred to as wedges, can account for much of the observed movements in
macroeconomic aggregates in the data. In particular, one shock, labeled the labor wedge,
plays a central role in accounting for employment in the data.       CKM shows that such a
model with these reduced-form shocks can account for much of the movements in economic
aggregates. While CKM argues that understanding which reduced-form shocks are needed
to fit the data can be useful in determining which classes of structural models are promising,
by itself such a model is useless for policy analysis.

B. A Growth Model with Reduced-Form Shocks
       To describe CKM’s argument in more detail, we begin with a prototype growth model,
which is a standard business cycle model with four reduced-form shocks, referred to as wedges:
the eﬃciency wedge At , the labor wedge 1 − τ lt , the investment wedge 1/ (1 + τ xt ), and the
government consumption wedge gt .
       In this economy, consumers maximize expected utility over per capita consumption ct
and per capita labor lt ,
            ∞
            X
       E0         β t U (ct , 1 − lt ),
            t=0

subject to the budget constraint

       ct + (1 + τ xt ) xt = (1 − τ lt ) wt lt + rt kt + Tt

and the capital accumulation law

(1)    kt+1 = (1 − δ)kt + xt ,


                                                      7
where β denotes the time discount factor, xt per capita investment, wt the wage rate, rt the
rental rate on capital, kt the per capita capital stock, Tt per capita lump-sum transfers, and δ
the depreciation rate of capital. Notice that in this prototype economy, the eﬃciency wedge
resembles a blueprint technology parameter, and the labor wedge and the investment wedge
resemble tax rates on labor income and investment.
          The equilibrium of this prototype economy is summarized by the resource constraint,

(2)       ct + xt + gt = yt ,

where yt denotes per capita output, together with

(3)       yt = At F (kt , lt ),

          Ult
(4)           = (1 − τ lt ) At Flt , and
          Uct

(5)       Uct (1 + τ xt ) = Et [βUct+1 {At+1 Fkt+1 + (1 − δ)(1 + τ xt+1 )}] ,

where, here and throughout, notations like Uct , Ult , Flt , and Fkt denote the derivatives of the
utility function and the production function with respect to their arguments.
          CKM shows that the eﬃciency and labor wedges together account for essentially all
the movement in U.S. output and that the labor wedge plays a central role in accounting for
the movement in U.S. labor, both for the Great Depression period and in postwar business
cycles.
          Here we focus on the labor wedge. To get a feel for this wedge, look at Figure 1A.
There we report on U.S. output (relative to trend) and the measured labor wedge for the Great
Depression period from 1929 to 1939. Note that the underlying distortions which manifest
themselves as labor wedges became substantially worse from 1929 to 1933 and stayed roughly
at this level at least until 1939. Figure 1B displays the 1929—39 data for U.S. labor, along
with the model’s predictions for labor when the model includes just the labor wedge. Note
here that the model captures almost all of the movements in labor. (For more details, see
CKM.)




                                                     8
C. Two Structural Models That Generate a Labor Wedge
       We now briefly discuss two structural models that can give rise to the labor wedge in a
prototype economy and these models’ policy implications. One model has government policy
toward unions fluctuate. The other model has the consumer’s value of leisure fluctuate. The
two interpretations, as we shall see, have radically diﬀerent policy implications.

1. Fluctuating Government Policy Toward Unions
       Consider, then, the following economy in which fluctuations in government policy
toward unions show up as fluctuations in labor market distortions in an associated prototype
economy with reduced-form shocks. (For a discussion of such policies during the Great
Depression, see the 2004 work of Harold L. Cole and Lee E. Ohanian.)
       In this economy, the technology for producing final goods from capital and a labor
aggregate after a history of exogenous shocks st is constant returns to scale and is given by

(6)    y(st ) = F (k(st−1 ), l(st )),

where y(st ) is output of the final good, k(st−1 ) is capital, and
                     ∙Z       1                        ¸1+λ
                                              1
            t                          t
(7)    l(s ) =                    l(i, s )   1+λ   di
                          0

is an aggregate of the diﬀerentiated types of labor l(i, st ) with an elasticity of substitution
governed by λ. Capital is accumulated according to (1). The discounted value of profits for
the final goods producer is
       ∞ X
       X                          h                                    i
(8)                 q(st ) y(st ) − x(st ) − w(st )l(st ) ,
       t=0 st

where q(st ) is the price of a unit of consumption goods at st in an abstract unit of account,
x(st ) is investment at st , and w(st ) is the aggregate real wage at st . The producer’s problem
can be stated in two parts. First, the producer chooses sequences for capital k(st−1 ), invest-
ment x(st ), and aggregate labor l(st ) subject to (1) and (6). Second, the demand for labor
of type i by the final goods producer is
                           Ã                  ! 1+λ
        d       t                  w(st )          λ
(9)    l (i, s ) =                                       l(st ),
                                  w(i, st )
                      hR                       1
                                                        i−λ
where w(st ) ≡                w(i, st )− λ di                 is the aggregate wage.

                                                                           9
       The economy has a representative union that, when setting its wage, faces a downward-
sloping demand for its type of labor, given by (9). The problem of the ith union is to maximize
its union members’ utility
       ∞ X
       X                        ³                       ´
(10)             β t π(st ) u c(i, st ), 1 − l(i, st )
       t=0 st
subject to the budget constraints
                     X
       c(i, st ) +          q(st+1 |st )b(i, st+1 ) ≤ w(st )ld (i, st ) + b(i, st ) + d(st )
                     st+1

and the borrowing constraint b(st+1 ) ≥ −b, where π(st ) is the probability of the state st
and ld (i, st ) is given by (9). Here b(i, st , st+1 ) denotes the consumers’ holdings of one-period
state-contingent bonds purchased in period t and state st , with payoﬀs contingent on some
particular state st+1 in t + 1, and q(st+1 |st ) is the bonds’ corresponding price. Clearly,
q(st+1 |st ) = q(st+1 )/q(st ). Also, d(st ) = y(st ) − x(st ) − w(st )l(st ) are the dividends paid by
the firms. The initial conditions b(i, s0 ) are given and assumed to be the same for all i.
      The only distorted first-order condition for this problem is that
                         ul (i, st )
(11) w(i, st ) = (1 + λ)             .
                         uc (i, st )
Notice that real wages are set as a markup over the marginal rate of substitution between
labor and consumption. Clearly, given the symmetry among the consumers, we know that
all of them choose the same consumption, labor, bond holdings, and wages, which we denote
by c(st ), l(st ), b(st+1 ), and w(st ), and the resource constraint is as in (2).
       We think of government pro-competitive policy as limiting the monopoly power of
unions by pressuring them to limit their anti-competitive behavior. We model the government
policy as enforcing provisions that make the unions price competitively if the markups exceed,
say, λ̄(st ), where λ̄(st ) ≤ λ. Under such a policy, then, the markup charged by unions is λ̄(st ),
so that the key distorted first-order condition is that
                            ul (st )
(12) w(st ) = [1 + λ̄(st )]          .
                            uc (st )
       We now show that this detailed economy has aggregate allocations which coincide with
those in a prototype economy. In that prototype economy, the firm maximizes the present
discounted value of dividends
                ∞ X
                X                h                                               i
(13)   max               q(st ) F (k(st−1 ), l(st )) − x(st ) − w(st )l(st )
                t=0 st


                                                            10
subject to k(st ) = (1 − δ)k(st−1 ) + x(st ). Consumers maximize utility
       ∞ X
       X                       ³                     ´
(14)            β t π(st ) u c(st ), 1 − l(st )
       t=0 st

subject to the budget constraint
                  X
(15)   c(st ) +          q(st+1 |st )b(st+1 ) ≤ [1 − τ (st )]w(st )l(st ) + b(st ) + d(st ) + T (st ),
                  st+1


where τ (st ) is a tax on labor income, d(st ) = F (k(st−1 ), l(st )) − x(st ) − w(st )l(st ) are
dividends, and T (st ) = τ (st )w(st )l(st ) are lump-sum transfers. The resource constraint is,
again, as in (2). The only distorted first-order condition is that
                                    ul (st )
(16)   [1 − τ (st )]w(st ) =                 .
                                    uc (st )
Comparing (12) and (16), we see that the following proposition immediately follows:

Proposition 1. Consider the prototype economy just described, with the stochastic process
for labor wedges given by
                              1
(17)   1 − τ (st ) =                  .
                          1 + λ̄(st )
The equilibrium allocations and prices of this prototype economy coincide with those of the
unionized economy.

       The policy implications of this model are clear. Its equilibrium allocations are ineﬃ-
cient. The optimal policy of the government is, then, to limit the monopoly power of unions
as much as possible. Crudely put, relentless union-busting is optimal.

2. Fluctuating Utility of Leisure
       A diﬀerent policy implication comes from a diﬀerent structural model in which the
labor market distortion is interpreted not as fluctuations in the government’s policy toward
unions but rather as fluctuations in the consumers’ value of leisure.
       In this detailed economy, let consumers’ discounted utility be of the form (14), where
the period utility function is separable and of the form
         ³                      ´         ³      ´
(18)   u c(st ), 1 − l(st ) = u c(st ) + ψ(st )v (1 − l(st )),


                                                          11
where ψ(st ) is an exogenous stochastic shock to the utility of leisure v. The consumer maxi-
mizes utility (14) subject to the budget constraint
                  X
       c(st ) +          q(st+1 |st )b(st+1 ) ≤ w(st )l(st ) + b(st ).
                  st+1

The firm’s problem here is identical to that in (13). The consumer’s first-order condition for
labor in this detailed economy is given by
       v0 (1 − l(st ))   w(st )
(19)                   =        .
          u0 (c(st ))    ψ(st )
       The associated prototype economy is nearly identical to the one above. The consumer
maximizes (14) subject to (15), where now the period utility function is of the form
                                         ³           ´
(20)   uc(st ), l(st ) = uc(st ) + v 1 − l(st ) ,

which is the same separable form as in (18) except that (20) has no shock to the utility of
leisure. The firm maximizes profits of the form (13). The consumer’s first-order condition in
this prototype economy is that
       v0 (1 − l(st ))
                       = [1 − τ (st )]w(st ).
          u (c(s ))
           0    t


The following proposition is then immediate:

Proposition 2. In the prototype economy just described, with the stochastic process for labor
wedges given by
                           1
(21)   1 − τ (st ) =             ,
                          ψ(st )
the equilibrium allocations and prices of this prototype economy coincide with those of the
detailed economy with a fluctuating value of leisure.

       The policy implications for this structural model with our label wedge are simple: the
equilibrium allocations are eﬃcient, so laissez-faire is optimal.
       In sum, even though the union model and the leisure model generate the same observa-
tions as the prototype model with reduced-form shocks, the models have drastically diﬀerent
policy implications. We shall see this reflected more practically in our critique of a version of
the New Keynesian model.

                                                          12
II.    Our Critique of New Keynesian Models
       The prototypical New Keynesian model is not much diﬀerent from the prototype
growth model with reduced-form shocks just described. It includes dubiously structural
shocks and other features that handicap its usefulness for policy analysis.

A. The Dubiously Structural Shocks
       The Smets-Wouters model we critique has seven exogenous random variables. Three
of these are arguably structural: shocks to total factor productivity, investment-specific tech-
nology, and monetary policy. Four others, however, we think are dubiously structural: shocks
to wage markups, price markups, exogenous spending, and risk premia. We begin by showing
that these four shocks play a central role in the New Keynesian model. We then explain why
the shocks are hard to interpret as structural.

1. The Centrality of These Shocks
       The four shocks we have isolated are not minor parts of the Smets-Wouters model.
We demonstrate that by backing out of the estimated model a predicted time series for
aggregate variables for combinations of the stochastic shocks. In Figures 2A, 2B, and 2C,
we display a comparison of the results, the actual time series and the model’s predictions for
those variables with just the four questionable shocks.1 These figures show that these shocks
account for a sizable fraction of the movements in output, most of the movements in labor,
and virtually all of the movements in inflation.
       The centrality of these shocks can also be been in Table 1. There we report the variance
decomposition of forecast errors for the Smets-Wouters model at horizons of 4 quarters and
10 quarters and the unconditional variance decomposition (measured as forecast errors at
a horizon of 1,000 quarters) for output, labor, and inflation. We also report the sum of
the variances due to the four dubiously structural shocks. This table confirms the visual
impression of the figures. The shocks generate much of the fluctuations. For example, at a
horizon of 10 quarters, the forecast error variances for output, hours, and inflation due to the
dubiously structural shocks are about 44 percent, 69 percent, and 87 percent, respectively.

  1
   Labor in the U.S. data is measured as total hours worked per person in the nonfarm business sector
multiplied by the total number of civilians employed (workers aged 16 years and older).


                                                 13
2. The Non-Structural Nature of the Shocks
       Whereas these shocks play a central role in fluctuations, they are not structural. We
argue here that the wage- and price-markup shocks are reduced-form shocks, subject to
multiple interpretations with vastly diﬀerent policy implications. The other two shocks, we
argue, are not likely invariant with respect to policy either.

a. The Wage-Markup Shock–A Fancy Name for a Labor Wedge?
       In the Smets-Wouters model, one shock, the wage-markup shock, accounts for a sig-
nificant fraction of the fluctuations in aggregates, especially labor. This shock appears as
an additive shock in a linearized wage equation that relates current wages to past and ex-
pected future wages. We argue that this shock is a dubiously structural reduced-form shock
that mechanically plays exactly the same role as the labor wedge does in our business cycle
model. This shock can therefore be interpreted in at least two ways, the same two ways
we saw in our business cycle analysis: as fluctuations in workers’ bargaining power, due to
changes in government policy toward unions, or as changes in consumers’ value of leisure.
And as we have argued above, these interpretations have radically diﬀerent implications for
policy. Obviously, then, until we have concrete micro evidence in favor of at least one of these
interpretations, the New Keynesian model should not be used for policy analysis.

(1) Equivalent to a Labor Wedge
       The additive shock to the linearized wage equation in the Smets-Wouters model is
motivated as coming from shocks to the labor aggregator. This labor aggregator G relates
aggregate labor lt to a continuum of diﬀerentiated types of labor services lt (i) according to
              Z             Ã                   !
                  1      lt (i)
(22)   1=              G        ; λt                di,
              0            lt
where λt is referred to as the wage-markup shock. For intuition’s sake, we focus discussion
on a special case of this aggregator, the constant elasticity of substitution case explored by
                                                                     1
Smets and Wouters (2003), in which G(lt (i)/lt ; λt )=(lt (i)/lt ) 1+λt , so that
              ∙Z       1                    ¸1+λt
                                      1
(23)   lt =                lt (i)   1+λt   di         .
                   0

Clearly, making λt stochastic is just a simple way to make stochastic the elasticity of substi-
tution between diﬀerent types of labor in the labor aggregator (23), namely, (1 + λt )/λt .

                                                          14
       Given our business cycle accounting analysis, we are not surprised that this wage-
markup shock plays an important role in generating fluctuations. In fact, we argue that this
shock is equivalent to what we have called a labor wedge.
       To see this equivalence, consider a stripped-down flexible-wage version of the Smets-
Wouters model with period utility function u(ct , 1 − lt ). Here, as in our union interpretation
above, think of consumers as being organized into unions, so that the ith union consists of
all consumers with labor services of type i. The first-order condition for union i is to set
the nominal wage for that type of labor Wt (i) so that the corresponding real wage wt (i) =
Wt (i)/Pt satisfies wt (i) = (1 + λt )ult /uct . Since all unions are symmetric, wt (i) equals the
aggregate real wage wt . This model, therefore, implies that
                        ult
(24)   wt = (1 + λt )       .
                        uct
(If we also abstract from sticky prices and monopoly power by firms, both of which play a
quantitatively minor role in generating fluctuations in labor in the Smets-Wouters model, we
have that the real wage equals the marginal product of labor.)
       Now compare the wedge between the real wage and the marginal utility of leisure
in (24) to the corresponding wedges in the two models described earlier and characterized
by equations (17) and (21) of Propositions 1 and 2. Clearly, all the wage-markup shock λt
does is generate a labor wedge in the model. In this sense, adding this shock is completely
equivalent to mechanically inserting an exogenous labor wedge into the model, as we did in
the prototype model.
       We have already argued that the wedges identified in business cycle accounting cannot,
by themselves, be used for policy analysis. Can the wage-markup shock? What if we interpret
the shock literally, as consisting of fluctuations in the elasticity of substitution for diﬀerent
types of labor? To help with interpretation of units, we consider the constant elasticity of
substitution case with the labor aggregates given by (23). We have re-estimated the Smets-
Wouters model for this case after imposing, as Smets and Wouters do, that the mean markup
is 50 percent. We have found that the standard deviation of the markup is absurdly large:
2,587 percent. In the Smets-Wouters model, fluctuations in λt , taken literally, correspond to
fluctuations in the elasticity of substitution ((1 + λt )/λt ) between diﬀerent types of labor.


                                               15
We think everyone, including Smets and Wouters, would regard these fluctuations as being
several orders of magnitude outside of a reasonable range. Hence, a literal interpretation of
the wage-markup shock is not palatable. We view the shock instead as a reduced-form shock
that stands in for some deeper, as yet unidentified shocks.
         Since the wage-markup shock accounts for much of the fluctuations in labor and in-
flation, the Smets-Wouters model cannot be used for policy analysis until we take a stand
on what those deeper shocks are. In particular, we must determine whether the shock is
invariant to policy and whether it is interpretable enough to be identified as a good shock,
which policymakers would want to accommodate, or a bad shock, which they would want to
oﬀset.

(2) Multiple Interpretations
         We now describe two possible interpretations of the wage-markup shock, both of which
are problematic for the New Keynesian model.

(a) The Bargaining Power of Unions.
         One possible interpretation of the wage-markup shock is that it represents the bar-
gaining power of unions, in particular, and labor, more generally. What then gives rise to the
shock’s fluctuations? And are these shocks invariant to monetary policy? Those questions,
of course, are impossible to answer given the reduced form of the model. We tend to doubt
that the shocks are invariant to policy. Presumably, though, advocates of this view see the
bargaining power of unions relative to firms as related to the outside opportunities of these
economic agents. The whole point of a monetary policy intervention is to aﬀect the real
side of the economy and, thus, to change these opportunities. So this interpretation fails the
policy-invariant requirement.
         For argument’s sake, however, suppose we view these shocks as standing in for fluc-
tuations in bargaining power and invariant to monetary policy interventions. Then we do
not end up with a view of business cycles that most macroeconomists would find appealing.
Under this interpretation, fluctuations in the bargaining power of workers lead them to be-
come discontented with their current wages and to try to bid up those wages. If workers are
unsuccessful at that, then they quit (in order to satisfy (24)), and if they are successful, then

                                               16
the firm lays them oﬀ.
       Under this view, fluctuations in the wage-markup shock are bad, and the government
should use all of its powers to oﬀset their real eﬀects on the economy. Indeed, the general
principle here is that policy should be set so as to replicate the eﬃcient equilibrium in which
workers have no monopoly power and no sticky wages. In this eﬃcient equilibrium, all
variables, including labor, are at their eﬃcient levels. Since most of the movements in labor
are driven by this wage-markup shock, labor will not be volatile. Monetary policy, which is
a poor tool for oﬀsetting such shocks, should balance the benefits of keeping nominal wages
constant against the other costs in the model of doing so.
       Of course, if this type of shock were actually thought to be driving the business cycle,
then the government could instead use a much more powerful and eﬀective policy to combat
it. At the first hint of recession, the government should crack down hard on unions. Such
a policy, which would be of the form that led to (12), would eﬀectively eliminate business
cycles in the U.S. economy.
       Is this worker greed a palatable story of business cycles? We find it farfetched to think
that most New Keynesians–or most economists of any stripe–would think so. Anyone who
does should support the view with some detailed microeconomic evidence. For example, what
fraction of labor’s decline in a recession can be accounted for by strikes?

(b) The Value of Leisure.
       An alternative interpretation of the wage-markup shock leads to another story. Per-
haps this shock simply reflects changes in consumers’ utility of leisure along the lines discussed
in our business cycle accounting above. This interpretation of the shock turns out to lead to
an observationally equivalent economy, in terms of aggregates, to the one just discussed, but
with vastly diﬀerent policy implications. Thus, without more to go on than aggregate data,
the policy implications of the New Keynesian model cannot be pinned down.
       To get some intuition for this observational equivalence result, consider an economy
with a utility function of the form (18). Comparing (19) and (24), we see that in an economy
in which the coeﬃcient on leisure is given by

(25)   ψ(st ) = 1 + λ(st ),


                                                17
which has no distortions or monopoly power, the first-order condition for leisure will be
equivalent to that in a stripped-down, flexible price version of the Smets-Wouters model with
the fluctuations in monopoly power that gave rise to (24).
       The Smets-Wouters model is actually more complicated than the stripped-down ver-
sion because with the Calvo-type way of making wages sticky, wages are set as a markup over
a present value of the marginal utility of leisure. But the equivalence between fluctuations in
the value of leisure and fluctuations in monopoly power holds even in this setting. Indeed,
as Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) acknowledge, in the log-linearized model they use in
estimation, they cannot identify whether their wage-markup shocks are really shocks to the
elasticity of substitution in the labor aggregator, as in (23), or shocks to the utility of leisure,
as in (18).
       Note that the policy implications of interpreting the wage-markup shock as fluctuations
in leisure are radically diﬀerent than those of the bargaining power interpretation. Under
the leisure interpretation, fluctuations in the shock are good, since they represent eﬃcient
equilibrium changes in agents’ preferences, and the Fed should accommodate them. But this
interpretation of the shock in the New Keynesian model has serious issues. To get a feel for
these issues quantitatively, we follow Smets and Wouters (2003) and allow for an AR(1) taste
shock and an i.i.d. markup shock (as do Andrew T. Levin et al. (2006)). We think of this
model as the taste shock version of the Smets-Wouters model. We use this model to predict
what output would be in the model’s eﬃcient equilibrium (the economy’s potential output).
Then in Figure 3, we plot changes in the potential and actual output from 1965 to 2005 from
this version of the model estimated for the United States.
       We see there that in the period from 1979 to 1984, the United States went through
two recessions. Many economists attribute those downturns in large part to the Fed’s actions
aimed at reducing inflation. The figure shows that as actual output fell, so did potential
output. Indeed, in all of the early 1980s, the model says, output’s potential level was below
its observed level.
       Do New Keynesians accept their model’s implication that the driving force behind
postwar recessions has been, in Modigliani’s (1977, p. 6) terminology, that workers suﬀered
a “severe attack of contagious laziness”? That the recessions between 1979 and 1984 had


                                                18
almost nothing to do with monetary policy? That the Fed should have tightened even more
during recessions because its actual monetary policy discouraged workers from taking the even
longer vacations from working that they desired? (Carl E. Walsh (2006) expresses similar
skepticism about this version of the New Keynesian model.)
       In sum, we have diﬃculties with both interpretations of the key wage-markup shock
in the New Keynesian model and the associated policy recommendations. Presumably, most
other economists do as well.

b. Other Shocks.
       So far we have argued that the wage-markup shock in the Smets-Wouters model is
dubiously structural. Similar concerns obviously apply to the price-markup shock, so we will
not detail them here. We now turn to the model’s exogenous spending and risk premium
shocks. Both of these were added to help the New Keynesian model fit the aggregate data,
but neither is invariant with respect to policy.
       Consider first the exogenous spending shock. Smets and Wouters (2007) refer to
this type of shock as a shock to either “exogenous spending” or “government spending.”
Unfortunately, the resulting shock clearly has little to do with measured government spending.
For example, the variance of the Smets and Wouters exogenous spending shock is 3.5 times
the variance of measured government spending in the U.S. data. This may be true because in
the Smets-Wouters empirical implementation, this shock is residually defined from the U.S.
national income identity and includes, among other variables, net exports. Variables like net
exports are not likely to be invariant to monetary policy.
       Consider also the Smets-Wouters risk premium shock. (By the way, we find the term
risk premium shock confusing because the Smets-Wouters model has no risk premium.) This
type of shock enters the consumer’s first-order condition for government debt, but not the
first-order condition for accumulating capital. In this sense, this shock resembles (unobserved)
time-varying taxes on short-term nominal government debt (relative to taxes on capital in-
come). In the Smets-Wouters model, this shock is enormous.
       To see that, look at Figure 4. There we plot the short-term nominal interest rate and




                                              19
the risk premium shock from the Smets and Wouters (2007) model.2 Note that this shock
is dramatically more variable than the short-term interest rate. The variance of the risk
premium shock is more than six times the variance of the short-term nominal rates.
        The only sensible economic interpretation that we can give to this sort of risk premium
shock is that it is meant to capture financial market episodes when there is a flight to qual-
ity, in the sense that consumers’ preference for holding government debt increases abruptly.
Unfortunately for the Smets-Wouters model, under this interpretation, this shock is hardly
likely to be invariant to monetary policy.

B. Other Dubious Features
        So far we have focused on structural issues with the shocks in the Smets-Wouters New
Keynesian model. That model also has other features highly questionable in a structural
model. Here we focus on two related features: the backward indexation mechanism for
generating persistent inflation and the modeling of the Fed’s policy function. Both of those
features have important implications for policy but only a weak theoretical foundation, and
they are at odds with microeconomic evidence.

1. A Mechanism for Generating Persistent Inflation
        A questionable assumption about price behavior has recently been added to New
Keynesian models in order to solve a problem. Several researchers, including Jeﬀrey C.
Fuhrer (1996) and N. Gregory Mankiw (2001), have pointed out that simple New Keynesian
models, even with Calvo wage- and price-setting, cannot generate persistent inflation. That’s
a problem because U.S. inflation is persistent. Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005)
have shown that when the backward indexation of prices is added to a New Keynesian model,
the model can generate inflation persistence. Unfortunately, this feature is inconsistent with
microeconomic evidence on price-setting and can lead researchers to mistaken assessments of
the costs of disinflation.

   2
    To be precise, equation (2) in the 2007 work of Smets and Wouters is the log-linearized consumption
Euler equation

        ct = c1 ct−1 + (1 − c1 )Et ct+1 + c2 (lt − Et lt+1 ) − c3 (rt − Et πt+1 + εbt ).

In Figure 4, we plot rt and εbt .


                                                           20
       Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007), building on the work of Christiano, Eichenbaum,
and Evans (2005), incorporate backward price indexation into their models. Specifically,
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans assume that even firms that are not allowed to freely
adjust their prices in time period t, mechanically adjust them to lagged inflation, so that the
price pjt charged by a nonadjusting firm j in period t equals

(26)   pjt = π t−1 pjt−1 ,

where pjt−1 is this firm’s price in t − 1 and π t−1 is the rate of gross inflation of the aggregate
price level between periods t − 1 and t. Smets and Wouters (2003, 2007) assume something
similar, except they allow for only partial indexation.
       The problem with this backward indexation assumption is that it is counterfactual.
We know this thanks to the work of Mark Bils and Peter J. Klenow (2004), Mikhail Golosov
and Lucas (2007), Virgiliu Midrigan (2007), Emi Nakamura and Jón Steinsson (forthcoming),
and others. Their evidence on price behavior at the micro level strongly suggests that the
backward price indexing assumption is greatly at odds with the data.
       This point can perhaps be grasped most easily through a concrete example from the
data. Consider the actual prices charged in the early 1990s for a particular product in scanner
data from a grocery store. In Figure 5, we plot the price charged for a package of Angel Soft
bathroom tissue at Dominick’s Finer Foods retail store in Chicago in 1991—93, along with
what the price would look like if it were backward-indexed along the lines of (26), as is
assumed by Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005). Clearly, the path of the actual price
does not look like that assumed. (We have picked a particular series to illustrate our point,
but we could have shown literally thousands more that look similar.)
       More generally, the backward indexation is at odds with how prices change in the
economy. The key statistic reported in the budding literature on the properties of individual
prices is the average number of months before a price is changed. Bils and Klenow (2004)
report that number to be about four months, while Nakamura and Steinsson (forthcoming)
use a diﬀerent procedure and report a number closer to eleven months. Note that the New
Keynesian model’s predictions with backward indexation are simply inconsistent with these
micro data. If we were to use either Bils and Klenow’s or Nakamura and Steinsson’s algorithm


                                                21
on prices generated from the New Keynesian model, we would find that prices changed every
single period.
       There seems to be some confusion on this point among those who use the backward
indexation assumption. When, for example, Bils and Klenow report that the average time
between price changes is four months, they are not providing an estimate of the Calvo proba-
bility of changing a price in an economy in which, because of backward indexation, all prices
change in every period. Rather, Bils and Klenow’s results imply that to be consistent with
the micro data, a model must have prices completely and utterly fixed between price changes,
and then, on average, changes must occur every four months.
       In short, although sticking an ad hoc backward price indexation equation like (26) into
a model can make the model mechanically generate inflation persistence, the mechanism by
which this procedure does so is flatly inconsistent with the micro data.
       Aside from that inconsistency, we know that the mechanical backward indexation
feature of the model shapes its policy advice. In particular, as the literature has shown, the
costs of disinflation in an economy with backward indexation are quite high. If the persistence
of inflation were coming from another mechanism, then those costs may be much lower.

2. The Model of the Fed’s Policy Function
       The other dubious feature of the Smets-Wouters model is its description of monetary
policy. New Keynesian models generally follow the standard Taylor rule specification of how
the Fed sets its policy instrument, the short-term nominal interest rate, as a function of
what the Fed observes. These models assume that short-term nominal rates are stationary
and ergodic. But that assumption implies that long-term nominal rates are much smoother
than they are in the data. This discrepancy leads New Keynesian models to misidentify the
source of inflation persistence and, hence, to give erroneous policy advice about the costs of
disinflation.
       The gist of our argument follows from two features of the interest rate data. One is
that, as is well known, during the postwar period, short and long rates have similar secular
patterns. (For some recent work documenting this feature, see the 2008 work of Andrew
Atkeson and Kehoe.) The other data feature is that, as a large body of finance work has


                                              22
shown, the level of the long rate is well accounted for by the expectations hypothesis. (See, for
example, the 2008 work of John H. Cochrane and Monika Piazzesi.) Together, these two data
features imply that when the Fed alters the current short rate, private agents significantly
adjust their long-run expectations of the future short rate. If that is true, then at an intuitive
level, we can see that Fed interest rate policy must have a large random component. Such
a component is hard to reconcile with the smooth long-run rates implied by the use of the
Taylor rule.
       This dubious feature of the Smets-Wouters model is actually related to the model’s
inappropriate use of backward price indexation. The use of that procedure, recall, is intended
to help the model generate the data’s inflation persistence, but the procedure is inconsistent
with the micro evidence. A more plausible mechanism to generate that persistence is the
addition of a persistent random walk component to the model’s policy function. Cogley and
Sbordone (2005) and Peter N. Ireland (2007) show that once the Fed policy function has a
random walk component, the model needs no backward indexation of prices in order to fit
the data. In fact, that model then fits the data better than the standard New Keynesian
model with backward indexation and a Taylor rule.

III.       The Source of Convergence in Policy
       Thus far, we have argued that new Keynesian models are not ready for quarter-to-
quarter policy advice. And yet, we have also argued that New Keynesian and Neoclassical
economists have converged on broad principles of macroeconomic policy. How can that be?
       To see the source of this convergence in a simple and stark way, consider the 2008 work
of Correia, Nicolini, and Teles. They work out the monetary and fiscal policy implications
of a sticky price model in which the government has a rich set of instruments: it can choose
monetary policy as well as taxes on consumption, labor income, and profits. They compare
the optimal monetary and fiscal policies in the sticky price version of the model–the New
Keynesian version–to those of the model with flexible prices–the neoclassical version. Their
main result is that optimal monetary and fiscal policies in the two model versions coincide
exactly.
       As we complicate the simple New Keynesian model studied by Correia, Nicolini, and


                                               23
Teles, by restricting the set of fiscal instruments and adding more frictions, the resulting
optimal policy implications of sticky price models begin to diﬀer from those of flexible price
models, but perhaps not by much. For example, Levin et al. (2006) consider a version of the
Smets-Wouters model with a restricted set of instruments and find policy recommendations
that are neoclassical in flavor. Of course, as we have discussed, the details of the recom-
mendations depend on the nature of the structural shocks. Given the shocks, however, the
recommendations from neoclassical and New Keynesian models seem nearly the same.
       This illustrates a convergence among macroeconomists today in our policy recommen-
dations, if not in how we reach them. New Keynesian modelers, even with their dubiously
structural models, are now moving toward policy recommendations similar to those made by
neoclassical economists like Lucas and Stokey 25 years ago.

IV.    Conclusion
       We have argued here that New Keynesian models are not yet useful for policy analysis.
Our basic reason is that macroeconomists working in this tradition have added so many free
parameters to their models that those models are dubiously structural.
       Changes in method can, however, change that judgment. The primary change needed
is obvious: to resist the urge to add parameters undisciplined by micro data simply because
they help the model better fit the same old aggregate time series. This method is what makes
the New Keynesian models unhelpful as tools of policy analysis.
       An example of a better way for New Keynesian modelers to proceed has to do with
the cross-sectional distribution of employment, which fluctuates dramatically in the Smets-
Wouters model. Fluctuations like that are obviously ineﬃcient. Indeed, a major goal of
optimal monetary policy is to reduce those employment distribution fluctuations by reducing
the corresponding fluctuations in the wage distribution over the business cycle. (See the 2006
work of Levin et al.) At the minimum, then, researchers pursuing variants of the Smets-
Wouters model as potentially useful policy tools should ask whether the data actually show
significant fluctuations in these distributions and show as well some links between the wage
and employment distributions necessary for monetary policy eﬀectiveness. If the data appear
promising in this regard, then these data should be used to discipline the estimation. If the


                                             24
data are not promising, however, then looking elsewhere for a model would seem to be the
only prudent option.
      Processes of this kind will be slow and painful, but likely worth the trouble because
they will help the profession avoid the unhappy outcomes of the Old Keynesian revolution.
In our view, these unhappy outcomes resulted from a false promise that we had trustworthy
tools for designing and implementing good policy.




                                            25
References

Atkeson, Andrew, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2008. “On the Need for a New Approach to Ana-
      lyzing Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department
      Working Paper 662.
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.”
      Journal of Political Economy, 112 (5, October): 947—85.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan. 2007. “Business Cycle Accounting.”
      Econometrica, 75 (3, May): 781—836.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidi-
      ties and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political
      Economy, 113 (1, February): 1—45.
Cochrane, John H., and Monika Piazzesi. 2008. “Decomposing the Yield Curve.” Univer-
      sity of Chicago. Unpublished. http://faculty.chicagogsb.edu/john.cochrane/ research/
      papers/interest_rate_revised.pdf.
Cogley, Timothy, and Argia M. Sbordone. 2005. “A Search for a Structural Phillips Curve.”
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 203.
Cole, Harold L., and Lee E. Ohanian. 2004. “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the
      Great Depression: A General Equilibrium Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy,
      112 (4, August): 779—816.
Correia, Isabel, Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles. 2008. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary
      Policy: Equivalence Results.” Journal of Political Economy, 116 (1, February): 141—
      70.
Fuhrer, Jeﬀrey C. 1996. “Monetary Policy Shifts and Long-Term Interest Rates.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 111 (4, November): 1183—1209.
Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 2007. “Menu Costs and Phillips Curves.” Journal
      of Political Economy, 115 (2, April): 171—99.
Ireland, Peter N. 2007. “Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and
      Consequences.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 39 (8, December): 1851—82.
Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah M. Williams. 2006. “Mon-
      etary Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded Macroeconometric Models.” In

                                            26
      NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 229—
      87. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Nancy L. Stokey. 1983. “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in
      an Economy without Capital.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12 (1, July): 55—93.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 2001. “The Inexorable and Mysterious Tradeoﬀ between Inflation and
      Unemployment.” Economic Journal, 111 (471, May): C45—61.
Midrigan, Virgiliu. 2007. “Menu Costs, Multi-Product Firms, and Aggregate Fluctuations.”
      Center for Financial Studies CFS Working Paper 2007/13.
Modigliani, Franco. 1977. “The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Forsake Stabilization
      Policies?” American Economic Review, 67 (2, March): 1—19.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. Forthcoming. “Five Facts About Prices: A Reevaluation
      of Menu Cost Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters. 2003. “An Estimated Dynamic Stochastic General Equilib-
      rium Model of the Euro Area.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 1 (5,
      September): 1123—75.
Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. 2007. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
      Bayesian DSGE Approach.” American Economic Review, 97 (3, June): 586—606.
Walsh, Carl E. 2006. “Comment on ‘Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty in Micro-Founded
      Macroeconometric Models.’” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, ed. Mark Gertler
      and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, 297—308. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                           27
          Table 1. Fore ast Error Varian e De omposition
                 in the Smets-Wouters (2007) Model


                                                        Each Shock’s Percent
                                                      Contribution to Variance of

Horizon             Type of Shock                    Output      Hours    Inflation

4 Quarters          1-Monetary shock                    9.1       11.1        4.6
                    2-Productivity shock               26.1        8.1        5.1
                    3-Investment shock                 25.1       26.8        3.3
                    4-Risk premium shock                9.9       12.8        0.7
                    5-Exogenous spending shock         15.2       20.9        0.5
                    6-Price markup shock               26.1        8.1        5.1
                    7-Wage markup shock                 6.5       12.9       42.9
                    All shocks                        100.0      100.0      100.0
                    Shocks 4−7                         39.6       53.9       86.9


10 Quarters         1-Monetary shock                    5.9        8.0        5.3
                    2-Productivity shock               31.6        4.1        4.5
                    3-Investment shock                 18.5       18.7        3.6
                    4-Risk premium shock                4.2        6.3        0.7
                    5-Exogenous spending shock          8.2       13.8        0.7
                    6-Price markup shock               11.1       11.4       34.0
                    7-Wage markup shock                20.5       37.7       51.1
                    All shocks                        100.0      100.0      100.0
                    Shocks 4−7                         44.0       69.2       86.5


1,000 Quarters      1-Monetary shock                    2.3        3.4        4.6
                    2-Productivity shock               29.5        2.0        4.0
                    3-Investment shock                  7.9        8.6        3.4
                    4-Risk premium shock                1.6        2.6        0.6
                    5-Exogenous spending shock          4.2       10.5        1.0
                    6-Price markup shock                6.4        6.2       28.6
                    7-Wage markup shock                48.2       66.7       57.8
                    All shocks                        100.0      100.0      100.0
                    Shocks 4−7                         60.3       86.0       88.0

Note: Output and hours are logged and detrended but not differenced.
        Figure 1A. U.S. Output and the Measured Labor Wedge

              Annual 1929–39, Series Normalized to Equal 100 in 1929

Index
100




 90




 80


           U.S. Output

 70
                                                             Labor Wedge



 60
  1929     1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936    1937      1938   1939



      Source: Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007)
            Figure 1B. U.S. Labor and Predi tion of Model

                         with Just the Labor Wedge

              Annual 1929–39, Series Normalized to Equal 100 in 1929

Index
100



 95



 90

                          Predicted
 85


             Actual
 80



 75



 70
  1929     1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936    1937      1938   1939



      Source: Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2007)
        Figure 2A. U.S. Output and Predi tion of Smets-Wouters
                                                                          ∗
          (2007) Model with the Dubiously Stru tural Sho ks

        Quarterly Percentage Changes, 1965–2005, Series Logged and Detrended


%8

    6

    4

    2                            U.S. Data
    0

 -2

 -4

 -6                                          Model Prediction
 -8

-10

-12
  1965       1970     1975     1980     1985      1990     1995    2000        2005


∗
    The dubiously structural shocks include the wage-markup shock, the price-markup
    shock, the exogenous spending shock, and the risk premium shock.

    Source of Actual Data: See Smets and Wouters (2007).
        Figure 2B. U.S. Hours and Predi tion of Smets-Wouters
                                                                           ∗
         (2007) Model with the Dubiously Stru tural Sho ks

        Quarterly Percentage Changes, 1965–2005, Series Logged and Demeaned


%6

                                                        U.S. Data
    4


    2


    0


 -2

                                           Model Prediction
 -4


 -6


 -8
  1965       1970     1975     1980     1985     1990      1995     2000       2005


∗
    The dubiously structural shocks include the wage-markup shock, the price-markup
    shock, the exogenous spending shock, and the risk premium shock.

    Source of Actual Data: See Smets and Wouters (2007).
       Figure 2C. U.S. Inflation and Predi tion of Smets-Wouters
                                                                             ∗
           (2007) Model with the Dubiously Stru tural Sho ks

                         Quarterly, 1965–2005, Series Demeaned


% 2.0



  1.5



  1.0



  0.5                                                     Model Prediction


  0.0



 -0.5
                                           U.S. Data

 -1.0
    1965       1970     1975     1980     1985     1990      1995    2000        2005


  ∗
      The dubiously structural shocks include the wage-markup shock, the price-markup
      shock, the exogenous spending shock, and the risk premium shock.

      Source of Actual Data: See Smets and Wouters (2007).
      Figure 3. U.S. Output and Potential Output in Version

         of Smets-Wouters (2007) Model with AR(1) Taste

                  Sho ks and i.i.d. Wage-Markup Sho ks

      Quarterly Percentage Changes, 1965–2005, Series Logged and Detrended


%6

 4

 2

 0

 -2

 -4

 -6                                                      Actual Output

 -8

-10
            Potential Output
-12

-14
  1965     1970     1975       1980   1985     1990     1995     2000        2005



 Source of Actual Data: See Smets and Wouters (2007).
   Figure 4. Annualized Interest Rate and Risk Premium Sho k

                  of the Smets-Wouters (2007) Model

                     Quarterly 1965–2005, Series Demeaned


% 35

  30

  25

  20                                   Interest Rate

  15

  10

   5

   0

  -5

 -10

 -15
                                    Risk Premium Shock
 -20

 -25
   1965    1970     1975     1980      1985     1990     1995   2000   2005



  Source of Actual Data: See Smets and Wouters (2007).
Figure 5. Pri e of Angel Soft Bathroom Tissue at Chi ago's Domini k's

          Finer Foods and Pri e Implied by Ba kward Indexation

                   Weekly, from Week 11 of 1991 to Week 5 of 1993



 $ 0.60



                                            Implied Price


   0.58




                             Actual Price

   0.56




   0.54
          1991:2    1991:3     1991:4   1992:1    1992:2    1992:3   1992:4



     Source of Actual Data: University of Chicago, Kilts Center for Marketing
