                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SEGREGATION AND THE QUALITY OF GOVERNMENT IN A CROSS-SECTION
                           OF COUNTRIES

                                           Alberto Alesina
                                        Ekaterina Zhuravskaya

                                         Working Paper 14316
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14316


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




We are grateful to Denis Chetverikov and Anna Savelyeva for excellent research assistance. We also
thank Roman Schibli, Artem Dzuba, and Galina Besstremiannaya for help with data collection. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alberto Alesina and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross-Section of Countries
Alberto Alesina and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
NBER Working Paper No. 14316
September 2008, Revised February 2009
JEL No. H10

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper has three goals. The first (and perhaps the most important one) is to provide a new compilation
of data on ethnic, linguistic and religious composition at the sub-national level for a large number
of countries. This data set allows us to measure segregation of different ethnic, religious and linguistic
groups within the same country. The second goal is to correlate measures of segregation with measures
of quality of the polity and policymaking. The third is to construct an instrument that helps to overcome
the endogeneity problem due to the fact that groups move within country borders, partly in response
to policies. Our results suggest that more segregated countries in terms of ethnicity and language, i.e.,
those where groups live more spatially separately, have a substantially lower quality of government.
In contrast, there is no relationship between religious segregation and the government quality.


Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Ekaterina Zhuravskaya
New Economic School
47 Nakhimovsky prospect
office 720
Moscow
117418
Russia
EZhuravskaya@cefir.ru
1     Introduction
Racial and religious con‡icts are often associated with poor politico-economic
performance, especially in developing countries. Economists have recently turned
their attention to ethno-linguistic fractionalization as an explanation of di¤er-
ences in the pace of development, starting with an in‡uential paper by Easterly
and Levine (1997). Since then, many others have shown how fractionalization
is negatively correlated with a host of policy variables, such as the quality of
government, indices of development, etc.1 However, many ethnically diverse
countries (the United States, for instance) are quite successful. What makes
di¤erent countries more or less capable of handling diversity or even of bene…t-
ting from it remains an open question.2
    Due to lack of data, existing cross-country literature rarely considered the
issue of segregation: that is, two hypothetical countries with, for example, two
equally sized groups would have the same fractionalization index (1=2) regard-
less of how the groups are distributed geographically within the country, from
complete segregation (e.g., one group living in the northern half of the country
and the other in the southern half) to total integration (i.e., the members of the
groups are uniformly distributed throughout the country); yet one might expect
outcomes to vary with segregation.
    The purpose of this paper is to …ll this gap. More speci…cally, our contribu-
tion is fourfold: …rst and perhaps most importantly, we present a new data set
on the composition of ethnic, linguistic and religious groups at the sub-national
(regional) level for a large number of countries (97 for ethnicity, 92 for language,
and 78 for religion).3 These data allow us to compute both an index of fraction-
alization and an index of segregation at the national level, as well as an index
of fractionalization at the sub-national level. We …nd that the level of segre-
    1 See Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) for a survey. For quality of government in particular,

see La Porta et al. (1999). Alesina and Glaeser (2004) show that redistributive policies are
less extensive in more fractionalized countries.
    2 For some discussion of whether democracy and/or development helps, see Alesina and La

Ferrara (2005).
    3 The precise de…nition of linguistic versus ethnic groups is given below.




                                              2
gation varies vastly across countries and the national-level fractionalization is
often di¤erent from subnational fractionalization. Second, we relate our index
of segregation to measures of the quality of government. We …nd that, control-
ling for fractionalization at the national level and for the level of development,
higher segregation in terms of ethnicity and language is associated with signif-
icantly lower quality of government. The negative correlation between ethnic
and linguistic segregation and the quality of government is especially large in
democracies. In contrast, there is no correlation between religious segregation
and the quality of government. Third, we recognize that, at least up to a point,
the geographical distribution of groups is endogenous to policy choices. Pop-
ulations move in response to national and local policies as well as economic
shocks. In addition, the choice of internal borders may depend on factors cor-
related with government quality. To cope with the endogeneity of segregation,
we suggest and compute an instrument based upon the composition of major
groups in bordering countries. More speci…cally, we construct an index of pre-
dicted segregation based on the idea that if the home country has a group that
is also present in a neighboring country, this group is likely to be concentrated
near the border of the two countries. Conversely, if the home country has a
group not present in any of the neighboring countries, that group is likely to be
distributed uniformly. Finally, we use this instrument to establish the causal
negative e¤ect of ethnic and religious segregation on the quality of government.
Instrumental variables estimation con…rms that there is no relationship between
religious segregation and the quality of government.
   There are several possible and non-mutually-exclusive explanations for this
…nding. One is that, if groups choose to live separately, they feel more animosity
towards each other and they disagree more on how to conduct public policies,
leading to a deterioration of the quality of government. Alesina, Baqir and
Easterly (1999) provide a model that relates the extent of disagreement among
individuals and the quality of their public policies. They show that the more
distant the preferences of di¤erent individuals and groups over public policies,
the lower the quality of the latter. Geographical concentration of ethnic groups

                                        3
may also exacerbate “ethnic voting” (i.e., di¤erent ethnicities voting for candi-
dates who represent their group, regardless of their quality). This e¤ect would
hold only in democracies, and Banerjee and Pande (2007) show evidence from
India that ethnic voting reduces the quality of politicians. In some cases, geo-
graphical segregation may also lead to a threat of secession, putting additional
stress on the central government, which may then have to spend additional re-
sources on appeasement or repression rather than on productive public goods
and local governance. Alesina and Spolaore (2003) provide models of secession
threats and military spending needed to repress them. Geographical separation
of groups may also exacerbate con‡icts over allocation of public goods across
regions and their …nancing by identifying the bene…ciaries of local public goods
in terms of di¤erent ethnic groups.
   The only two papers on the e¤ects of segregation in a cross-section of coun-
tries (that we are aware of) are Matuszetski and Schneider (2006) and Uslander
(2008). Matuszetski and Schneider (2006) build an index of clustering of lin-
guistic groups based on digital linguistic maps and show that it is signi…cantly
correlated with the incidence of civil con‡ict. Uslander (2008) uses Minorities
at Risk data base to build a measure of segregation of minorities and shows
that it is signi…cantly correlated with trust. The measures of segregation used
in these papers are fairly crude due to data limitations and neither of the papers
addresses causality issues.
   There is, of course, a vast literature on segregation in US cities, which focuses
on three issues: i) measures of segregation (see Echenique and Fryer 2008 for
a recent contribution), ii) explanations for the evolution of segregation (see,
for instance, Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor 1999 and the references cited therein)
and iii) the e¤ect of segregation on the socioeconomic performance of minorities
(Kain 1968, 1992, Jenks and Meyer 1990, Cutler and Glaeser 1997 and Cutler,
Glaeser and Vigdor 2008). There has been little research on the e¤ects of
segregation on the quality of government. An exception is La Ferrara and Mele
(2006). They consider the e¤ect of racial segregation in US cities (Metropolitan
Statistical Areas) and …nd that more racial segregation has a positive impact

                                         4
on average public school expenditure but leads to more inequality of school
spending across school districts.
    The present paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the data on
group composition at the sub-national level that we have assembled. Section
3 discusses the construction of indices of segregation using these data. Section
4 presents the correlations between segregation measures and the quality of
government. Section 5 presents our instrument for segregation and the results
of instrumental variables estimation of the e¤ect of segregation on the quality
of government. Section 7 discusses the robustness of the results; and the last
section concludes.



2     Data
We construct three data sets with ethnic, linguistic and religious composition
of sub-national administrative units (regions) in each country. We apply the
classi…cation of groups used in Alesina et al. (2003), a paper that has produced
a widely used data set for fractionalization at the national level. That paper ex-
tends the “traditional” ethno-linguistic fractionalization index based upon the
Atlas Narodov Mira, used by Easterly and Levine (1997) and many other au-
thors since. Alesina et al (2003) break the index into its ethnic and linguistic
components by focusing not only on linguistic di¤erences but also on other per-
tinent di¤erences between relevant groups. These authors, then, construct one
index based exclusively on language and another that combines a classi…cation
of language, self-reported ethnicity, and physical features, primarily skin color.4
    In many cases, people identify with a particular ethnic group based only on
the commonality of their mother tongue; in these cases, ethnic and linguistic
groups coincide. In some countries, however, the use of separate classi…cations
for language and ethnicity produces substantially di¤erent measures of diver-
   4 They use skin color to identify groups in the ethnicity component whenever this infor-

mation is available. When data on skin color are unavailable, groups are identi…ed according
to self-identi…cation of people into particular ethnic groups. By using additional sources,
they also expand on the number of countries in the Atlas. As data sources, they used the
Encyclopaedia Brittanica and the CIA Factbook.


                                             5
sity. Consider the US: according to a linguistic classi…cation, whites and African
Americans would belong to the same group, but according to the ethnic index
they would not, since their skin colors are di¤erent. These two criteria make a
lot of di¤erence in other parts of the world as well. For instance, some Latin
American countries (e.g., Brazil and Ecuador) are much more homogeneous in
terms of language than in terms of ethnicity. This is because di¤erent eth-
nic groups such as whites, mulattos and blacks speak the language of former
colonizers (i.e., Portuguese or Spanish).
   In the present paper, we consider the same three dimensions of diversity
as in Alesina et al. (2003): i) ethnicity, for which we have 97 countries, ii)
language, for which we have 92 countries, and iii) religion, for which we have
78 countries. The median number of groups is six for ethnicity and …ve for
language and religion. The maximum number of groups within a country is
55 for ethnicity, 34 for language and 13 for religion. Note that each group is
treated identically; we make no attempt to measure the “distance” between
groups (i.e., the degree of di¤erence between di¤erent languages, ethnicities,
physical features or religions).5
   Our geographical unit of observation is a region, i.e., a sub-national admin-
istrative unit of each country. For each region, we collected data on the total
population size and the fraction of the population that belongs to a certain
linguistic, ethnic or religious group. We drew data from the Census closest
to the year 2000 whenever its results were available. The second source of
data we turned to whenever census data were unavailable is the statistics pub-
lished by the national statistical o¢ ces of the countries. If neither of these two
sources were available, we relied on the regionally-representative Demographic
and Health Surveys (www.measuredhs.com). For the vast majority of countries,
at least one of these three sources was available. In a few cases, however, we
had to rely on the results of published demographics research. Table A.1 in the
Appendix describes in detail the data sources.
   The quality of data available for the regional composition of groups varies by
  5 See   Spolaore and Wacziarg (2007) on this question.


                                              6
country. Interestingly, it is often the case in this data set that data are “better”
for developing than for developed countries. For example, the censuses of some
countries in Western Europe after WWII deliberately do not ask questions about
ethnic identity. Therefore, we had to rely on information about the birthplace
of naturalized migrants and citizenship of non-naturalized migrants to proxy
for ethnic composition. We have classi…ed countries into “high”and “low”data
quality (12 countries got a “low” score for quality of data on ethnicity; 3 for
language and only one for religion). The results do not vary much between the
sample which includes all countries and the sample with high-quality data only.
      The …rst consistency check on our data is as follows. For each country,
we started with our regional data and aggregated them to the national level.
We constructed the Her…ndahl index of fractionalization at the national level
for each country i and for each dimension of diversity, i.e., ethnicity, language,
and religion. The Her…ndahl index captures the probability that two randomly
drawn individuals in a certain country belong to di¤erent groups and is equal
to:

                                        i
                                       M
                                       X
                                  i          i      i
                                 F =         m (1   m)
                                       m=1

where i indexes countries; m indexes groups and M i is the total number of
                             i
groups in the country i.     m   is the fraction of group m in the country i. Then,
we compared the resulting indices to the corresponding indices compiled by
Alesina et al. (2003) directly from the national-level data. The correlation
between the indices from the two data sources is very high. For language and
ethnicity, correlation coe¢ cients are above 0:9, and in the case of the high-
quality samples, they are 0:97. For religion, the correlation coe¢ cients are
slightly lower for both samples: namely, about 0:84.
      Using our data, we can compute fractionalization indices of di¤erent regions
within countries. For each region j of country i we calculate the Her…ndahl
indices of fractionalization (Fji ) based upon our three dimensions of diversity.
The formula for regional-level fractionalization is as follows:


                                             7
                                       i
                                      M
                                      X
                              Fji =         i
                                            jm (1
                                                    i
                                                    jm )
                                      m=1

                                                                   i
where i indexes countries (as above); j indexes regions; and       jm   stands for the
fraction of group m in region j of country i.
   In the data there is no obvious pattern in the relationship between national-
level and regional-level fractionalization indices. In some countries regional-level
fractionalization indices do not di¤er much from national-level fractionalization.
Of course, this is the case in very homogenous countries, such as Ireland and
Costa Rica in terms of linguistic composition. But, this also happens in very
fractionalized countries, such as Australia in terms of religion, where national
fractionalization is 0:77, whereas regional fractionalizations range from 0:72 to
0:78 with a standard deviation (SD) of only 0:02. Another example is Bolivia,
which has an ethnic national fractionalization of 0:74 and regional fractionaliza-
tion indices ranging from 0:59 to 0:73 with an SD of 0:04. In other countries,
national fractionalization turns out to be a lot higher than all regional fractional-
izations, in other words, regions turn out to be a lot more homogenous than the
whole country. For example, national-level linguistic fractionalization in Nige-
ria is 0:42, while the largest regional fractionalization is only 0:22. Finally, it is
often also the case that a country has relatively small national fractionalization,
but some regions within it are very fractionalized. For example, in Colombia the
national linguistic fractionalization is 0:06 while regional fractionalization is 0:5
in Amazonas and Vichada regions (“departments”); similarly, the national reli-
gious fractionalization in Indonesia is 0:2, while regional fractionalization indices
are about 0:6 in the West Kalimantan and Maluku provinces. The great diver-
sity of the observed patterns suggests that the national-level fractionalization
index is hardly a su¢ cient statistic to describe diversity within countries.




                                            8
3     Indices of Segregation
Based on information on the group composition in sub-national regions, we
construct an index of segregation which assumes a value of 1 if each group
occupies a separate region and therefore each region is fully homogeneous, even
though the country as a whole is fractionalized. The index assumes a value of
0 if each region has the same composition as the country as a whole.
    Reardon and Firebaugh (2002) derive, summarize, and compare several al-
ternative indices of segregation. Based on their analysis, we de…ne our baseline
index of segregation for country i as follows:

                                       i        i
                                     M X
                                     X    J
                        i      1             tij (   i
                                                     jm
                                                              i 2
                                                              m)
                      S =
                            Mi     1 m=1 j=1 T i          i
                                                          m


where T i is the total population of country i and tij is the population of region
j in country i. J i is the total number of regions in country i. The rest of the
                                        i
notation is as above. In particular,    m   is the fraction of group m in country i,
      i
and   jm   is the fraction of group m in region j of country i. To avoid cluttering
from now on, we drop the superscript i that indicates the country.
    If each region is comprised of a separate group, then the index is equal to 1,
and this is the case of full segregation. If every region has the same fraction of
each group as the country as a whole, the index is equal to 0, and we take this
as the case of no segregation. S is increasing in the square deviation of regional-
level fractions of groups relative to the national average. It is usually referred
to as the “squared coe¢ cient of variation.” The index gives higher weight to
the deviation of group composition from the national average in bigger regions
than in smaller regions. Scaling by the total number of groups keeps the index
between 0 and 1.
    S is de…ned for the full set of M groups. One important consideration in
applying this formula to the data relates to how to classify the “other”category:
that is, in many regions of many countries, a certain share of the population is
not classi…ed (i.e., classi…ed as “other”). There are di¤erent ways of treating the


                                            9
group (or non-group) “other.” The simplest but least appropriate would be to
treat this group as any of the identi…ed groups. This is not satisfactory precisely
because the classi…cation of “other” captures tiny groups or mixed groups. If
the group “other” were a clearly identi…able homogenous group, it would most
likely be classi…ed as such.
      An alternative is to assume that the group “others”is composed of a number
of distinct and small subgroups O that data availability does not permit us to
properly classify. Assume also that there is no segregation within the “other”
category, i.e., the subgroups of the “other” category are uniformly distributed
across all regions. Denote the number of identi…ed groups by N . Then, under
these assumptions, one can rewrite the formula for the segregation index S as
follows:                            0                                          1
                                     N X
                                     X   J                          2
                         1                  tj (                  m)
                 Sb =              @                    jm
                                                                        + So A
                      N +O        1 m=1 j=1 T                 m


where
                                        XJ                    2
                                            tj (   jo       o)
                                So =
                                        j=1
                                            T           o


 o    is the fraction of “others” in the whole population and             jo   is the fraction of
others in the region j. Thus, in this case, the segregation index is equal to the
sum of the two components – the segregation among identi…ed groups and the
segregation of the “other group”treated as a single group (So ) –divided by the
total number of groups (N + O) minus one.6
                            b one needs to assess the number of subgroups within
      In order to calculate S,
the “other”category (O). It is reasonable to assume that none of the subgroups
in “others” is larger than the smallest group that is explicitly classi…ed. Thus,
we set the number of “others” subgroups O equal to the number of people in
“others” divided by the size of the smallest identi…ed group. The rationale is
clear: the assumption is that the individuals who are not explicitly classi…ed
into groups are those who belong to tiny groups that are “missed”by the census
     6 If
      one were to treat “others” as a single homogenous group, the segregation index S would
               N
be equal to N +O     b
                     S.
                   1




                                             10
or the national statistical o¢ ce precisely because they are small.7
    Another approach would be to simply ignore the group “other” altogether
and rede…ne the index of segregation for the N groups not de…ned as “other.”
In this case, segregation could be measured as follows:

                                           XN X J                    2
                                     1             tj (            m)
                          Se =
                                                          jm
                                 N       1 m=1 j=1 T           m


    Note that, under the assumptions underlying the distribution of “others,”
the index Sb is a theoretically correct de…nition of segregation. In contrast,
the index Se is an approximation, since we are ignoring a certain share of the
population de…ned as “other.”8
    Let us now describe how these indices of segregation apply to the actual data.
The …rst thing to note is that the two indices Sb and Se are very highly correlated:
0:96 –for ethnicity, 0:80 –for language, and 0:86 –for religion. Figure 1 shows
the scatter plots of the two indices of segregation (i.e., Se and S)
                                                                  b for each of the

three dimensions of diversity. As one would expect, ethnic and linguistic segre-
gation indices are highly correlated; in fact, by construction, they are identical
in 46 countries. These are the countries in which people identify with ethnic
groups on the basis of language di¤erences. Correlation between segregation by
language or ethnicity, on the one hand, and by religion, on the other, is sub-
stantially lower, albeit also positive. (Figure 2 plots the segregation indices by
ethnicity, language, and religion against each other.) Countries appear to be
more segregated in terms of ethnicity and language than in terms of religion.
Segregation ranges from 0 to 0:39 in terms of ethnicity with a mean value of
0:10 and from 0 to 0:49 with a mean of 0:11 in terms of language; whereas
religious segregation ranges from 0 to 0:27 with a mean of 0:05 (all according
   b As shown in the left column of Figure 3, the indices of segregation are
to S).
   7 To get rid of a few outliers in terms of the number of subgroups of “others” (O), we cut

o¤ the distribution of O across countries at the 95th percentile, i.e., we rede…ne O to be equal
to the 95th percentile of the distribution of O across countries when it is larger than the 95th
percentile of this distribution.
   8 Since
           PN                                                                              e
              m=1 m 6= 1 and N < M , both the numerator and the denominator in S are
smaller than in S.



                                                11
positively correlated with the indices of fractionalization at the national level
for ethnicity and language (with pairwise correlation coe¢ cients of 0:42 and
0:36, respectively) and uncorrelated for religion (with a correlation coe¢ cient
of 0:01).
   The most striking fact about segregation across countries is its relationship
with the level of development. Poor countries are on average twice as segregated
as rich countries in terms of all three dimensions of diversity. The mean value
of ethnic segregation is 0:11 for countries with per capita GDP below Slovenia,
which is often considered to be the poorest rich country; in contrast, the mean
of ethnic segregation is 0:04 for countries with per capita GDP above or equal to
Slovenia; for linguistic segregation the corresponding …gures are 0:12 vs. 0:07;
and for religious segregation –0:05 vs. 0:02. The very few rich countries which
are ethnically highly segregated are Spain, Belgium and Israel and none of them
are among the ten most segregated countries. Arguably, these countries face the
most di¢ cult ethnic con‡icts within the developed world. The most religiously
segregated rich countries are the Netherlands, Israel, and Japan and their rank
among all countries is below 17. It would appear that the ability or willingness
to reduce segregation is increasing in GDP per capita. Correlation coe¢ cients of
log per capita GDP with ethnic, linguistic, and religious segregation are     0:35,
 0:23, and    0:31, respectively. The right column of Figure 3 presents scatter
plots of segregation indices against log per capita GDP.
   Controlling for per capita GDP and fractionalization (both of which are
correlated with segregation, as we point out), Latin American countries are on
average the most ethnically and linguistically segregated and the least segregated
in terms of religion. Interestingly, there are no signi…cant di¤erences in the level
of segregation between Africa and Asia. Transition countries are less segregated
than non-transition countries in terms of ethnicity and language, while they do
not di¤er terms of religious segregation.
   Table 1 shows the most and the least segregated countries along with their
segregation and fractionalization coe¢ cients. In the Appendix, we report sum-
mary statistics for the segregation indices (Panel A of Table A.2) and the table

                                        12
of correlations between them (Table A.3).9



4     Correlation: Segregation and Governance
We now look at the correlation of our measures of segregation with what are, by
now, standard measures of the quality of government, namely, the World Bank’s
Governance Indicators: Voice and accountability, Political stability, Government
e¤ectiveness, Regulatory quality, Rule of law, and Control of corruption. The
data, detailed de…nitions and sources for each of these variables are presented
at www.govindicators.org (see also Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton 1999,
2002 and Kaufmann, Kraay, and Mastruzzi 2006).
    Di¤erent governance indicators are very highly correlated with each other.
Therefore, it is virtually impossible to disentangle di¤erent dimensions of the
quality of government in a cross-section of countries. Throughout the analysis we
carry all six governance indicators with us, knowing well, however, that each one
of them is not truly an independent observation. In Table 2, we present pairwise
correlation coe¢ cients between the quality of government indicators and our six
measures of segregation (Sb and Se for language, ethnicity and religion). All of the
correlation coe¢ cients are negative, and their magnitude is quite high (i.e., more
segregation, lower quality of government); in some cases, correlation exceeds 0:5
in absolute value. This is not surprising, however, considering that the quality
of government goes hand-in-hand with the level of development and the level of
fractionalization.
    Therefore, we are primarily interested in establishing whether segregation
is associated with governance conditional on fractionalization and the level of
development. To study partial correlations, we run simple OLS regressions of
the following form:


                           Qi =     + S i + Fi + 0 Xi + "i
   9 To conserve space, in each of these tables, in addition to the indices of segregation we

summarize the instruments used for these indices. The instruments are described below in
the Section 5.


                                             13
where i indexes countries, Q stands for a governance indicator; S and F are
segregation and fractionalization indices, respectively; X is a vector of additional
covariates (described below); and " is a heteroscedastic error. We run these
regressions separately for the three dimensions of diversity: ethnicity, language,
and religion.
    In Table 3, we present results for the rule of law as dependent variable
and Sb as the measure of segregation. First, consider regressions in which the
right-hand side includes only the indices of segregation and fractionalization
(the results are presented in columns (1), (3) and (5)). For all dimensions of
diversity, the index of segregation in these regressions enters negatively with the
coe¢ cient statistically di¤erent from 0, at least at the 5% level of con…dence.
The index of fractionalization is also negative and signi…cant in regressions for
ethnic and linguistic diversity, while it is positive and marginally signi…cant for
religion. The results on fractionalization are in line with …ndings by Alesina
et al. (2003). Religious a¢ liation can be “forced” upon individuals. In many
countries, religious freedom is limited or non-existent, and therefore, a high level
of religious homogeneity is arti…cially imposed by law, and this may especially
be the case in “bad” forms of government.10
    Columns (2), (4) and (6) add a set of regressors standard in the literature
(e.g., La Porta et al. 1999 and Treisman 2000). The most important one is, of
course, log of GDP per capita, since measures of institutional development and
government quality are highly correlated with per capita income. We also con-
trol for log population size, democratic tradition, and two geographical variables:
latitude (a common control for adverse climate conditions) and a measure of the
extent to which country’s surface is covered by mountains. We added mountains
to the list of covariates because, on the one hand, the level of segregation may
depend on physical constraints to mobility and, on the other hand, harsh terrain
may make government policies less e¤ective. We also add legal origin dummies
to the list of controls following the insights by La Porta et al. (1999). Finally,
  1 0 The same problem may apply to forced linguistic and ethnic assimilation, but it is less

common.



                                             14
in order to capture Weberian ideas, we control for the shares of main religions
in the population (see, for instance, La Porta et al. 1997). De…nitions of control
variables, their sources, and summary statistics are reported in Tables A.2 and
A.4.
   Ethnic and linguistic segregation continues to be negatively (and signi…-
cantly, at the 1% level) associated with the rule of law after the inclusion of
control variables (columns (2) and (4)); whereas the coe¢ cient on religious seg-
regation becomes small and statistically insigni…cant. Fractionalization loses
signi…cance in all regressions with control variables. It is, in particular, the
inclusion of GDP per capita that makes the index of fractionalization insignif-
icant in this regression, a result consistent with La Porta et al. (1999). Note,
however, that whether or not one wants to control for GDP per capita in these
types of regressions is debatable, since per capita income may be endogenous to
ethnic fractionalization and segregation. In any case, our index of segregation
remains signi…cant even after controlling for GDP per capita. As for the con-
trol variables, with the exception of GDP per capita and democratic tradition,
none of the controls is statistically signi…cant consistently across regressions;
the legal origin variables, however, are jointly signi…cant. Figure 4 illustrates
the relationship between segregation indices and the rule of law with residual
scatter plots conditional on all covariates.
   In Tables 4 and 5, we report abbreviated results of the same regressions as in
Table 3 for all the quality of government indicators. We show the results for the
                    b the OLS results for Se are almost identical and available
segregation indices S;
upon request. Each table has three panels. The …rst two panels report results
of regressions with all control variables (Panel A) and with fractionalization and
segregation indices as the only regressors (Panel B). Panel C presents results
for a subset of countries which excludes dictatorships, de…ned as countries with
an average Polity IV democracy score less than one for the years 1975-2004.11
   Not surprisingly, the pattern of results obtained for the rule of law in Table
 1 1 The Polity   IV    democracy    score        is   the   democ   variable   taken   from
www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4v2006.xls.



                                             15
3 generalizes to all the other quality of government indicators. Let us discuss
ethnic and linguistic diversity …rst. Fractionalization is signi…cant only in regres-
sions without control variables. In contrast, measures of linguistic and ethnic
segregation have a statistically signi…cant negative coe¢ cient in regressions both
with and without controls. There are a couple of exceptions: in the full sam-
ple with all controls, coe¢ cients on segregation are insigni…cant for regulatory
quality for both ethnicity and language and for government e¤ectiveness for
ethnicity. In the sub-sample of democracies, the results on ethnic and linguistic
segregation are stronger: the coe¢ cients are larger in absolute value while stan-
dard errors are approximately the same as in the full sample. The coe¢ cients
on segregation in the sub-sample of democracies are statistically signi…cant in
regressions for all governance indicators. The result that segregation is more
strongly associated with the quality of government in the sample of democracies
does not depend on the de…nition of democracy.12
    As for the case of religious diversity, religious segregation is not associated
with any measures of the quality of government once control variables are in-
cluded; whereas coe¢ cients on religious fractionalization are positive and in
approximately one half of regressions statistically signi…cant. In section 7, we
discuss the robustness of our results with respect to excluding in‡uential ob-
servations and including additional covariates that may a¤ect both segregation
and the quality of government.13
  1 2 For example, the results are just as strong for the substantially more restrictive de…nition

of democracy adopted in Persson and Tabellini (2003).
  1 3 An alternative measure of segregation that we came across is a so-called “relative di-
                    PM PJ tj                       2
versity”: R = F1      m=1     j=1 T ( jm        m ) . The relationship between R and S is as
                                                                    PJ tj ( jm m )2
follows. De…ne segregation of a particular group m as Sm =             j=1 T              . Then,
                                                                                      m

      PM                       PM                                                             1
R =     m=1   !R
               m Sm and S =       m=1   !S              R
                                         m Sm , where ! m =       PMm        2   and ! S
                                                                                       m =   M 1
                                                                                                 .   If
                                                              1    k=1   k
groups are equal in size, R = S because ! S       R
                                           m = ! m . If groups have di¤erent sizes, R gives a
higher weight to segregation of larger groups, whereas S gives equal weight to segregation of
all groups. Correlation of segregation measures based on the formula for R with the quality of
government is negative but much weaker than that of S. This has a theoretical underpinning:
segregation in smaller groups has an important e¤ect on the quality of government by means
of a¤ecting the relationship between minorities and majorities. This e¤ect is ignored in R. In
the rest of the paper, we focus on S as a measure of segregation.




                                               16
5     Causal Inference: the E¤ect of Segregation

5.1    Description of the instrument

The level of segregation depends upon where people live, and this choice is en-
dogenous to politico-economic forces. Certainly, major events like civil wars,
revolutions or large regional economic shocks may lead to massive migrations.
People may also move in response to more “minor” events, such as changes in
the level of local taxation or public goods (Tiebout 1956). How much people
actually move in response to changes in local policies can be debated. For ex-
ample, in many developing countries, individuals face serious economic barriers
to mobility. If the quality of government (and, in particular, rule of law) is very
low at the national level, ethnic and religious groups may choose to live closer
together to provide local public goods such as security, order, and socioeconomic
infrastructure in a more homogeneous environment with higher social capital.
This gives rise to a reverse causality going from the quality of government to
segregation.
    In addition, the index of segregation depends on internal administrative
boundaries, which, in turn, are at government’s discretion. For example, in
1956 India undertook a major reform, known as the States Reorganisation Act,
to redraw internal boundaries along linguistic lines. As unobserved factors may
determine both the internal borders and politico-economic outcomes, there is
also an omitted variables problem in interpreting the correlation between seg-
regation and the quality of government as causal.
    We propose and compute an instrument for segregation which relates spatial
distribution of groups in a country to the composition of major groups present in
neighboring countries. In a nutshell, we make a prediction about the location of
people belonging to each group in each country, assuming that people belonging
to a particular group “gravitate” towards the borders of countries that are
populated by people from the same group. Based on the predicted location of
members of each group, we construct an index of predicted segregation, which



                                        17
we use as an instrument for the actual segregation.
    The idea behind predicting the location of groups is as follows: If a par-
ticular group in the home country is also present in one of the neighboring
countries, it is likely that this group will live closer to the border with the coun-
try populated by the same group. Conversely, if a group in the home country
is not present in any of the neighboring countries, it is less likely to concentrate
near any particular border and, therefore, will be spread more uniformly across
the country. Note that this could be due to a natural historical formation of
borders cutting across large areas populated by a particular ethnic or religious
group (e.g., the border drawn between Austria and Italy after WWI that left
a German-speaking population in the Tyrolean part of Northern Italy). This
could also be due to a gradual spread out of a particular language or religion
across borders (e.g., adopted from colonizers or missionaries). But it also could
be due to an awkward drawing of borders that split groups into two adjoining
countries (e.g., in many African states).14
    An example in Figure 5 illustrates the basic logic of the instrument. Consider
a home country HC1 with four groups, A; B; C and D. Suppose that this
country has four neighboring countries, all fully homogeneous and populated by
each one of the four groups. The predicted segregation of HC1 would be 1, since
each of the four groups of the home country would cluster near the border of the
neighboring country populated by the same group. Consider now another home
country HC2 with the same groups but surrounded by four countries without
any members of groups A; B; C or D. In this case, the predicted segregation
of the home country would be 0, since the four groups in the HC2 have no
“gravitation” to any of the borders.
    The procedure for calculation of the predicted segregation index is as follows.
Let the home country have K neighboring countries, assume that it is divided
 1 4 See MacMillan (2003) for an excellent discussion of this kind of problem created by the
1919 Treaty of Versailles, which redesigned the world’s borders after WWI. The idea of a
“wrong” border splitting an ethnic group into two neighboring countries underlies the empir-
ical work on “arti…cial states” by Alesina, Easterly and Matuszeski (2006). We discuss the
relationship between our instrument and various measures of “arti…cial states” in detail in
section 7.



                                            18
into K hypothetical regions. We construct a predicted distribution of people into
these hypothetical regions, assuming that members of each group “gravitate”
towards those regions that border countries where their own group constitutes
a larger share of the population. Finally, we calculate the predicted index of
segregation on the basis of this predicted distribution and use it as an instrument
for segregation. Note that the “size” of a hypothetical region is its population
share, and since the segregation index does not depend on population density,
the borders of these K hypothetical regions are inconsequential.
   The calculation of predicted distribution takes several steps. First, we match
all groups in each home country to the “major”groups in the neighboring coun-
tries. The question of which groups in two neighboring countries “match” is
often not so simple. We have adopted a mechanical procedure based upon the
de…nition of groups.15 We de…ned a “major”group as a group with size greater
or equal to 10% of the country’s population. “Major”groups are unlikely to be
formed due to cross-border migrations from the home country. Thus, our focus
on the major groups corrects for the possibility of relatively small cross-border
migrations and makes the instrument less likely to be contaminated by the poli-
cies of the home country. The key assumption required for excludability of our
instrument is that the quality of government in the home country does not a¤ect
major groups in the neighboring countries. Obviously, a state collapse leading
to a massive cross-border migration would cause problems for our instrument,
but this is a very rare event.
   As the second step, we construct the predicted distribution of groups in the
home country across hypothetical regions. Let tmk be the number of people
from group m predicted to be located in the hypothetical region k of the home
country. If none of the neighboring countries has group m as one of its major
groups, people from group m are divided equally among all hypothetical regions.
Formally,
 1 5 Yet   even the most mechanical “matching” procedure in some countries calls for judgment.




                                               19
                                                 HC HC     1
                               tmk =             m T
                                                           K
        HC
where   m    is the fraction of group m in the home country; T HC is the home
country’s total population; and K is the total number of neighboring coun-
tries and, thus, of hypothetical regions. In the case when at least one of the
neighboring countries has group m as a major group, we predict the following
distribution:

                                             k
                                     HC HC   m
                             tmk =   m T   K
                                                                                         (1)
                                           X                   j
                                                               m
                                                        j=1

        k
where   m   is the fraction of group m in the neighboring country that borders
                                             k
hypothetical region k. Therefore,    P       m
                                                 j   has a simple interpretation of the force
                                         j       m

of gravity, which is increasing in the fraction of group m in the neighboring
country k relative to the fractions of group m in the other neighboring countries.
It is easy to see that if fractions of group m in all neighboring countries are the
same, the predicted number of people from group m will be the same in each
region. If only one neighboring country has group m among its major groups, the
whole group m of the home country is predicted to be located in the hypothetical
region bordering this country. Note that we ignore the neighboring countries
with population smaller than one hundredth of the size of the home country
on the grounds that they should have little gravity. This eliminates from the
calculation such neighboring states as San Marino for Italy, Liechtenstein for
Switzerland, and Andorra for Spain.
   Figure 6 illustrates how the predicted distribution of groups across hypo-
thetical regions is constructed using the example of the religious composition of
Switzerland. Switzerland has Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, Jewish, and non-
religious populations. It has borders with France, Germany, Austria, Italy, and
Liechtenstein. Since Liechtenstein is too small to have any gravity force, we di-
vide Switzerland into four hypothetical regions, i.e., F , G, A, and I named after



                                                 20
the …rst letter of the respective (large enough) neighboring country. Germany is
the only country neighboring Switzerland with Protestants as a major religious
group; therefore, we predict all of the Switzerland’s protestant population (37%
of the total population) to be located in the region G. Italy, Austria, and France
have sizable not religious populations, while the share of non-religious popula-
tion in Germany is below 10% and, therefore, it is not a major group. Thus, we
predict that the non-religious population of Switzerland will be divided between
regions I, A, and F according to the relative shares of non-religious populations
in Italy, Austria, and France (5% of the total population in region I, 3.5% in
region A, and 3% in region F ). We predict Catholics to be located in all four
hypothetical regions, as they form a major group in all the neighboring states.
Region I is predicted to have the largest number of Catholics because the frac-
tion of Catholics in Italy is higher than in the other neighboring countries. Since
Muslims, Orthodox Christians, and Jews do not form a major group in any of
Switzerland’s neighbors, we predict members of these groups to be located in
all hypothetical regions in equal proportions.16
    The outlined procedure yields a predicted distribution of groups among hy-
pothetical regions, which has, however, an important undesirable property. The
population size of the individual hypothetical regions is not restricted in any way
(apart from the fact that the sum of regional populations equals the population
of the home country). As a result, in some countries, predicted population of
some hypothetical regions may be very small and uniform. This happens when
a tiny group s of the home country is matched to a major group in one of the
neighboring countries k and no other group from the home country is matched to
any other group in the neighboring country k, at the same time, all other groups
in the home country are matched with groups in other neighboring countries. In
this case, the segregation index on the basis of this predicted distribution will
be very high because the tiny group s will be the only group in the hypothetical
region k and it will be perfectly segregated so that no other hypothetical region
  1 6 In Section 7, we discuss the robustness of our results to alternative assumptions behind

the construction of predicted distribution of groups across hypothetical regions.



                                             21
will have members of group s.
   In reality, regions are su¢ ciently large that none of the tiny groups can form
a homogenous region and segregation of tiny groups does not have a large e¤ect
on the segregation indices. Thus, we introduce a lower bound to the population
size of hypothetical regions. We postulate that the share of the population of
any hypothetical region cannot be smaller than the average of the shares of
the smallest real regions across countries, namely, 2.7% of the total country’s
population. Therefore, as the next step, we augment the predicted distribution
of groups across hypothetical regions. If a hypothetical region has a predicted
size smaller than the lower bound, we “re-settle”people from other hypothetical
regions that are bigger than the threshold to this region proportionally so that
each person in the sending regions has equal probability to be “re-settled.” In
other words, we increase the population of the smallest region to reach the lower
bound, so that the populations of all bigger regions decrease, but the fractions
of di¤erent groups in each of these other regions remains constant. If none of the
hypothetical regions have predicted population less than the critical value, we
do not augment the predicted distribution. The number of countries in which
“re-settlement” occurs is: 18 for ethnicity; 19 for language; and 10 for religion.
The median number of hypothetical regions with too small populations is 1 for
ethnicity and religion and 3 for language; the mean number is between 2 and 3
for all dimensions of diversity. Finally, we calculate the predicted segregation
indices Se and Sb using the resulting predicted distributions. For all countries
which have no neighbors, e.g., islands, or have just one neighbor, e.g., Portugal
and Denmark, we set predicted Se and Sb to be zero, as our logic predicts the
distribution of all groups to be uniform. The indices of predicted segregation
are summarized in Panel C of Table A.2.
   Does predicted segregation have the power to predict actual segregation?
Table A.3 presents unconditional pairwise correlations between segregation in-
dices and the instruments: they are always positive and range between 0.3 and
0.6. However, in order for predicted segregation to serve as an instrument for
the actual segregation, it has to have su¢ cient predictive power conditional on

                                       22
all covariates. Table 6 reports the results of the …rst stage regressions of the
form:
                            Si =    + Sip + Fi + 0 Xi + "i

where Sip is a measure of predicted segregation. Panel A presents …rst stage
results for Sb and Panel B for S.
                               e For both measures of segregation, Sb and S,
                                                                          e the

instrument is a strong (and signi…cant) predictor of the actual segregation. The
instrument has a higher predictive power for index Sb than for S.
                                                               e Figure 7 shows

residual scatter plots of the predicted versus actual segregation conditional on
covariates (the measure used for the plots in the left column is Sb and in the
               e The last two columns in each of the panels of Table 6 report
right column – S).
F-statistics for the excluded instrument (Sip ).17 They are su¢ ciently high for
b In the case of S,
S.               e in some regressions the instrument is weak; particularly,

this is the case for the linguistic diversity. This happens because of one outlier -
the US. The US is the only country for which the predicted segregation is equal
to one (in the case of linguistic diversity), as the Spanish-speaking population
is predicted to reside next to Mexico, while the English-speaking population is
predicted to reside next to Canada (the only two countries bordering the US by
land). We address the problem of weak instrument for Se in Section 7.


5.2     Results

In Tables 7, 8, and 9, we present the results of the second stage regressions for
b These tables are organized in the same way as OLS tables 3, 4, and 5, respec-
S.
tively. Table 7 displays the full regression output for the rule of law outcome in
regressions with all controls and with no controls except for fractionalization.
As with OLS, in 2SLS regressions, the coe¢ cient on segregation is negative and
signi…cant at the 5% level in the second stage for ethnicity and language when
all controls are included, whereas religious segregation is insigni…cant. Table 8
  1 7 We report these F-statistics calculated both under the assumption of heteroscedastic and

homoscedastic ", even though the latter is certainly an incorrect assumption. The reason for
reporting both is that the theory of weak instruments, which generated the cut o¤ points for
the weak instruments, is developed only for the homoscedastic case (see, for instance, Stock
et al. 2002).


                                             23
shows that ethnic and linguistic segregation has a negative signi…cant e¤ect on
all governance indicators without exception in the sample of democracies, and
with just a couple of exceptions (voice for ethnicity; and regulatory quality and
control of corruption for language) in the full sample. The e¤ect of religious
segregation disappears once control variables are included in contrast to the ef-
fects of ethnic and linguistic segregation. Figure 8 illustrates the second stage
relationship with residual scatter plots.
   To understand the size of the e¤ect of segregation on governance, consider the
example of linguistic diversity. In the full sample, a move from perfect linguistic
segregation to a perfect intermix, which is equivalent to a change of about 9
standard deviations (SD’s), leads to improvements in the indices of political
stability of about 3 points (= 3:4 SD’s), voice of 2.5 points (= 2:6 SD’s), the
rule of law of about 2 points (= 2 SD’s), and government e¤ectiveness of 1.6
points (= 1:6 SD’s). The e¤ect of ethnic segregation is a little higher for all
governance indicators, with the exception of voice. In addition, in the sample
which excludes autocracies, the magnitude of the e¤ect of ethnic and linguistic
segregation is larger than in the full sample for all governance indicators with the
exception of political stability index. The magnitude of coe¢ cients on ethnic
and linguistic segregation in the 2SLS regressions is consistently higher than
that of OLS. This could be due both to the endogeneity of segregation and to
measurement error.
   All the 2SLS results that we have described are for Sb measure of segregation.
For ethnic and religious dimensions of diversity, the results of the second stage
are very similar both in terms of magnitude and statistical signi…cance when
we consider Se instead of S.
                          b For linguistic diversity, however, the results of the

second stage in the case of Se are weaker in terms of statistical signi…cance with
the same magnitude of coe¢ cients. The main di¤erence is as follows: segregation
is signi…cant for three instead of four outcomes (voice, political stability, and
the rule of law). The results for Se are available from the authors.




                                        24
6     Alternative Measures of the Quality of Gov-
      ernment
The World Bank’s Governance Indicators which we have used so far to measure
the quality of government are the most commonly used, but not the only avail-
able measures. In this section, we explore whether a similar relationship exists
between segregation and alternatives measures of the quality of government.
    In theory, there are two distinct dimensions of the quality of government (see,
for instance, La Porta et al. 1999): (1) the extent of government’s intervention
into the economy— measured by such variables as the security of private property
rights and the extent of regulation— and (2) the e¢ ciency of government, or
the quality of bureaucracy— measured, for instance, by corruption indicators.
Empirically, however, it is hard to separate the two dimensions of the quality of
government in a cross-section of countries because countries with interventionist
governments also often have less e¢ cient bureaucracy (and vise versa).
    Following La Porta et al. (1999), we take property rights index and business
regulation index from the Index of Economic Freedom, 2009 (www.heritage.org)
and top marginal tax rate from the Economic Freedom of the World, 2008
(www.freetheworld.com) to measure government’s intervention. As measures of
government e¢ ciency, we take corruption perception index (CPI, average for
1994-2006) from Transparency International (www.transparency.org), freedom
from corruption index from Index of Economic Freedom, 2009 (www.heritage.org),
tax compliance index from the Global Competitiveness Report, 1996, and bu-
reaucratic delays index (average for 1972-1994) from Business Environmental
Risk Intelligence’s (BERI) Operation Risk Index (www.beri.com). In addition,
we take another commonly used composite index of the quality of government
from the Political Risk Services Group’s (PRS) International Country Risk
Guide (ICRG) which combines “Corruption”, “Law and Order” and “Bureau-
cracy Quality” ICRG ratings.18
  1 8 These measures (although some for earlier years) are described in detail in La Porta et

al. (1999).



                                             25
    All of these measures of the quality of government are highly and signi…cantly
correlated with each other and with the World Bank Governance Indicators.
The correlation is statistically signi…cant irrespective of whether we condition on
other covariates (Si , Fi , and Xi ). Thus, our baseline measures— the World Bank
Governance Indicators— re‡ect both the intervention and e¢ ciency dimensions
of the quality of government.
    We repeat our analysis for each of the other measures. We …nd that top
marginal tax rate and bureaucratic delays index are not robustly related to
segregation.19 The results for the other indices are summarized in Table 10
for ethnic segregation and Table 11 for linguistic segregation. For each of the
six measures of the quality of government, we report OLS and 2SLS results
of two speci…cations: (1) with full sample and no controls with the exception
of fractionalization and (2) with democracy sample and all controls. We …nd
that ethnic segregation is signi…cantly negatively correlated with all considered
indices with the exception of regulation index and tax compliance index (the
latter only for the sample of democracies). Ethnic segregation also has a signi…-
cant negative causal e¤ect in the second stage on all considered indices with the
exception of TI CPI index in the sample of democracies with all controls and tax
compliance index in the full sample with no controls. The results for linguistic
segregation are very similar for OLS and statistically weaker for 2SLS. In the
2SLS, linguistic segregation has a signi…cant e¤ect only on the ICRG index of
the quality of government, EF freedom from corruption index, and EF property
rights index in the sample of democracies with all control variables. As above,
there is no signi…cant e¤ect of religious segregation on any of the alternative
measures of the quality of government.
    Overall, the results are broadly consistent with our previous …nding that
ethnic and linguistic segregation have a negative impact on the quality of gov-
ernment; but not all results are statistically signi…cant. Furthermore, we …nd
a negative impact of ethnic and linguistic segregation on measures of both di-
  1 9 It is worth noting that bureaucratic delays index is available for only few countries, i.e.,

48 countries with ethnic segregation data and 42 countries with linguistic segregation data.



                                               26
mensions of the quality of government.



7     Sensitivity
In this section, we further investigate the robustness of our results.


7.1    Arti…cial states

Our main identi…cation assumption, i.e., exclusion restriction, is as follows: the
predicted segregation calculated based on information on group composition of
neighboring states is unrelated to home country outcomes (and, particularly,
the quality of government) other than through its relationship with the home
country’s actual segregation. Yet, one could argue that in many African coun-
tries, borders were drawn by colonizers without paying much attention to the
historical location of di¤erent ethnic groups and some of these borders cut right
across them (Alesina et al. 2006). On the one hand, as Alesina et al. (2006)
argue, this colonizer’s disregard to the local conditions must have had a direct
e¤ect on such country’s outcomes as government quality. On the other hand,
it is also related to predicted segregation, as it yields a situation in which the
same ethnic group resides in the two neighboring countries.
    We conduct several exercises to verify that our results do not depend on so-
called “arti…cial states.”In particular, we try to control directly for the measures
of arti…cial borders suggested by Alesina et al. (2006). The …rst measure of
arti…cial borders is a measure of how straight the country border is (note that
many African countries have borders which are straight lines). The variable
is described in detail in Alesina et al. (2006). This variable is uncorrelated
with either actual or predicted segregation. Our results are una¤ected by the
inclusion of this control variable (both in terms of magnitude and statistical
signi…cance of the e¤ect segregation and the predictive power of the instrument).
    The second measure of arti…cial borders used by Alesina et al. (2006) is
the share of the home country’s population which belongs to ethnic groups also



                                        27
represented in neighboring countries which are likely to form the same nation.
Alesina et al. (2006) “match”ethnic groups across borders just as we do in order
to construct our instrument. There is one important di¤erence in our approach
and that of Alesina et al. (2006). While matching groups across borders they
make a judgement on whether a certain group present on both sides of a border
can potentially make a single nation, e.g., they do not consider groups having the
same skin color or the same language in Latin America as the same group. Our
approach to matching groups across borders is a more mechanical one and we
match groups across borders on the basis of all available characteristics. Thus, in
order to check whether our results are driven by the presence of “arti…cial states”
we conduct two additional tests. First, we control for the second measure of
arti…cial borders constructed by Alesina et al. (2006). Alternatively, we control
for the share of ethnic, linguistic, and religious populations that match across
borders according to our own “mechanical” criterion. Note that in addition
to truly “arti…cial” states these measures depict also the states which were
formed naturally but have representatives of the same groups in neighboring
countries. As one would expect, these variables are positively correlated with
our predicted segregation.20 Nevertheless, our results are robust to controlling
for the share of home country’s population which is represented in neighboring
states irrespective of which matching criteria are applied. The only notable
di¤erence between the results with and without these control variables is in the
F-statistics for the excluded instrument from the …rst stage, they do drop once
each of these control variables is included. Nonetheless, for the Sb measure of
segregation, they still remain su¢ ciently strong not to worry about weakness of
the instrument.
   2 0 Note that the predicted segregation is more highly correlated with the shares of “par-

titioned groups” calculated based on our own matching compared to correlation with the
Alesina et al. (2006) measure as predicted segregation is zero if there are no groups matched
across the borders.




                                             28
7.2    Con‡icts

Matuszetski and Schneider (2006) document a positive correlation between var-
ious measures of prevalence of civil con‡icts and their measure of spacial lin-
guistic segregation. In a related paper, we show that the duration and intensity
of con‡icts are signi…cantly related to our measures of segregation controlling
for fractionalization (see Alesina and Zhuravskaya 2009).
   For the present paper, it is important to make sure that our results are
not driven by the omission of civil con‡ict variables. Thus, we veri…ed that
our results are una¤ected if we control for various measures of duration and
intensity of con‡icts. In addition, we repeated our analysis excluding countries
which experienced civil con‡icts. When all countries that had at least one civil
con‡ict since WWII are excluded, our results for the quality of government
become insigni…cant, possibly, due to a dramatic (over forty percent) reduction
in the number of observations. However, our baseline results are robust to
excluding countries that had con‡icts since 1990.


7.3    Additional covariates and di¤erent samples

We have made a number of additional robustness checks to make sure that our
results are not driven by an omitted variable. In particular, we included the
following covariates which potentially could vary systematically with the level
of segregation and the quality of government: 1) dummies for large geographical
areas, i.e., East Asia and Paci…c, South Asia, Europe and Central Asia, Latin
America and Caribbean, North America, Middle East and North Africa, Sub-
Saharan Africa; 2) a dummy indicating whether a country is a former colony; 3)
the share of country’s population living in urban areas (this could be important
since group mixing is more likely in the cities and, at the same time, countries
with higher urbanization usually are more developed); 4) a dummy indicating
countries surrounded by water (this control could be important because by con-
struction our instrument always predicts zero segregation for such countries);
5) a measure of the extent to which a country is covered by rivers or other in-


                                      29
land bodies of water and the standard deviation of the elevation within country
borders (as both rivers and mountains a¤ect the costs of mobility); 6) the share
of population which belongs to the “other” group (as it a¤ects the Sb measure
and could be related to the quality of statistics in the country, which, in turn,
may be related to the overall quality of government); and 7) the average size
of administrative districts (as the smaller size of administrative districts may
(especially in the limit) be mechanically associated with higher country segrega-
tion). The results of both the OLS and IV regressions are practically una¤ected
by inclusion of these additional covariates.
   We checked that our results do not depend on the quality of the data on
the sub-national group composition: we re-ran all regressions for the sample of
countries with good-quality data, and the results are robust. We also veri…ed
that the results are robust to the exclusion of OECD countries and/or transition
countries from the sample as well as controlling for OECD and transition country
dummies.


7.4    In‡uential observations

The results are robust to the exclusion of any one particular country from the
sample. The two most in‡uential observations (which a¤ect the results in favor
of our story) are Chile (which has low ethnic segregation and very high quality
of government conditional on other covariates) and Zimbabwe (which has very
high ethnic segregation and low government quality). If we exclude both Chile
and Zimbabwe from the sample, the results become weaker. Nonetheless, in the
sample that excludes dictatorships, the coe¢ cient on ethnic segregation remains
statistically signi…cant for government e¤ectiveness, the rule of law, and control
of corruption in IV regressions and for voice, political stability, the rule of law
and control of corruption in the OLS regressions. Moreover, Chile and Zimbabwe
have a countervailing force in the second stage regressions for ethnic diversity:
Bulgaria and Russia are very in‡uential observations, but they work against our
story. Excluding Bulgaria (which has a relatively high quality of government



                                        30
and an extremely high predicted ethnic segregation) and Russia (where both
predicted ethnic segregation and the quality of government are low) strengthens
the negative e¤ect of ethnic segregation on government quality.
     Linguistic segregation also has a statistically signi…cant negative e¤ect on
voice, political stability, the rule of law and control of corruption in the OLS
regressions without Chile and Zimbabwe. But the instruments become weak in
the second stage. Yet, once we exclude the USA –the most in‡uential observa-
tion in the …rst stage –in addition to Chile and Zimbabwe, the instrument for
language becomes strong enough, and then the statistically signi…cant results
are obtained in the second stage regressions for voice and political stability. We
conclude that the e¤ect of segregation cannot be explained by the presence of
outliers.


7.5     Instrument

We have also examined the sensitivity of the results to our instrument by ex-
perimenting with di¤erent ways of constructing it. First, we recalculated it
taking into account tiny states such as San Marino and Liechtenstein and got
almost exactly the same results. Second, we constructed an instrument which
treats a border with an ocean (or sea) as an additional neighbor with no gravity
force, i.e., as if the ocean were another neighboring country with none of the
home country groups represented. And again, we got very similar results to the
baseline.21 Third, we constructed the predicted segregation of groups across hy-
pothetical regions in which the gravity force is based on the relative number of
people in each group in neighboring countries instead of the relative fractions of
groups (i.e., taking the population size of neighbors into account). In particular,
                                                                                   k   k
                                                                                   mT
the gravity force parameter from the equation 1 was replaced by            P         j   j
                                                                                             , where
                                                                               j     mT
 k
T is the total population of the neighboring country k. The results for language
  2 1 The main di¤erence between the results is that the instrument which takes the sea border

into account has a better predictive power in the case of language (because the predicted
segregation decreases for the USA and becomes much closer to what it actually is); and it has
worse predictive power in the case of ethnicity (because the predicted segregation for Brazil
increases substantially and becomes a very poor predictor of the actual Brazil’s segregation).




                                             31
are the same, while the results for ethnicity are statistically weaker both in the
…rst and in the second stage. Nonetheless, in the second stage, the results re-
main statistically signi…cant for political stability, government e¤ectiveness and
the rule of law.
   It is important to note that for the vast majority of countries, the baseline
instrument is very similar to all other versions of the instrument that we tried.
But there are a few exceptions. The list of the countries for which there are
large di¤erences in the prediction of segregation between the baseline and at
least one of the alternative approaches is as follows: Argentina, Austria, Brazil,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Israel, Jordan, Latvia, Mexico, Morocco, Saudi Arabia,
and Spain. We re-estimated the 2SLS regressions excluding these countries from
the sample and the results turned out to be robust. Despite the reduction in
the sample size, the …rst stage works well for Sb and the second stage yields
the following results. Linguistic segregation has a negative signi…cant e¤ect
on voice, political stability, government e¤ectiveness and the rule of law (and
on all outcomes without exception in the sub-sample of democracies); while
ethnic segregation has a negative signi…cant e¤ect on political stability and
government e¤ectiveness. (Control of corruption is also signi…cant, but only in
the sub-sample of democracies.) In addition, we estimated all our instrumental
variable regressions with Generalized Method of Moments instead of 2SLS and
got very similar results with stronger statistical signi…cance.
   We also considered the weakness of the Se instrument. As we already men-
tioned, the strength of the predictive power of the instrument for language
segregation measured by Se strongly depends on the inclusion of the US in the
sample. As the scatter plot in the middle row of Figure 7 shows, the US is a
very in‡uential observation in the …rst stage: it has very high predicted segre-
gation, while its actual segregation is not that high. The US is the only country
with predicted segregation measured by Se equal to one, as all of the English-
speaking population is predicted to be located in the north next to Canada,
and all the Spanish-speaking population is predicted to be located in the south
next to Mexico. If one excludes the US from the sample, F-statistics for the

                                        32
Se instrument for language rise to over 20, while the coe¢ cient on linguistic
segregation in the second stage remains negative and statistically signi…cant for
voice, political stability, and the rule of law.
    Our instrument is based on predicted segregation of groups across as many
hypothetical regions as there are neighboring countries. We have veri…ed that
including the number of neighboring countries as additional control variable does
not a¤ect our results in the second stage and only slightly decreases statistical
signi…cance of the excluded instrument in the …rst stage.



8     Conclusions
This paper achieves three goals. First, it has provided a new data set on compo-
sition of ethnic, linguistic and religious groups at the sub-national level for about
90 countries which can be used to study a wide variety of politico-economic
questions previously out of reach for an empirical researcher. Second, it has
suggested an instrument for segregation in a country based on the composition
of groups in the home and neighboring countries. Third, it has shown that
more ethnic and linguistic segregation is associated with signi…cantly lower gov-
ernment quality, holding fractionalization constant both in the OLS and 2SLS
regressions. The e¤ect of ethnic and linguistic segregation on the quality of
government is stronger in a subset of democracies. The results are robust to
inclusion of an extensive list of controls, alternative de…nitions of segregation,
and exclusion of in‡uential observations.
    Thus, our results show that if two countries have the same level of fraction-
alization at the national level, quality of government is lower in the more ethni-
cally segregated country, i.e., in the country where di¤erent ethnic groups live
relatively more apart. Several arguments may explain this …nding, and future
research may investigate the channels more precisely, either with cross-country
studies or by focusing on speci…c countries. One argument is that groups liv-
ing apart do not develop a commonality of goals and views that would allow
better policymaking. Also, geographic concentration of groups may exacerbate


                                         33
ethnically- and geographically-based suboptimal policies at the expense of good
governance at the national level. Ethnic voting may be easier to organize and
may favor the selection of politicians on the basis of geographic and ethnic char-
acteristics, rather than quality. In some cases, secession threats may force the
central government to focus on repression or appeasement, subtracting resources
from more productive use.




References
 [1] Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, "Public Goods
     and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1999,
     114:1243-1284.
 [2] Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat,
     and Romain Wacziarg, "Fractionalization," Journal of Economic Growth,
     June 2003, 8:155-194.
 [3] Alesina, Alberto, William Easterly, and Janina Matuszeski, "Arti…cial
     States," NBER Working Paper No. 12328, June 2006.
 [4] Alesina, Alberto, and Edward Glaeser, Fighting Poverty in the US and
     Europe: A World of Di¤ erence, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, April
     2004.
 [5] Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara, "Ethnic Diversity and Economic
     Performance," Journal of Economic Literature, September 2005, 43:721-
     761.
 [6] Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore, The Size of Nations, MIT Press,
     Cambridge, MA, November 2003.
 [7] Alesina, Alberto, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, "Segregation and Civil Con-
     ‡ict," 2009, mimeo, Harvard University.
 [8] Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Pande, "Parochial Politics: Ethnic Prefer-
     ences and Politician Competition," KSG Working Paper No. RWP07-031,
     June 2007.
 [9] Cutler, David, and Edward Glaeser, "Are Ghettos Good or Bad?" Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, August 1997, 112:827-872.
[10] Cutler, David, Glaeser, Edward, and Jacob Vigdor, "The Rise and Decline
     of the American Ghetto," Journal of Political Economy, June 1999,
     107:455-506.


                                       34
[11] Cutler, David, Glaeser, Edward, and Jacob Vigdor, "When Are Ghettos
     Bad? Lessons from Immigrant Segregation in the United States," Journal
     of Urban Economics, May 2008, 63:759-774.
[12] Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, "Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies
     and Ethnic Divisions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1997,
     112:1203-1250.
[13] Echenique, Frederico and Roland Fryer, "A Measure of Segregation Based
     on Social Interactions," Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[14] Jenks, Christopher, and Susan Meyer, "Residential Segregation, Job Prox-
     imity and Black Job Opportunity," in L. Lynn and M. McGreary (eds.),
     Inner City Poverty in the United States, National Academic Press, Wash-
     ington, DC, 1990.
[15] Kain, John, "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment and Metropolitan
     Decentralization," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1968, 82:175-197.
[16] Kain, John, "The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: Three Decades Together,"
     Housing Policy Debate, 2008, 3:371-392.
[17] Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, "Governance
     Matters." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2196, Washing-
     ton, D.C., 1999.
[18] Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, "Governance
     Matters II –Updated Indicators for 2000/01." World Bank Policy Research
     Working Paper No. 2772, Washington, D.C., 2002.
[19] Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, "Governance
     Matters V: Aggregate and Individual Governance Indicators for 1996-
     2005." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4012. Washington,
     D.C., 2006.
[20] La Ferrara, Eliana, and Angelo Mele, "Racial Segregation and Public
     School Expenditure," CEPR Discussion Paper 5750, 2006.
[21] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
     Vishny, "Trust in Large Organizations," American Economic Review, May
     1997, 87(2):333-338.
[22] La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert
     Vishny, "The Quality of Government," Journal of Law, Economics, 971
     and Organization, 1999, 15(1): 222–279.
[23] MacMillan, Margaret, Paris 1919: Six Months that Changed the World,
     Random House Trade Paperbacks, New York, NY, 2003.
[24] Matuszeski, Janina and Frank Schneider, "Patterns of Ethnic Group Seg-
     regation and Civil Con‡ict," 2006, Mimeo, Harvard University.

                                     35
[25] Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, The Economic E¤ ects of Constitu-
     tions: What Do the Data Say?, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[26] Reardon, Sean and Glenn Firebaugh, "Measures of Multi-Group Segrega-
     tion," Sociological Methodology, 2002, 32: 33-67.

[27] Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, "The Di¤usion of Development,"
     NBER Working Paper 15253, March 2008.
[28] Stock, James, Jonathan Wright and Motohiro Yogo, "A Survey of Weak
     Instruments and Weak Identi…cation in Generalized Method of Moments,"
     Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2002, 20(4):518–29.

[29] Tiebout, Charles, "A Pure Theory of Local Public Expenditures," Journal
     of Political Economy, October 1956, 64:416-424.
[30] Treisman, Daniel, "Decentralization and the quality of government," 2000,
     Mimeo, UCLA.
[31] Uslaner, Eric M., "Trust, Diversity, and Segregation," 2008, Mimeo, Uni-
     versity of Maryland— College Park.




                                     36
                                                                ethnicity




          .5
                                                                                                                UGA



                                                                                                                AFG




          .4
                                                                                                    PAK             ZWE
                                                                                                                  GTM
                                                                          ETH
                                                                 IDN             ESP                          TUR
                                                                                BFA                     ECU


          .3
S tilde                                                                                     COL
                                                                                KEN
                                                         TZA                      ZAF
                                                                                   MAR
                                                           RUS                   GIN
                                                                      HND
                                                                     BEN
                                                                   TGO
          .2

                                                                   BEL
                                         CHE PHL                 ISR
                                                                 BHR
                                                                PAN
                                            GHA              PER
                                                         CIVMEX
                                           MKD NER
                                         SEN
                                           MLICAF
          .1




                           NPL       BLZ CHN
                                          BGR
                           GAB
                         MWI   TWNFIN IND
                       CMR
                      USA           UZBBOL
                                  LTUAUS
                           UKR
                          LKA   BLR
                              VNM  ZMB
                                 BRA
                               NZL
                            KAZ
                             KGZCRI
                               SAU
                        LVA
                         ROM
                         EST
                           GBR
                           QAT
                           DNK
                          NOR
                     CZE
                     KHM
                       HRVCHL
                         JOR
                        PRT
                         FRA
                       TJK
                       AUT
                       RWA
                        ARG
                      SVK
                     PRY
                     SVN
                      CAN
                     ARM
                      ITA
                      BGD
                     DEU
                     SWE
                     ISL
                     NLD
                     IRL
                     JPN
                     GRC
                     HUN
                     KOR
                       LSO
          0




                 0                       .1                        .2                        .3                       .4
                                                                  S hat

                                                                language
            .6




                              NGA
                                                                                      NAM
                                                                                                  UGA
                                              IDN
                                                                 CMR                              AFG
            .4




                                                                                      PAK            ZWE               GTM
                      IND                                                             TGO
                                                                 ETH                         TUR
                                                                       ESP
  S tilde




                     BFA        KEN                               COLRUS
                                                              PERKGZ
                              GHA        PHL TZA
                        ZMB                              GIN ZAF
                                                              MAR
                                                        HND
                                                       BEN
            .2




                                                      BEL
                                     CHE            PAN
                                    BLZ           GBR
                                                 MOZ
                                               LVA
                                      BOL     CIV
                                             MEX
                                             ITA
                         PRYNPL       MKDNIC
                                     SEN  NER
                                        CAF
                               UZB    MLI
                                     CHNECU
                                       BGR
                                  USA
                                 FIN
                          GAB
                         MWI
                        CAN
                       UKR
                          EST    AUS
                               LTU
                              BLR
                            VNM
                              RWA
                              AUT
                          KAZ
                         THA
                        ROM  SAU
                            HRV
                     CZE
                     KHM  DNK
                         CHL
                         NOR
                         MUS
                        PRT
                       TJK
                        CRI
                     SVK
                     NZL
                      SVN
                     ARM
                     BGD
                     SWE
                     ISL
                      BRA
                     JPN
                     KOR
                     HUN
                       LSO
                     HTI
            0




                 0                  .1                     .2                   .3                  .4                .5
                                                                  S hat

                                                                religion
          .3




                                                                                     IND                      IDN



                                                                                                BGR
                                                                                              TZA
          .2




                                                                                       NGA
S tilde




                                                                         RUS
                                                                       KEN
                                                           ETH
                       PHLMOZ                               GIN
                                                 BEN
          .1




                              ROM              KGZ
                                                KAZ
                                              BFA
                               JPN           LKA
                      CMR        ISR     HUN
                                   NAMNLD
                                       MUS
                       NIC           UZB
                                      GHA
                                      MDG
                                     CIV
                                   ZWE
                                   TGO
                                   EGY
                       CHE THA
                          VNM
                            USA
                          GTM   UGA
                              HRV
                               NPL
                             CAN
                      SVNCZE
                       DOM  ZMB
                            MEX
                            QAT
                      BLZ GBR
                        ZAFPAK
                           BRA
                         LTU
                     RWASEN
                       AUTCAF
                        KOR
                         SVK
                          HTI
                          MWI
                        STP MLI                                        KHM
                        EST
                        GAB
                        NER
                       PER
                     PRYBGD
                     PRT
                      ARM
                      AUS
                      NZL
                     CHL
                      IRL
                     TUR
                     IRN
          0




                 0                                  .1                                 .2                             .3
                                                                  S hat




               Figure 1: Segregation indices Se and Sb




                                                                37
                          .4
                                                                                                                           ZWE
                                                                                                                                         GTM
                                                                                                                       AFG
                                                                                                                       UGA
                                                                                                                     TUR

                                                                    ECU                                       PAK




           ethnicity segregation (S hat)
                                     .3
                                                                                                        COL
                                                                                                MAR
                                                                                               ZAF
                                                                                            GINESP
                                               BFA           KEN
                                                                                        HND
                                                                                        ETH
                                                                                       BEN
                         .2
                                                                                      BEL                     TGO
                                                                                    PAN
                                                                          IDN
                                                                                                  PER
                                                                            MEX                           RUS
                                                                             CIV
                                                                            TZA
                                                                 PHL
                                                                   NER
                                                         GHA     CAF
           .1




                                               IND             MKD
                                                               MLI
                                                                BGR
                                                              CHE
                                                              SEN
                                                              CHN
                                                               BOL
                                                           AUS
                                                          FINBLZ
                                                         UZB
                                                   ZMB LTU
                                                BRA
                                               NZL      BLR
                                                  CRI SAU
                                                      VNM                                           KGZ
                                                 UKRKAZ
                                                    GAB
                                                    DNK
                                                   CHL
                                                   NOR NPL                 GBR
                                                   MWI
                                                  ROM
                                                    EST
                                                  PRT                   LVA
                                                 LSO
                                                 TJK
                                                BGD
                                               ARM
                                               ISLCAN
                                                CZE
                                                SVK  HRVAUT
                                                        RWAUSA        ITA                 CMR
                                               HUN
                                                SVNPRY
                          0




                                               JPN
                                               KOR
                                               SWE
                                               KHM

                                           0                   .1                 .2            .3                         .4            .5
                                                                             language segregation (S hat)
                           .3




                                                                          IDN



                                                                    BGR
            religion segregation (S hat)




                                                                            TZA
                                  .2




                                                         NGA
                                               IND

                                                                                                          RUS
                                               KHM           KEN

                                                                                           GIN
                                                                                          ETH
                 .1




                                                                                          BEN
                                               BFA KAZ                                              KGZ

                                               HUN
                                                 MUS GHA
                                                     UZB                    CIV                               TGO
                                                                                                               NAM       ZWE
                                               JPN    NPL                                                             UGA
                                                 ROM
                                                  CAN
                                                  ZMBHRV
                                                BRATHA     USAMLI     MEXMOZ                                   PAK
                                               HTIMWI
                                                CZE
                                                SVK
                                               KOR
                                                BGD
                                                     VNM
                                                    EST
                                                    GAB LTU SENCAFNIC
                                                                PHL
                                                                  NER
                                                                         GBR
                                                                                          CMR ZAF
                                                                                               PER
                                                                                                                                         GTM
                                               NZL
                                                SVN
                                               ARM     AUTAUSCHE
                                                            BLZ
                           0




                                                   CHL RWA
                                                 PRT
                                                   PRY                                                               TUR

                                           0                   .1                 .2            .3                         .4            .5
                                                                             language segregation (S hat)
                           .3




                                                                                            IDN



                                                                     BGR
            religion segregation (S hat)




                                                                                   TZA
                                  .2




                                                                     IND

                                                                                      RUS
                                               KHM                                                       KEN

                                                                                                          GIN
                                                                                                   ETH
                 .1




                                                                                                   BEN
                                                      KAZ
                                                       KGZ                                               BFA
                                                     LKA

                                               HUN
                                               NLD                         GHA
                                                             UZB                    CIV           TGO                                    ZWE
                                                                                                ISR
                                               JPN   NPL                                                                           UGA
                                                HRV
                                                CANROM     ZMB
                                                USA QAT
                                                     GBR BRA      MLI
                                                                SEN                      MEX                               PAK
                                               CZE
                                                SVKMWI VNMLTU       CAF                                                                GTM
                                               KOR
                                                BGDEST
                                                 CMR
                                                 AUT GAB              NER
                                                                      PHL                 PER                 ZAF
                                               SVN
                                               IRL
                                               ARM           AUS CHE
                                                    CHL NZL BLZ
                           0




                                                 RWA
                                               PRYPRT                                                                            TUR

                                           0                         .1                      .2                       .3                 .4
                                                                                ethnicity segregation (S hat)



Figure 2: Segregation indices along the three dimensions of diversity




                                                                                          38
                                                                               ethnicity                                                                                                                                 ethnicity




                                                                                                                                                             .4
              .4




                                                                  ZWE                                                                                                                                                   ZWE
                                                                               GTM                                                                                                                                                  GTM
                                                                                                   AFG                       UGA                                                        AFG           UGA
                                                      TUR                                                                                                                                                                                   TUR

                                                                                             ECU                                                                                                                  PAK          ECU
                                                                                                          PAK




                                                                                                                                                                      .3
                       .3




                                                                                                                                                  Segregation (S hat)
   Segregation (S hat)




                                    COL                                                                                                                                                                                                      COL
                                                                             MAR                                                                                                                                                MAR                   ZAF
                                                                  ESP                                           GIN         ZAF                                                                                   GIN                                          ESP
                                                                                                 BFA                        KEN                                                                   KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                  BFA
                                           HND                                                        ETH BEN                                                                        ETH        BEN                      HND




                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                         TGO                                                          BEL
           .2




                                                                                           BEL         TGO
                                              PAN                 ISR              BHR                                                                                                                                                      PAN             BHR ISR
                                                                                                   IDN                                                                                                                        IDN
                                             PER                                                                                                                                                                                      PER
                                          MEX                      RUS                                                                                                                                                                        RUSMEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIV
                                                                                                         TZA CIV                                                                  TZA
                                                                                                    NER         PHL                                                                      NER                      GHA               PHL
                                                                                                    GHA                                                                                            CAF




                                                                                                                                                             .1
                                                                                                               CAF
              .1




                                                            BGR                        MKD                     MLI                                                                        MLI                           INDMKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BGR                          CHE
                                           CHN                                         CHE             IND
                                                                                                        SEN                                                                                              SEN                        CHN
                                                                                                           BOL                                                                                                          BOL
                                           FIN          AUS                                                  BLZ                                                                                                          BLZ                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                      UZB                                                                                                                                   ZMB          UZB                       LTU
                                                        LTUBLR                             BRA                                  ZMB                                                                      CMR           BLR     BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRI           TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NZL
                                    TWNCRI                      SAUNZL                                                         CMR                                                                        VNM                           SAU
                                                      VNM                                  KGZ                                                                                                    NPLKGZ               KAZ GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UKR                            GBR QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DNK
                                        QAT
                                        CHL
                                         FRA  GBR
                                               DNK
                                              NOR          LKAUKR                           KAZ MWI
                                                                                           NPL                         GAB                                                         MWI                            LKAJOR     ROMLVACHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST ARG PRT     FRA    NOR
                                  PRT
                                LSO ARG          JOR
                                                  ROM
                                                RWA
                                                AUT SVK    TJK       EST
                                                                   USA                      LVA                                                                                             TJK RWA BGDKHMLSO                       HRVSVK             AUTUSA
                                    KHM        HRV                                                                                                                                                            ARM                             GRC ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HUNCZE      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISL




                                                                                                                                                             0
                                 BGD
                                   ARMISL ITA CZE     CAN                                                                                                                                                              PRY                   SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            KOR      JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SWEIRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NLD
              0




                                 JPN
                                 KOR PRY
                                     HUN   GRCSVN IRL
                                            DEU NLD
                                            SWE

                            0                    .2                      .4              .6                       .8                     1                                 6                      7                    8                          9           10
                                                                         Fractionalization                                                                                                                        Log per capita GDP
                            R-squared = 0.1789                                                                                                                             R-squared = 0.1222




                                                                             language                                                                                                                                   language
                                                                                                                                                             .5
               .5




                                                                             GTM                                                                             .4                                                                     GTM
               .4




                                                                        ZWE                                                                                                                                             ZWE
                                                                                                           AFG                           UGA                                            AFG           UGA
                                                            TUR                                                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                                  Segregation (S hat)
   Segregation (S hat)




                                                                                                    NAM
                                                                                                   TGO                PAK                                                                                TGO PAK                            NAM
                                                                                                                                                               .3
                .3




                                                                       RUS                                                                                                                                                                    RUS
                                     COL                                       KGZ                                                                                                                       KGZ                                 COL
                                                                        PER
                                                                        ESP      MAR                                                ZAF                                                                                         MAR PER               ZAF      ESP
                                            HND                                                        CMR       ETH     GIN                                                         ETH                           GIN HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CMR
                                                                                                                        BEN                                                                     BEN
                                                                                                                                                      .2
       .2




                                                                                                 BEL                                                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                      PAN                                                                                                                                                                                   PAN
                                        GBR                                                                                              MOZ                                                  MOZ                                                                   GBR
                                                                     LVA                       CIV
                                                                                             IND                                                                                                            CIV         IND                       LVA
                                        ITA MEX                                            TZA                                                                                    TZA                                                               MEX            ITA
                                                                                         IDN                                                                                                                        IDN
                                    NIC                                              NER                                                                                                 NER                         NIC
                                                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                  CAF                    PHL
               .1




                                          ECU           BGR                                  PHL CAF                                                                                                                  ECU        BGR
                                                                          MKD
                                                                           BOL
                                                                          CHE                     MLI                                                                                     MLI                  BOL              MKD                          CHE
                                            CHN                                  BLZ     SEN                                                                                                          SEN                CHN BLZ
                                            FIN        USA
                                                         AUS                                       KEN                                                                                           KEN                                                      AUS USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         FIN
                                          RWA UZB AUT LTU BLR SAUNGA GHA                                                                                                                      NGARWA   UZB GHA              BLR        LTU                  AUT
                                      HRV              VNM               NPL                                                                                                                         NPL    VNM                         HRV  SAU
                                         CHL    DNK
                                              NOR               MUS EST BFAZMB
                                                                           PRY KAZ                 GAB                                                                                      ZMB BFA                         KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRY GAB      EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MUS                DNKNOR
                                  PRT
                                CRI        THA  ROM                 UKR      CAN    MWI                                                                                            MWI       TJK                           UKR    THACRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROM              PRT    CAN
                                LSO
                                 BRA
                                  BGDKHM
                                      ISL SWE CZESVN
                                                   NZL SVK   TJK                                                                                                                                       BGDKHMLSO                    BRA     SVK   SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUNCZE       ISL
                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NZL SWE
               0




                                HTI
                                 JPN
                                 KOR
                                  HUN
                                    ARM                                                                                                                                                                   HTI   ARM                              KOR      JPN

                            0                         .2                    .4                      .6                       .8                                            6                      7                    8                          9           10
                                                                         Fractionalization                                                                                                                        Log per capita GDP
                            R-squared = 0.1320                                                                                                                             R-squared = 0.0518


                                                                               religion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         religion
                .3




                                                                                                                                                              .3




                                                            IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IDN

                                                             BGR
                                                                                                                             TZA                                                                                                            BGR
    Segregation (S hat)




                                                                                                                                                                                  TZA
                   .2




                                                                                                                                                   Segregation (S hat)




                                                                                                                      NGA
                                                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                         IND                                                                                                                  NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IND
                                                           RUS
                                     KHM                                                         KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KEN          KHM
                                                                   GIN                                           ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                      ETH                         GIN
     .1




                                                                                                         KAZ                       BEN
                                                                 KGZ                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                     LKA                                                                                                        BEN                                   KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BFA     KGZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LKA
                                                                                                    HUN         MUS
                                       UZB                                                                             NLD
                                                                                                                       MDG CIV
                                                                                                                           GHA
                                         EGY                                   NAM              ZWE                            TGO                                                          MDG                                  MUS HUN          NLD
                                                                               ISR
                                                                                                     UGA                                                                                            CIV GHA ZWE EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   UZB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TGO                    NAM
                                                   ROMNPL                                    JPN                                                                                                                                              ISR
                                     PAK
                                       SENMLIHRV MEX QAT
                                         THA                                     ZMB
                                                                                  BRA
                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                               MOZ     USA                                                                     UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                NPL                                              JPN
                                 NER           PERBGD  LTU
                                                       PHL                      VNM  NIC
                                                                                   SVK   CZE GBR CAF
                                                                                       STP        HTIGTMGABKOR
                                                                                                    EST            MWI
                                                                                                                   ZAF                                                                   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                           MOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                         MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROM HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEX              CAN  USA
                                 ARM      PRTIRL                                     AUT
                                                                                    SVN      DOM          BLZ CMR AUSNZL
                                                                                                        CHE                                                                                       SENHTIPAK                  BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            THA                  GBRQAT
                0




                                IRN           TUR
                                              PRY                                      CHL            RWA                                                                           MWI NER   CAFSTP     VNM      GTM     GAB LTUESTSVK CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BGDCMR ARM NIC PHLPER DOM     ZAF     KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SVN      AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NZL AUS CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PRYBLZ
                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                              RWA                        IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TUR CHL        PRT
                            0                          .2                      .4                         .6                       .8
                                                                         Fractionalization                                                                                 6                      7                     8                         9           10
                            R-squared = 0.0001                                                                                                                                                                     Log per capita GDP
                                                                                                                                                                           R-squared = 0.0973




Figure 3: Segregation and fractionalization (left); Segregation and per capita GDP (right)




                                                                                                                                             39
                                                   CHL




                  1
                                                                       ETH
                                                           TZA
                                                       VNM         TWNBEN
                                             MLI




                  .5
                                                 JOR           CHN
                                            SEN FRA
                                            MWI                           BEL
                                                                           MARESP
                                                     PRT NZL AUS HUN
                                                    AUT NLD CZE                        UGA
                                           RWA       IRL    GBR


             Rule of law
                                                ZMB SWE
                                              IND       SVN
                                                      CRI
                                             KGZ NER   SVK
                                                       CAN GHACHE
                                         NPL               HRV       FIN EST BFA
                                                             KHM
                                             PHL              DNK LTUBGR
                 0
                                                 LKA QAT ARM
                                                 USA
                                               TJK          LVA      TGO
                                                                         BHR
                                                                           PAN
                                           SAU
                                           BOL       JPNCIV
                                                          NORROM      KEN
                                                              DEU
                                        BRA ITA           LSO
                                                            UZBISL
                                        GAB
                                      CMR                            GIN
                                                   GRC IDN         MEX
                                                                                   ECU
                                                            CAF     PER      HND
                                                                               ISR
                                               BGD KAZ KOR MKD               PAK
                                                     BLZ                                    TUR GTM
                  -.5



                                                            UKR                         AFG
                                                    ARG                 BLR
                                                     PRY                           ZAF    COL
                                                                                   RUS
                                                                                                                        ZWE
                  -1




                           -.2              -.1               0              .1                .2               .3
                                                          ethnicity segregation (S hat)
                           coef = -1.4209862, (robust) se = .4719442, t = -3.01



                                         CHL
                   1




                                                            TZA
                                                             ETH
                                                        VNM
                                           MLI             HUN     BEN
                                          MWI             CHN
                   .5




                                            SEN            AUS MAR
                                             PRT
                                               NZL             BEL ESP
                                                 RWA CZE
                                                 CRI MOZ                GBR           UGA
                                                      GHA AUT
             Rule of law




                                       CAN        ZMB
                                                 SVKSVN EST
                                                  NER
                                               MUS IND   CHEHRV
                                                       SWE     KHMFIN         KGZ
                                               SAU USA       BFA
                                                             DNK       PAN
                                                              LTU BGR
                0




                                          TJK              UZB
                                         PHL
                                         NPL      LSOARM
                                                      ROM                LVA      TGO
                                               KEN THA
                                        GAB
                                             BRABOL NOR
                                                      CIVJPN
                                                           ISL
                                                         ITA
                                             IDN BGDCAF MEX GIN    CMR
                                                                 NIC
                                                            ECU          PER
                                                                       HND
                                                KAZ          KOR                       NAM
                                                                         PAK TUR
                   -.5




                                                   NGA MKD BLZ                                              GTM
                                                  UKR                       AFG
                                         PRY                                      COL
                                            HTI             BLR
                                                                    ZAF
                                                                                                          ZWE
                                                                                         RUS
                   -1




                           -.2                             0                      .2                                 .4
                                                         language segregation (S hat)
                           coef = -1.3428299, (robust) se = .43677639, t = -3.07


                                                                 CHL
                   1




                             VNM                             EGY                                    TZA
                                                                        ETH
                   .5




                                                 SEN
                                                MLI
                                              AUS               PRT
                                                               HUN
                                                MWI                  IRL
                                                 UGA
                                                   ZMB NZL
                                                  RWA            BENAUT NLD
                                                                  QAT
                                               CZE GBR
             Rule of law




                                                     GHA
                                              NER            HRV
                                                           MDG
                                                         SVK        KHM
                                                                 CANCHE
                                                       EST                  IND
                                           THA     USASVN
                                               MOZ PHL      LKA
                 0




                                                      NPL      BFA
                                                                STP     KGZ  KEN                          BGR
                                             ARM BRA          MEX  MUS
                                                JPNUZB GAB
                                              ROM                                                                 IDN
                                         BGD         LTUPER
                                                    CIVTGO             NAM   GIN
                                             CMRPAKCAF NIC
                                               KOR IRN     ISR
                                                          DOM
                   -.5




                                                   TUR
                                                            PRYKAZ
                                                            GTM                          NGA
                                                         BLZ
                                                  ZAF        ZWE
                                                               HTI

                                                                                   RUS
                   -1




                             -.1                            0                       .1                               .2
                                                          religion segregation (S hat)
                           coef = -.2467093, (robust) se = .99137285, t = -.25




Figure 4: Residual scatter plots for rule of law and segregation (OLS)




                                                                       40
                      Group A
                     No groups
                      B,C,or D

                        Predicted
             HC 1
                       location of
 Group D                                        Group B
              Predicted     A     Predicted
No groups                                      No groups
             location of         location of
 A,B,or C        D                   B          A,C,or D
                        Predicted
                      location of C

                        Group C
                       No groups
                        A,B,or D




                      No groups
                      A,B,C,or D


              HC 2
No groups         Groups A,B,C,D are            No groups
A,B,C,or D          predicted to be             A,B,C,or D
                  uniformly distributed




                     No groups
                     A,B,C,or D

    Figure 5: Predicted location of groups




                            41
                                                       Germany
                                                       43% Protestant     Liechtenstein
                                                       33% Catholic       79% Catholic


            France
                                                                          Austria
            76% Catholic                      G
            11% Not religious                                             75% Catholic
                                                       A                  12% Not religious
                                 F

                                          I

                                                            Italy
                                                            82% Catholic
                                                            17% Not religious

                                                     % of total population
                                        Entire                Hypothetical regions:
                                      Switzerland:          F      G        A       I
                          Catholic       44.16            12.62 5.48 12.45 13.61
                        Protestant       37.21              0     37.21      0      0
                      Not religious      11.73            3.23      0      3.52   4.99
                           Muslim         4.50             1.13   1.13     1.13   1.13
                Orthodox Christian        1.90            0.48    0.48     0.48   0.48
                            Jewish        0.25            0.06    0.06     0.06   0.06


Figure 6: Predicted location of religious groups across hypothetical regions in Switzerland




                                                  42
                                                                      ethnicity                                                                                                                          ethnicity
                                                                                                                     ZWE                                                                                                                            ZWE




                                                                                                                                           .3
           .3




                                                                             GTM                                                                                             UGA
                                                                                                                                                                ESP                                         GTM




                                                                                                                                                     .2
                    .2




                                                                                                    TUR                                                                                                                         TUR
                                                                                                                                                                            AFGCOL
                                             AFG
                                            UGA                                                                                                             RUS




                                                                                                                               Segregation (S tilde)
Segregation (S hat)




                                              COL
                                                                                  ECU                                                                                                   BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                      ETH          PAK
                                ESP                 BFA
                                                     ZAF PAK                                                   ISR                                                                                  ECU                                           ISR




                                                                                                                                            .1
                                 RUS
           .1




                                            HND                                                                                                            IDN           HND
                                                                                                                                                                        PAN
                                        PAN      MAR                              BEL                                                                                      ESTFIN
                                      BHR          EST                                                                                                                BHR    TWN
                                                                                                                                                                            MAR         CHE           BEL
                                        KEN
                                        GINBENTGO
                                                FIN                                                                  BGR                                                  LTU ZAF                                                                         BGR
                                               PER MEX
                                              LTU
                                              TWN                                                                                                               TZA KEN BEN     TGO
                                     ETH             HUNBLR                                                                                                          GIN       HUN
                                                                                                                                                                              PER
                                                                                                                                                                               ISL     BLR
                                  MKD CHN AUS ISL  DEUCHE                                                                                                      MKD
                                                                                                                                                                    LVA CZE
                                                                                                                                                                         KHM DNK GHA MEX
                                           KHM DNK




                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                 UKR
                                                                                                                                                                  NLD    AUS
   0




                                   LVAROM
                                 UKR
                                   GBR  CAF
                                         CZE                                                                                                                  ARM   ROM            UZB      DEU HRV
                            IDN
                                 ARM NLD
                                      NZL       GHA UZB
                                               NOR
                                             KOR
                                               LSO    HRV                                                                                                         GBR
                                                                                                                                                                    CHN LSO
                                                                                                                                                                   QAT
                                                                                                                                                                   CAF
                                                                                                                                                                  NZL
                                     SVN
                                   TZA CANVNMSVK                                        CIV                                                                      SVN
                                                                                                                                                                 BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                   CAN       NOR
                                  QAT                                                                                                                            PRT IRL
                                                                                                                                                                    CRI    PRY
                                                                                                                                                                          SVK
                                                                                                                                                                        KOR
                                  BLZ
                                 PRT CRI
                                      IRL
                                    JPN  SWE
                                        KAZ         NER
                           GRC FRA AUT    PRY                ARG                                                                                              GRC
                                                                                                                                                             JORFRALKA
                                                                                                                                                                       VNMSWE
                                                                                                                                                                                 NER USA     ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CIV
                               JORLKA CHL ZMBUSA                                                                                                               AUT KAZ
                                                                                                                                                           PHL JPN   CHL  MWI
                              PHL BGD    IND                TJK                                                                                                         SEN
           -.1




                                                                                                                                           -.1
                                  KGZ
                                    SENMWI
                                  SAU        MLI
                                           ITA                                                                                                               BGD
                                                                                                                                                              NPL
                                             RWABOL                                                                                                                      ITA
                                                                                                                                                                          GABMLI                        TJK
                               NPL                                                                                                                                          RWA
                                            GAB                      BRA                                                                                    KGZSAU ZMB
                                     CMR                                                                                                                                    BOL
                                                                                                                                                                      IND
                                                                                                                                                               CMR                        BRA
           -.2




                                                                                                                                           -.2
                          -.1                    0               .1            .2                  .3                .4                                   -.1                     0                .1            .2               .3                .4
                                                          Predicted Segregation (S hat)                                                                                                      Predicted Segregation (S tilde)


                                                                      language                                                                                                                        language
           .4




                                                                                                                                               .4
                                                 GTM                                                                                                                                    NAM
                                                                                                               ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NGA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZWE
                                             NAM
                                                                                                                                  Segregation (S tilde)
Segregation (S hat)




                                                               UGA                                                                                                                              GTM
                                                                                                                                                    .2
                .2




                                                                           RUS                                                                                                                                   TGO
                                                         COL                 TGO                                                                                                           ESP      CMR RUS             TUR
                                                                            KGZ                               TUR                                                                                COLUGA
                                                             AFG                                                                                                                        IDN           AFG
                                                                                                                                                                                                       BFAKGZ
                                                               LVA                                                                                                                                       LVA
                                      PAK
                                      GBR HND PAN                PER                                                                                                                     GBR PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                             HND           PER
                                     ESP            CMR    ZAF                                                                                                                        PAK ETHNICMAR FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                      BGR
                                                     BEN FIN
                                                   MAR    BGR                                                                                                                                    ISL BLZ GHA BEL
                                           GIN NICLTU KHM               BEL                                                                                                               ITA MKD
                                                                                                                                                                                                LTU   BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                           HRV
                                          KOR AUS   DNK BLZ
                                                  BFA                HRV                                                                                                                   IND
                                                                                                                                                                                             GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                              CZE              UZB
                                                                                                                                    0




                                        ETH       ECU     BLR                                                                                                                                ARM
                                                                                                                                                                                            EST  CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KHM
 0




                                         JPN HUNUZB
                                               ISL
                                                TZA                         AUT                                                                                                         HUN      ROMBEN
                                  ITA CHN CHE
                                          EST
                                          MKD    MEXVNM                                                                                                                                  KOR SVNDNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MEX SWE
                                             CZE
                                              ROM     SWE
                                                       GHACIV                                                                                                                               PRTECU
                                                                                                                                                                                               KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                               NOR PRY       AUT
                                         ARM   NOR
                                             IND
                                             MOZ                                                                                                                                        CHN
                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN       MUS
                                       LSOSVNNGA ZMBNERTHA
                                          CAF                                                       USA                                                                                  TZASVKUKR
                                                                                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                              CRI
                                                                                                                                                                                             PHL    ZAF   BOL
                                 BGD KAZ      UKR                                                                                                                                       LSO CHLVNM
                                    SAU
                                    NZL
                                          SVKCRI
                                              MUS     KEN BOL          RWA                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                          KAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                           HTI    NPL CIVTHARWA
                                     IDNPRT
                                   SEN          BRA
                                          HTI MLI                                                                                                                                     SAU
                                            MWI PRYTJK                                                                                                                                           NER     GAB                                USA
                                       CHLPHL
                                           NPL          GAB                                                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                      SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                      CAN      MOZ      TJK
                                 CAN                                                                                                                                                        BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                       CAF MLI
                                                                                                                                               -.2
           -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                        MWI

                         -.2                         0                 .2                     .4                     .6                                   -.5                                   0                        .5                              1
                                                          Predicted Segregation (S hat)                                                                                                       Predicted Segregation (S tilde)


                                                                       religion                                                                                                                           religion
                                                                                                                                               .2
            .2




                                                                           IDN                                                                                                                              IDN

                                                                                                        BGR                                                                                                                           BGR

                                                                            TZA                                                                                                                     IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                             TZA
                                                                                                                                  Segregation (S tilde)
Segregation (S hat)




                                                                                                                                                    .1
                .1




                                           NGA                                                                                                                               NGA
                                             RUS    INDGIN KEN                                                                                                                   PHL    GIN KEN   NAM
                                                      NLD                                                                                                                   RUS        KGZ
                                                        KGZ    NAM                                                                                                         QATMOZ               CHE
                              KHM              IRL AUT
                                             MUS      CHE                                                                                                                         NIC NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                 IRL
                                       QAT BEN                                    ETH                                                                                                                  ISR
                                       CAN     STP
                                                BFA PRT HUN                                             KAZ                                                           HRV MUS   STP AUT                   ETH                               KAZ
                                    HRVHTI CHL
                                     LKA
                                                MEX
                                               PRY                                                                                                                      CANBENBLZ BFA PRT HUNROM
                                             GTM
                                             NIC                                                                                                                                  PRY
  0




                                    MDG
                                                                                                                                   0




                                        EGY
                                         NZL DOM            ISR                                                                                                      EST
                                                                                                                                                                     LKA      CMR
                                          BLZ
                                     TGO GAB SVK       PER ZWE                                                                                              UZB
                                                                                                                                                                     SVN
                                                                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                                                                                          JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                GAB
                                                                                                                                                                               DOMGTM
                                                                                                                                                                                   SVK           ZWE
                                   EST
                                   SVN
                                  GHA  GBR      NPL           LTU                                                                                                        HTI
                                                                                                                                                                        NZL  CHLMEX                    LTU
                           UZB            IRN
                                        ZMB     CIV
                                                PHL        CAF                                                                                                     GHA
                                                                                                                                                                     MDG
                                                                                                                                                                       TGOZMBNPL         PERCAF
                                      RWA   USATUR                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                                                                           RWA
                                        PAKJPN
                                             SEN
                                               BRA              UGA                                                                                         CZE        GBRPAK   SEN
                            CZE MWIKOR
                                  MOZ
                                 ARM ROM
                                   CMR  NER
                                       AUS  ZAF MLI                                                                                                             ARM          USACIV
                                                                                                                                                                           NER    THA TUR            UGA
                                              THA                                                                                                                 MWI           ZAF MLI
                                                                                                                                                                    KORAUS      BRA
                                      BGD                                                                                                                                 BGD
                                                                                                                                                                KHM
            -.1




                                                                                                                                                                       VNM
                                                                                                                                               -.1




                                VNM

                         -.2                         0                 .2                     .4                     .6                                    -.2                           0                  .2                   .4                      .6
                                                          Predicted Segregation (S hat)                                                                                                       Predicted Segregation (S tilde)




                                 Figure 7: Predictive power of the instrument conditional on all controls




                                                                                                                          43
                                                                                ethnicity
                                                    CHL




                             1
                                                 ETH
                                                TZA
                                                      BEN
                                                      VNMTWN
                                                        MLI




                             .5
                                            JOR
                                             FRASEN CHN
                                                     MWI MAR                          BEL
                                           ESPPRTNZL AUS       HUN
                                                     UGA
                                                    AUT
                                               GBRIRLCZE
                                                  NLD   RWA
                       Rule of law
                                                 SVN
                                                  CRISWE
                                                       ZMB
                                                     IND
                                              KGZ  CAN  SVKGHANERCHE
                                         NPL                    HRV
                                                               BFA
                           0              PHLARM
                                               QAT
                                               BHR     KHMFINEST                                                           BGR
                                                LVAPANUSA
                                               LKA       LTUDNK       TJK
                                              SAUJPN      TGO
                                                   ROM
                                                    KEN   NOR
                                                           BOL
                                                             DEU                                CIV
                                                      ITA LSO
                                                      GAB  ISL UZB    BRA
                                        IDN CMR GIN
                                       GRC                       MEX                  ECU
                                                    CAFHNDPER                                                       ISR
                                              MKD KAZ KOR
                                              BGD                  PAK
                                               BLZ                                                            TUR
                             -.5




                                              UKR      AFG                          GTM

                                                                              ARG
                                                      PRY
                                                       COL         ZAFBLR
                                             RUS
                                                                                                                           ZWE
                             -1




                                     -.05                 0                .05              .1                .15                .2
                                                                   Fitted value of S hat from stage 1


                                                                               language
                                               CHL
                            1




                                                ETH       TZA
                                                           VNM
                                                   HUN
                                                     MLI     BEN
                                         SEN CHNMWIAUSMAR
                            .5




                                          NZL PRT                                           BEL
                                           ESP     CZE                                     RWA
                                            GBR      CRI ZMBGHAUGA                                AUT
                       Rule of law




                                       CAN      EST
                                                SVK MOZ
                                                 SVN            NER
                                                CHE MUS
                                                   IND        SWEKHM                  HRV
                                                         PAN      FIN                 KGZ                            USA
                                          SAU            BFADNK
                                                            LTU    BGR
                          0




                                                       UZB TJK
                                               ARM
                                             LSO  PHL
                                                  NPLROM                 LVA              TGO
                                               JPN NOR BRA    KEN   CIV
                                                                     THA
                                        ITA           ISL          BOL
                                                                 GAB
                                       BGDIDN CAFGIN    MEX CMR
                                                         NIC               PER
                                                  HND ECU
                                                 KOR
                                            PAKKAZ NAM                                                                           TUR
                            -.5




                                                     NGA
                                                MKDUKRGTM         BLZ AFG
                                                          PRYCOL
                                                HTI                BLR
                                                                    ZAF
                                                                                                                                  ZWE
                                                                                     RUS
                            -1




                                     -.05                     0                 .05              .1                  .15
                                                                   Fitted value of S hat from stage 1


                                                                                religion
                                                                        CHL
                             1




                                              VNM                 EGY                             TZA
                                                                                                        ETH
                             .5




                                                                 SEN MLI
                                                                           PRT     HUN
                                                    MWI AUS        IRL
                                                             NZL
                                                           QAT  BEN     AUTNLD        UGA
                                                          RWA
                                                            ZMB
                                                     GHA GBR
                       Rule of law




                                             CZE
                                                KHM      HRVNER SVK
                                                        MDG                CHE
                                                       ESTCAN USA THA
                                                                         IND
                                                      SVN
                                                     MOZ LKA        PHL
                           0




                                                                     BFA
                                                                   STP
                                                                    NPL      KGZ KEN                                             BGR
                                            UZB     ARM ROM JPN  MUSMEX
                                                                   BRA
                                                                 GAB                    IDN
                                                          BGD               PER     LTU
                                                         TGO        CIV      GIN     NAM
                                                      CMR PAK NIC                CAF
                                                      KOR     IRN                 ISR
                                                                 DOM
                             -.5




                                                                   TUR
                                                        NGA        PRY
                                                                 GTM                                                              KAZ
                                                              BLZ
                                                           HTI ZAF               ZWE

                                                                  RUS
                             -1




                                     -.05                              0                      .05                           .1
                                                                   Fitted value of S hat from stage 1




Figure 8: Residual scatter plots for the rule of law and segregation (second stage of 2SLS)




                                                                                44
     Table 1: The most and the least segregated countries

             Most segregated:                Least segregated:
                                 Ethnicity
                        Sb     F                           Sb      F
         Zimbabwe      0.39   0.32      Germany          0.001 0.12
         Guatemala     0.38   0.42      Sweden           0.001 0.12
         Afghanistan   0.37   0.63      Netherlands      0.001 0.20
         Uganda        0.37   0.88      Cambodia         0.001 0.06
         Turkey        0.36   0.22      Korea            0.002 0.02
                                  Language
                         Sb    F                           Sb      F
         Guatemala     0.49 0.36        Haiti            0.001 0.00




45
         Zimbabwe      0.39 0.32        Sweden           0.001 0.12
         Afghanistan 0.37 0.63          Burkina Faso 0.001 0.51
         Uganda        0.37 0.88        Cambodia         0.001 0.06
         Turkey        0.36 0.22        Korea            0.002 0.02
                                   Religion
                         Sb    F                           Sb      F
         Indonesia     0.27 0.21        Turkey          0.0000 0.16
         Bulgaria      0.23 0.22        Chile           0.0002 0.44
         Tanzania      0.22 0.73        Paraguay        0.0003 0.16
         Nigeria       0.20 0.66        Portugal        0.0005 0.12
         India         0.19 0.31        Iran            0.0007 0.00
           Note: S – segregation index; F – fractionalization index.
                  b
            Table 2: Correlation table: Segregation and the quality of government



                                                                Segregation indices
                                 Ethnicity Sb   Language Sb   Religion Sb Ethnicity Se   Language Se   Religion Se
                        Voice       -0.36          -0.30        -0.25         -0.37         -0.36        -0.19




46
           Political stability      -0.55          -0.45        -0.33         -0.56         -0.54        -0.30
     Government effectiveness       -0.35          -0.24        -0.27         -0.35         -0.32        -0.23
          Regulatory quality        -0.34          -0.24        -0.26         -0.35         -0.32        -0.23
                  Rule of law       -0.40          -0.30        -0.29         -0.40         -0.38        -0.25
        Control of corruption       -0.36          -0.27        -0.31         -0.37         -0.36        -0.27
              Table 3: Segregation and the rule of law, OLS regressions



                                                                   Rule of law
                                       (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)
         Segregation Sb (ethnicity)    -2.50***   -1.42***
                                       [0.72]     [0.47]
      Fractionalization (ethnicity)    -1.20***   0.02
                                       [0.28]     [0.22]
         Segregation Sb (language)                           -1.84**     -1.34***
                                                             [0.71]      [0.44]
      Fractionalization (language)                           -1.00***    0.23
                                                             [0.33]      [0.22]
           Segregation Sb (religion)                                                -4.53***   -0.25
                                                                                    [1.33]     [0.99]
        Fractionalization (religion)                                                0.76*      0.41
                                                                                    [0.42]     [0.25]
                    ln (population)               -0.02                  -0.03                 -0.05*
                                                  [0.03]                 [0.03]                [0.03]
              ln (GDP per capita)                 0.48***                0.48***               0.39***
                                                  [0.06]                 [0.07]                [0.06]
                 Protestants share                0.007**                0.005                 0.003
                                                  [0.003]                [0.003]               [0.003]
                    Muslims share                 0.002                  0.001                 0.001
                                                  [0.002]                [0.002]               [0.003]
                   Catholics share                -0.002                 -0.003                -0.003
                                                  [0.002]                [0.002]               [0.002]
                           Latitude               0.28                   0.60                  0.82
                                                  [0.46]                 [0.49]                [0.58]
               English legal origin               0.22*                  0.15                  0.12
                                                  [0.12]                 [0.15]                [0.14]
               German legal origin                0.38**                 0.27                  0.35*
                                                  [0.16]                 [0.19]                [0.18]
              Socialist legal origin              -0.40**                -0.49**               -0.34
                                                  [0.19]                 [0.22]                [0.23]
         Scandinavian legal origin                -0.07                  -0.06                 0.00
                                                  [0.26]                 [0.34]                [0.00]
              Democratic tradition                0.06***                0.07***               0.09***
                                                  [0.02]                 [0.02]                [0.03]
                        Mountains                 0.05                   0.19                  0.03
                                                  [0.16]                 [0.17]                [0.20]
                          Constant     0.79***    -3.98***   0.53***     -4.09***   -0.2       -3.21***
                                       [0.17]     [0.78]     [0.20]      [0.74]     [0.18]     [0.67]
                      Observations     97         97         92          92         78         78
                        R-squared      0.24       0.87       0.15        0.87       0.12       0.84

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                     47
                          Table 4: Ethnic and linguistic segregation and the quality of government, OLS

                                                      Ethnicity                                                           Language
                          Voice      Political Govern-t Regul.         Rule of    Control    Voice      Political   Govern-t Regul.        Rule of    Control
                                     stability effectiv.    quality    law        of corr.              stability   effectiv.  quality     law        of corr.
      Panel A. Baseline: All controls and full sample
           Segregation -1.11**       -2.24*** -0.7          -0.82      -1.42***   -0.93*     -1.32***   -1.82***    -0.79*     -0.68       -1.34***   -1.05**
                         [0.49]      [0.59]     [0.52]      [0.76]     [0.47]     [0.51]     [0.43]     [0.56]      [0.47]     [0.67]      [0.44]     [0.47]
      Fractionalization 0.16         0.11       0.06        0.17       0.02       -0.12      0.26       0.06        0.32       0.3         0.23       0.07
                         [0.21]      [0.27]     [0.21]      [0.25]     [0.22]     [0.23]     [0.19]     [0.27]      [0.22]     [0.25]      [0.22]     [0.24]
             R-squared 0.836         0.728      0.855       0.776      0.873      0.862      0.836      0.737       0.851      0.766       0.869      0.858
              Controls yes           yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes        yes         yes        yes         yes        yes
                Sample full          full       full        full       full       full       full       full        full       full        full       full
                  Obs. 97            97         97          97         97         97         92         92          92         92          92         92
      Panel B. No controls and full sample
           Segregation -2.36*** -3.77*** -1.86**            -1.72**    -2.50***   -2.15***   -1.83***   -2.91***    -1.22*     -1.03       -1.84**    -1.53**
                         [0.69]      [0.67]     [0.72]      [0.85]     [0.72]     [0.72]     [0.66]     [0.67]      [0.72]     [0.79]      [0.71]     [0.74]




48
      Fractionalization -0.80*** -0.72*** -1.33*** -0.96***            -1.20***   -1.39***   -0.75**    -0.72**     -1.08***   -0.91***    -1.00***   -1.18***
                         [0.29]      [0.26]     [0.28]      [0.24]     [0.28]     [0.30]     [0.30]     [0.30]      [0.33]     [0.27]      [0.33]     [0.35]
             R-squared 0.176         0.337      0.223       0.19       0.242      0.227      0.129      0.242       0.13       0.126       0.153      0.149
              Controls no            no         no          no         no         no         no         no          no         no          no         no
                Sample full          full       full        full       full       full       full       full        full       full        full       full
                  Obs. 97            97         97          97         97         97         92         92          92         92          92         92
      Panel C: All controls; sample excludes dictatorships
           Segregation -2.20*** -2.66*** -1.37*** -1.63**              -1.92***   -1.59***   -1.80***   -2.03***    -1.22***   -1.18*      -1.66***   -1.45***
                         [0.44]      [0.61]     [0.52]      [0.73]     [0.48]     [0.51]     [0.45]     [0.58]      [0.45]     [0.68]      [0.42]     [0.45]
      Fractionalization 0.50***      0.21       0.34        0.27       0.25       0.12       0.42*      0.07        0.44       0.24        0.28       0.17
                         [0.18]      [0.29]     [0.21]      [0.23]     [0.21]     [0.22]     [0.23]     [0.32]      [0.26]     [0.25]      [0.25]     [0.27]
             R-squared 0.844         0.766      0.878       0.799      0.883      0.88       0.826      0.784       0.874      0.78        0.886      0.881
              Controls yes           yes        yes         yes        yes        yes        yes        yes         yes        yes         yes        yes
                Sample democ         democ      democ       democ      democ      democ      democ      democ       democ      democ       democ      democ
                  Obs. 77            77         77          77         77         77         75         75          75         75          75         75

     Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
                                  Table 5: Religious segregation and the quality of government, OLS

                                                                                       Religion
                                                         Voice       Political Govern-t Regul.         Rule of    Control
                                                                     stability effectiv.     quality   law        of corr.
                                      Panel A. Baseline: All controls and full sample
                                           Segregation 0.53          -1.07      -0.17        0.4       -0.25      -0.18
                                                         [0.93]      [1.36]     [0.93]       [0.85]    [0.99]     [0.87]
                                      Fractionalization 0.12         0.61*      0.52*        0.24      0.41       0.57**
                                                         [0.26]      [0.32]     [0.26]       [0.23]    [0.25]     [0.27]
                                             R-squared 0.814         0.679      0.834        0.755     0.837      0.829
                                              Controls yes           yes        yes          yes       yes        yes
                                                Sample full          full       full         full      full       full
                                                  Obs. 78            78         78           78        78         78
                                      Panel B. No controls and full sample
                                           Segregation -3.71*** -4.72*** -4.29*** -3.53***             -4.53***   -5.07***
                                                         [1.40]      [1.39]     [1.29]       [1.25]    [1.33]     [1.32]




49
                                      Fractionalization 0.78*        0.72**     0.75*        0.63*     0.76*      0.94**
                                                         [0.40]      [0.35]     [0.43]       [0.37]    [0.42]     [0.44]
                                             R-squared 0.109         0.153      0.11         0.103     0.118      0.146
                                              Controls no            no         no           no        no         no
                                                Sample full          full       full         full      full       full
                                                  Obs. 78            78         78           78        78         78
                                      Panel C: All controls; sample excludes dictatorships
                                           Segregation -0.52         -1.47      0.06         -0.17     -0.32      0.05
                                                         [0.93]      [1.15]     [0.90]       [0.92]    [0.86]     [0.80]
                                      Fractionalization 0.57**       0.72**     0.57*        0.19      0.45       0.53*
                                                         [0.24]      [0.36]     [0.29]       [0.25]    [0.28]     [0.30]
                                             R-squared 0.801         0.719      0.849        0.764     0.852      0.849
                                              Controls yes           yes        yes          yes       yes        yes
                                                Sample democ         democ      democ        democ     democ      democ
                                                  Obs. 64            64         64           64        64         64

     Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
             Table 6: First stage: Segregation and predicted segregation



 Panel A: Segregation index Sb
                  Full sample; All controls       Full sample; No controls      Democ sample; All controls
                  E Sb      L Sb       R Sb       E Sb      L Sb      R Sb        E Sb    L Sb       R Sb
  Instrument 0.46*** 0.33*** 0.23***            0.49*** 0.32*** 0.25***         0.52*** 0.32*** 0.27***
                 [0.12]    [0.10]     [0.07]     [0.12]    [0.07]    [0.07]      [0.13]  [0.11]     [0.06]
       Fract-n 0.11** 0.15***         -0.01     0.13*** 0.15***      -0.01       0.08*  0.13***      0.01
                 [0.05]    [0.05]     [0.03]     [0.03]    [0.03]    [0.02]      [0.05]  [0.05]     [0.03]
         Obs.      97        92         78         97        92        78          77      75         64
    R-squared     0.52      0.44       0.53       0.39      0.31      0.34        0.59    0.41       0.61
  F-stat (het)   15.32     10.72      11.36      17.04     18.28     14.96       15.11    8.13      20.38
 F-stat (hom)    28.31     18.75      26.97      33.21     23.22     38.64       35.72   15.64      24.94

  Panel B: Segregation Index Se
                   Full sample; All controls     Full sample; No controls       Democ sample; All controls
                   E Se      L Se       R Se     E Se       L Se      R Se        E Se       L Se      R Se
    Instrument 0.33***      0.21*     0.20*** 0.35*** 0.20** 0.21*** 0.40***                  0.2    0.25***
                  [0.12]    [0.12]     [0.06]   [0.12]     [0.09]    [0.06]      [0.14]     [0.14]    [0.06]
        Fract-n 0.18*** 0.26***         0.02   0.20*** 0.29***        0.01     0.15*** 0.26***         0.03
                  [0.05]    [0.05]     [0.03]   [0.04]     [0.04]    [0.02]      [0.05]     [0.05]    [0.04]
           Obs.     97        92         78       97         92        78          77         75        64
     R-squared     0.48      0.50       0.48     0.34       0.36      0.25        0.55       0.50      0.56
   F-stat (het)    7.22      3.16      10.66     8.31       5.30     13.08        8.58       2.05     14.42
  F-stat (hom)    11.64      8.59      19.79    13.84       9.37     24.92       16.45       6.17     21.42
Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant
at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat (het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from the
first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat (hom)” – under the assumption of
homoscedasticity. “E” – ethnicity; “L” – language; “R” – religion.




                                                     50
Table 7: Segregation and the rule of law, the second stage of the 2SLS regressions


                                                                   Rule of law
                                        (1)       (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)
          Segregation Sb (ethnicity)    -3.88**   -2.46***
                                        [1.75]    [0.67]
       Fractionalization (ethnicity)    -0.97**   0.17
                                        [0.38]    [0.25]
          Segregation Sb (language)                          -1.14        -1.92**
                                                             [2.08]       [0.74]
       Fractionalization (language)                          -1.11***     0.32
                                                             [0.42]       [0.23]
           Segregation Sb (religion)                                                 -6.65**   -0.91
                                                                                     [2.92]    [1.87]
        Fractionalization (religion)                                                 0.76*     0.43*
                                                                                     [0.43]    [0.24]
                    ln (population)               -0.01                   -0.02                -0.05
                                                  [0.03]                  [0.03]               [0.04]
               ln (GDP per capita)                0.48***                 0.48***              0.39***
                                                  [0.07]                  [0.08]               [0.06]
                  Protestants share               0.01*                   0.005                0.002
                                                  [0.00]                  [0.003]              [0.003]
                     Muslims share                0.003                   0.001                0.001
                                                  [0.002]                 [0.002]              [0.003]
                    Catholics share               -0.001                  -0.003               -0.003
                                                  [0.002]                 [0.002]              [0.002]
                           Latitude               0.2                     0.64                 0.76
                                                  [0.47]                  [0.50]               [0.58]
                English legal origin              0.21                    0.12                 0.12
                                                  [0.13]                  [0.16]               [0.14]
               German legal origin                0.35**                  0.2                  0.35*
                                                  [0.17]                  [0.21]               [0.19]
               Socialist legal origin             -0.44**                 -0.54**              -0.31
                                                  [0.19]                  [0.24]               [0.23]
          Scandinavian legal origin               0.02                    -0.11                0
                                                  [0.29]                  [0.37]               [0.00]
              Democratic tradition                0.06***                 0.07***              0.09***
                                                  [0.02]                  [0.02]               [0.03]
                         Mountains                0.1                     0.24                 0.01
                                                  [0.17]                  [0.19]               [0.20]
                           Constant     0.84***   -4.11***   0.49**       -4.18***   -0.1      -3.24***
                                        [0.18]    [0.84]     [0.22]       [0.78]     [0.20]    [0.66]
                      Observations      97        97         92           92         78        78
                         R-squared      0.23      0.87       0.15         0.87       0.10      0.84
                       F-stat (het)     17.04     15.32      18.28        10.72      14.96     11.36
                      F-stat (hom)      33.21     28.31      23.22        18.75      38.64     26.97

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** signif-
icant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat (het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from
the first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat (hom)” – under the assumption of
homoscedasticity.


                                                     51
            Table 8: Ethnic and linguistic segregation and the quality of government, the second stage of 2SLS

                                                     Ethnicity                                                         Language
                         Voice       Political Govern-t Regul.       Rule of    Control    Voice      Political   Govern-t Regul.      Rule of    Control
                                     stability effectiv.   quality   law        of corr.              stability   effectiv.  quality   law        of corr.
      Panel A. Baseline: All controls and full sample
           Segregation -1.28         -3.64*** -2.14*** -2.10*        -2.46***   -1.77**    -2.49***   -3.07***    -1.60*     -1.84     -1.92**    -1.47
                         [1.03]      [1.37]     [0.69]     [1.24]    [0.67]     [0.72]     [0.74]     [0.79]      [0.83]     [1.20]    [0.74]     [0.98]
      Fractionalization 0.18         0.31       0.26       0.35      0.17       0          0.44*      0.25        0.44*      0.48      0.32       0.14
                         [0.24]      [0.33]     [0.25]     [0.32]    [0.25]     [0.27]     [0.22]     [0.29]      [0.25]     [0.31]    [0.23]     [0.28]
             R-squared 0.836         0.71       0.84       0.76      0.865      0.858      0.822      0.719       0.845      0.749     0.866      0.857
              Controls yes           yes        yes        yes       yes        yes        yes        yes         yes        yes       yes        yes
                Sample full          full       full       full      full       full       full       full        full       full      full       full
                  Obs. 97            97         97         97        97         97         92         92          92         92        92         92
           F-stat (het) 15.32        15.32      15.32      15.32     15.32      15.32      10.72      10.72       10.72      10.72     10.72      10.72
          F-stat (hom) 28.31         28.31      28.31      28.31     28.31      28.31      18.75      18.75       18.75      18.75     18.75      18.75
      Panel B. No controls and full sample
           Segregation -2.84*        -5.32*** -3.61**      -3.58**   -3.88**    -3.49**    -2.89*     -3.61**     -0.79      -2.05     -1.14      -0.66
                         [1.50]      [1.38]     [1.79]     [1.73]    [1.75]     [1.74]     [1.67]     [1.38]      [2.07]     [1.99]    [2.08]     [2.15]




52
      Fractionalization -0.72**      -0.46      -1.04*** -0.65*      -0.97**    -1.16***   -0.58      -0.61*      -1.14***   -0.75*    -1.11***   -1.32***
                         [0.34]      [0.31]     [0.39]     [0.38]    [0.38]     [0.39]     [0.39]     [0.35]      [0.42]     [0.39]    [0.42]     [0.43]
             R-squared 0.173         0.309      0.195      0.147     0.225      0.213      0.115      0.235       0.128      0.11      0.147      0.141
              Controls no            no         no         no        no         no         no         no          no         no        no         no
                Sample full          full       full       full      full       full       full       full        full       full      full       full
                  Obs. 97            97         97         97        97         97         92         92          92         92        92         92
           F-stat (het) 17.04        17.04      17.04      17.04     17.04      17.04      18.28      18.28       18.28      18.28     18.28      18.28
          F-stat (hom) 33.21         33.21      33.21      33.21     33.21      33.21      23.22      23.22       23.22      23.22     23.22      23.22
      Panel C: All controls; sample excludes dictatorships
           Segregation -2.26*** -3.11**         -2.61*** -2.40**     -2.46***   -2.22***   -2.94***   -2.59***    -2.16**    -2.18**   -2.18***   -2.07**
                         [0.83]      [1.21]     [0.67]     [1.06]    [0.65]     [0.71]     [0.68]     [0.75]      [0.85]     [1.04]    [0.75]     [1.01]
      Fractionalization 0.51**       0.27       0.50**     0.36      0.32       0.2        0.57**     0.14        0.56*      0.37      0.34       0.25
                         [0.21]      [0.31]     [0.25]     [0.27]    [0.24]     [0.26]     [0.25]     [0.33]      [0.28]     [0.28]    [0.26]     [0.29]
             R-squared 0.844         0.764      0.869      0.793     0.881      0.878      0.808      0.78        0.866      0.767     0.884      0.879
              Controls yes           yes        yes        yes       yes        yes        yes        yes         yes        yes       yes        yes
                Sample democ         democ      democ      democ     democ      democ      democ      democ       democ      democ     democ      democ
                  Obs. 77            77         77         77        77         77         75         75          75         75        75         75
           F-stat (het) 15.11        15.11      15.11      15.11     15.11      15.11      8.131      8.131       8.131      8.131     8.131      8.131
          F-stat (hom) 35.72         35.72      35.72      35.72     35.72      35.72      15.64      15.64       15.64      15.64     15.64      15.64

     Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat
     (het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from the first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat (hom)” – under
     the assumption of homoscedasticity.
                    Table 9: Religious segregation and the quality of government, the second stage of 2SLS

                                                                                     Religion
                                                           Voice   Political Govern-t Regul.          Rule of   Control
                                                                   stability effectiv.      quality   law       of corr.
                                       Panel A. Baseline: All controls and full sample
                                            Segregation 0.56       -2.12       -1.2         0.85      -0.91     -1.14
                                                          [2.03]   [2.31]      [1.87]       [1.81]    [1.87]    [1.86]
                                       Fractionalization 0.12      0.64*       0.55**       0.23      0.43*     0.60**
                                                          [0.26]   [0.34]      [0.26]       [0.24]    [0.24]    [0.26]
                                              R-squared 0.814      0.675       0.831        0.754     0.836     0.827
                                               Controls yes        yes         yes          yes       yes       yes
                                                 Sample full       full        full         full      full      full
                                                   Obs. 78          78         78           78        78        78
                                            F-stat (het) 26.97     26.97       26.97        26.97     26.97     26.97
                                           F-stat (hom) 11.36      11.36       11.36        11.36     11.36     11.36
                                       Panel B. No controls and full sample
                                            Segregation -5.72      -4.39       -6.56**      -4.46     -6.65**   -7.50**
                                                          [3.52]   [2.84]      [2.70]       [2.74]    [2.92]    [3.07]




53
                                       Fractionalization 0.78*     0.72**      0.75*        0.63*     0.76*     0.94**
                                                          [0.41]   [0.35]      [0.43]       [0.38]    [0.43]    [0.45]
                                              R-squared 0.09       0.152       0.089        0.099     0.1       0.124
                                               Controls no         no          no           no        no        no
                                                 Sample full       full        full         full      full      full
                                                   Obs. 78          78         78           78        78        78
                                            F-stat (het) 38.64     38.64       38.64        38.64     38.64     38.64
                                           F-stat (hom) 14.96      14.96       14.96        14.96     14.96     14.96
                                       Panel C: All controls; sample excludes dictatorships
                                            Segregation 0.12       -2.4        -0.59        -0.36     -0.02     0.23
                                                          [1.84]   [2.68]      [1.48]       [2.04]    [1.63]    [1.62]
                                       Fractionalization 0.55** 0.75*          0.59**       0.2       0.45      0.53*
                                                          [0.25]   [0.37]      [0.28]       [0.25]    [0.28]    [0.30]
                                              R-squared 0.8        0.717       0.848        0.764     0.852     0.849
                                               Controls yes        yes         yes          yes       yes       yes
                                                 Sample democ democ            democ        democ     democ     democ
                                                   Obs. 64          64         64           64        64        64
                                            F-stat (het) 24.94     24.94       24.94        24.94     24.94     24.94
                                           F-stat (hom) 20.38      20.38       20.38        20.38     20.38     20.38

     Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat
     (het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from the first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat (hom)” – under
     the assumption of homoscedasticity.
 Table 10: Ethnic segregation and alternative measures of government quality

              Dep. var.       ICRG quality of           TI corruption          EF corruption
                                 government                 index                  index
                           OLS          2SLS        OLS         2SLS       OLS         2SLS
                    E Sb   -0.53***     -0.73*      -4.17***    -6.57*     -45.57*** -77.44**
                           [0.18]       [0.39]      [1.47]      [3.89]     [15.26]     [37.08]
                   EF      -0.25***     -0.21**     -2.73***    -2.36***   -29.10*** -24.08***
                           [0.07]       [0.08]      [0.63]      [0.80]     [6.22]      [7.97]
                    Obs.   85           85          96          96         96          96
                   F-het                15.49                   16.23                  32.75
                 F-hom                  30.31                   32.75                  16.23
                 R-sqrd    0.242        0.233       0.19        0.18       0.217       0.2
           Specification   full sample, no additional controls
                    E Sb   -0.38**      -0.48**     -1.97*      -2.41      -24.57**    -39.99**
                           [0.16]       [0.20]      [1.10]      [1.60]     [11.95]     [17.31]
                   EF      0.12         0.14*       0.28        0.34       1.85        3.82
                           [0.07]       [0.08]      [0.56]      [0.61]     [5.13]      [6.12]
                    Obs.   69           69          77          77         77          77
                   F-het                13.63                   15.11                  35.72
                 F-hom                  29.26                   35.72                  15.11
                 R-sqrd    0.832        0.831       0.864       0.864      0.871       0.868
           Specification   democracies sample, all controls

              Dep. var.         EF Property            EF Regulatrion          Tax compliance
                                 rights index               index                   index
                           OLS           2SLS       OLS         2SLS       OLS          2SLS
                    E Sb   -61.49*** -102.25** -24.22           -62.49*    -4.44***     -3.85
                           [19.15]       [51.40]    [16.45]     [32.97]    [1.12]       [2.59]
                   EF      -22.68*** -16.26         -25.04*** -19.01**     0.1          -0.01
                           [7.01]        [10.49]    [5.66]      [7.37]     [0.69]       [0.81]
                    Obs.   96            96         96          96         41           41
                   F-het                 32.75                  32.75                   13.45
                 F-hom                   16.23                  16.23                   17.13
                 R-sqrd    0.183         0.158      0.243       0.196      0.181        0.178
           Specification   full sample, no additional controls
                    E Sb   -45.68**      -79.18*** -16.7        -52.99**   -2.14       -5.86*
                           [21.91]       [27.22]    [21.38]     [26.37]    [1.51]      [3.34]
                   EF      4.14          8.44       -2.25       2.41       -0.52       -0.07
                           [7.46]        [8.74]     [7.55]      [8.23]     [0.48]      [0.66]
                    Obs.   77            77         77          77         39          39
                   F-het                 35.72                  35.72                  5.624
                 F-hom                   15.11                  15.11                  3.613
                 R-sqrd    0.79          0.778      0.678       0.645      0.714       0.656
           Specification   democracies sample, all controls

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** signif-
icant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat(het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from
the first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat(hom)” – under the assumption of
homoscedasticity.




                                                    54
Table 11: Linguistic segregation and alternative measures of government quality

              Dep. var.       ICRG quality of          TI corruption          EF corruption
                                government                 index                  index
                           OLS          2SLS       OLS         2SLS       OLS         2SLS
                    L Sb   -0.36*       0.09       -3.08**     -0.52      -32.40**    -10.67
                           [0.18]       [0.61]     [1.51]      [4.81]     [15.61]     [47.03]
                   LF      -0.24***     -0.31*** -2.23***      -2.60***   -23.85*** -27.02***
                           [0.08]       [0.11]     [0.73]      [0.90]     [7.39]      [8.78]
                    Obs.   79           79         91          91         91          91
                   F-het                16.41                  15.52                  15.52
                 F-hom                  12.99                  19.65                  19.65
                 R-sqrd    0.159        0.111      0.121       0.107      0.135       0.125
           Specification   full sample, no additional controls
                    L Sb   -0.35**      -0.49*     -2.27**     -2.77      -29.55***   -52.50**
                           [0.13]       [0.26]     [1.06]      [2.22]     [10.83]     [21.64]
                   LF      0.11         0.13       0.46        0.53       4.51        7.52
                           [0.08]       [0.08]     [0.59]      [0.58]     [5.59]      [6.18]
                    Obs.   66           66         75          75         75          75
                   F-het                11.57                  8.131                  8.131
                 F-hom                  6.892                  15.64                  15.64
                 R-sqrd    0.836        0.833      0.865       0.865      0.881       0.872
           Specification   democracies sample, all controls

              Dep. var.         EF Property            EF Regulatrion        Tax compliance
                                rights index               index                  index
                           OLS           2SLS      OLS         2SLS       OLS         2SLS
                    L Sb   -50.92*** -11.5         -15.31      -10.1      -4.73***    -1.06
                           [17.77]       [62.79]   [15.89]     [42.47]    [1.32]      [3.62]
                   LF      -19.01**      -24.77** -22.55*** -23.31***     -0.01       -0.61
                           [7.95]        [11.27]   [6.05]      [7.77]     [0.67]      [0.78]
                    Obs.   91            91        91          91         33          33
                   F-het                 15.52                 15.52                  9.932
                 F-hom                   19.65                 19.65                  6.782
                 R-sqrd    0.131         0.103     0.162       0.161      0.232       0.112
           Specification   full sample, no additional controls
                    L Sb   -58.25*** -73.39** -8.48            -48.63     -1.43       -1.75
                           [19.22]       [28.20]   [19.27]     [30.36]    [1.82]      [3.42]
                   LF      6.36          8.34      -0.01       5.25       -0.51       -0.48
                           [7.70]        [7.85]    [6.98]      [8.25]     [0.67]      [0.70]
                    Obs.   75            75        75          75         32          32
                   F-het                 8.131                 8.131                  3.611
                 F-hom                   15.64                 15.64                  3.651
                 R-sqrd    0.797         0.794     0.683       0.632      0.74        0.74
           Specification   democracies sample, all controls

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for heteroscedasticity in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** signif-
icant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. “F-stat(het)” reports F-statistics for the excluded instrument from
the first stage under the assumption of heteroscedasticity; and “F-stat(hom)” – under the assumption of
homoscedasticity.




                                                    55
A        Data Appendix


                        Table A.1: Sources of data on group composition
 Country                Ethnicity                            Language                           Religion
 Afghanistan            Lang                                 NSO (www.mrrd.gov.af)              .
 Argentina              INDEC (www.indec.mecon.ar)           .                                  .
 Armenia                Census (www.armstat.am)              Census (www.armstat.am)            DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Australia              Lang                                 Census (www.abs.gov.au)            Census (www.abs.gov.au)
 Austria                NSO (www.statistik.at)               NSO (www.statistik.at)             NSO (www.statistik.at)
 Bahrain                Census (www.bahrain.gov.bh)          .                                  .
 Bangladesh             NSO (www.bbsgov.org)                 Ethn                               NSO (www.bbsgov.org)
 Belarus                Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)         .
 Belgium                Lang                                 www.eurolang.net                   .
 Belize                 Census                               Census                             Census
                        (www.statisticsbelize.org.bz)        (www.statisticsbelize.org.bz)      (www.statisticsbelize.org.bz)
 Benin                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Bolivia                Census (www.ine.gov.bo)              Census (www.ine.gov.bo)            .
 Brazil                 Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)         Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
 Bulgaria               Census (www.nsi.bg)                  Census (www.nsi.bg)                Census (www.nsi.bg)
 Burkina Faso           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Cambodia               Lang                                 Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)         Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
 Cameroon               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Canada                 Census (www.statcan.ca)              Census (www.statcan.ca)            Census (www.statcan.ca)
 Central African Rep.   DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Chile                  Census (www.ine.cl)                  Ethn                               Census (www.ine.cl)
 China                  Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Ethn                               .
 Colombia               Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Ethn                               .
 Costa Rica             Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)         .
 Cote D’Ivoire          DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Croatia                Census (www.dzs.hr)                  Census (www.dzs.hr)                Census (www.dzs.hr)
 Czech Rep.             Census (www.czso.cz)                 Ethn                               Census (www.czso.cz)
 Denmark                Council of Europe report             Ethn                               .
 Dominican Rep.         .                                    .                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Ecuador                Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)           Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)         .
 Egypt                  .                                    .                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Estonia                Census (http://pub.stat.ee)          Census (http://pub.stat.ee)        Census (http://pub.stat.ee)
 Ethiopia               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Finland                Lang                                 NSO (www.stat.fi)                  .
 France                 INED,       Population,       2004   .                                  .
                        (www.ined.fr)
 Gabon                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Germany                NSO (www-ec.destatis.de)             .                                  .
 Ghana                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Greece                 NSO (www.statistics.gr)              .                                  .
 Guatemala              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Guinea                 DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Haiti                  .                                    DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Honduras               Census (www.ine-hn.org)              Ethn                               .
 Hungary                Census (www.nepszamlalas.hu)         Census (www.nepszamlalas.hu)       Census (www.nepszamlalas.hu)
 Iceland                NSO (www.statice.is)                 Ethn                               .
 India                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Indonesia              Census (www.bps.go.id)               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           Census (www.bps.go.id)
 Iran                   .                                    .                                  NSO (www.sci.org.ir)
 Ireland                Census (www.cso.ie)                  .                                  Census (www.cso.ie)
 Israel                 NSO (www1.cbs.gov.il)                .                                  NSO (www1.cbs.gov.il)
 Italy                  NSO (www.dossierimmigrazione.it)     NSO (www.dossierimmigrazione.it)   .
 Japan                  Census (www.stat.go.jp)              Ethn                               Census (www.stat.go.jp)
 Jordan                 Census (www.dos.gov.jo)              .                                  .
 Kazakhstan             NSO (http://en.government.kz)        Ethn                               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Kenya                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
 Korea                  NSO (www.kosis.kr)                   Ethn                               NSO (www.kosis.kr)
Continued to the next page




                                                                  56
    Continued from the previous page
     Country          Ethnicity                              Language                              Religion
     Kyrgyzstan       DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Latvia           NSO (www.csb.lv)                       NSO (www.csb.lv)                      .
     Lesotho          Lang                                   DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              .
     Lithuania        NSO (www.stat.gov.lt)                  Ethn                                  NSO (www.stat.gov.lt)
     Macedonia        NSO (www.stat.gov.mk)                  Ethn                                  .
     Madagascar       .                                      .                                     DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Malawi           Lang                                   NSO (www.nso.malawi.net)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Mali             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Mauritius        .                                      NSO (www.gov.mu)                      NSO (www.gov.mu)
     Mexico           Census                                 Census                                Census
                      (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)          (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)         (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)
     Morocco          Lang                                   Census (www.statistic-hcp.ma)         .
     Mozambique       .                                      DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Namibia          .                                      Census                                DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
                                                             (www.npc.gov.na/census/index.htm)
     Nepal            Census (www.cbs.gov.np)                DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Netherlands      NSO (www.cbs.nl)                       .                                     NSO (www.cbs.nl)
     New Zealand      Census (www.stats.govt.nz)             Census (www.stats.govt.nz)            Census (www.stats.govt.nz)
     Nicaragua        .                                      Census                                Census
                                                             (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)         (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)
     Niger            NSO (www.stat-niger.org/)              Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Nigeria          .                                      DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Norway           Census (http://statbank.ssb.no)        Ethn                                  .
     Pakistan         Lang                                   Census (www.statpak.gov.pk)           Census (www.statpak.gov.pk)
     Panama           Census                                 Ethn                                  .
                      (http://censos.ccp.ucr.ac.cr)
     Paraguay         Census (http://www.dgeec.gov.py)       Census (http://www.dgeec.gov.py)      Census (http://www.dgeec.gov.py)
     Peru             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               Census (www.inei.gob.pe/)             Census (www.inei.gob.pe/)
     Philippines      Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)             Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)            Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
     Portugal         NSO (www.sef.pt)                       Ethn                                  NSO (www.sef.pt)
     Qatar            Census (www.planning.gov.qa)           .                                     Census (www.planning.gov.qa)
     Romania          Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)             Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)            Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
     Russia           Census (www.perepis2002.ru)            Census (www.perepis2002.ru)           Census (www.perepis2002.ru)
     Rwanda           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               NSO (www.statisticsrwanda.gov.rw)     NSO (www.statisticsrwanda.gov.rw)
     Sao Tome         .                                      .                                     Census (www.ine.st)
     Saudi Arabia     NSO (www.cds.gov.sa)                   Ethn                                  .
     Senegal          DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Slovakia         Census (http://portal.statistics.sk)   Ethn                                  Census (http://portal.statistics.sk)
     Slovenia         Census (www.stat.si)                   Census (www.stat.si)                  Census (www.stat.si)
     South Africa     Lang                                   Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)            Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
     Spain            Lang                                   Centro De Investigaciones Sociolog-   .
                                                             icas (www.cis.es)
     Sri Lanka        NSO (www.statistics.gov.lk)            .                                     NSO (www.statistics.gov.lk)
     Sweden           NSO (www.ssd.scb.se)                   Ethn                                  .
     Switzerland      Lang                                   Piguet, E. and Wanner P., Popula-     Piguet, E. and Wanner P., Popula-
                                                             tion Studies 31, 2000.                tion Studies 31, 2000.
     Taiwan           NSO (http://eng.dgbas.gov.tw)          .                                     .
     Tajikistan       NSO (www.stat.tj)                      Ethn                                  .
     Tanzania         DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Thailand         .                                      Census (web.nso.go.th)                Census (web.nso.go.th)
     Togo             DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Turkey           Multu, Servet (Int. J. Middle East     Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
                      Stud., 28, 1996)
     Uganda           NSO (www.ubos.org)                     Ethn                                  DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Ukraine          Census (www.ukrcensus.gov.ua)          Census (www.ukrcensus.gov.ua)         .
     United Kingdom   Council of Europe report               Council of Europe report              Council of Europe report
     Usa              Census (www.census.gov)                Census (www.census.gov)               Census (www.census.gov)
     Uzbekistan       DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Vietnam          Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)             Ethn                                  Census (www.ipums.umn.edu)
     Zambia           DHS (www.measuredhs.com)               DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
     Zimbabwe         Lang                                   DHS (www.measuredhs.com)              DHS (www.measuredhs.com)
    Note: “NSO” – National Statistical Office; “DHS” – Demographics and Health Survey. “Lang” means
that language data were used for ethnicity and “Enth” means that ethnicity data were used for language.
This happens when there are no independent sources of regional-level data for language and ethnicity and, at
the same time, national-level statistics on ethnic and linguistic diversity coincide. More detailed information
about the data sources is available from the authors upon request.




                                                                 57
           Table A.2: Summary statistics

variable                      Obs. Mean   SD    Min    Max
Panel A: Segregation and Fractionalization Indices
Segregation (ethnicity) Se     97   0.12  0.12    0    0.49
Segregation (ethnicity) S b    97   0.10  0.11    0    0.39
Segregation (language) Se      92   0.16  0.14    0    0.56
Segregation (language) Sb      92   0.11  0.11    0    0.49
Segregation (religion) Se      78   0.06  0.06    0    0.28
Segregation (religion) Sb      78   0.05  0.06    0    0.27
Fractionalization (ethnicity)  97   0.37 0.27    0     0.92
Fractionalization (language)   93   0.36 0.27     0    0.89
Fractionalization (religion)   78   0.43  0.24   0     0.83
Panel B: Dependent and control variables
Voice and accountability      109   0.07  0.93 -1.63   1.54
Political stability           109  -0.11  0.88 -2.26   1.48
Government effectiveness      109   0.13 1.00  -1.46    2.29
Regulatory quality            109   0.15  0.86 -2.12    1.67
Rule of law                   109   0.05 1.00  -1.68    2.07
Control of corruption         109   0.06  1.06 -1.41    2.47
ln (population)               109  16.41  1.57 11.84   20.95
ln (GDP per capita)           109   8.53 1.20   6.27   10.41
Protestants share             109  12.96 22.38    0    97.80
Muslims share                 109  19.61 33.04    0    99.40
Catholics share               109  34.09 36.76    0    96.90
Latitude                      109   0.32  0.20    0     0.72
English legal origin          109   0.25 0.43     0       1
French legal origin           109   0.44  0.50   0       1
German legal origin           109   0.06 0.23    0        1
Socialist legal origin        109   0.21 0.41    0        1
Scandinavian legal origin     109   0.05 0.21     0       1
Democratic tradition          109   4.86  3.62    0      10
Mountains                     109   0.28 0.26    0     0.94
Panel C: Instrumental variables
Predicted Se (ethnicity)       97   0.08 0.11     0    0.49
Predicted S (ethnicity)
            b                  97   0.06 0.10     0    0.47
Predicted Se (language)        92  0.12   0.19    0      1
Predicted Sb (language)        92  0.09   0.15    0    0.86
Predicted S (religion)
            e                  78   0.11 0.15     0    0.79
Predicted Sb (religion)        78   0.09 0.14     0    0.75




                            58
                 Table A.3: Correlation table: Indices of actual and predicted segregation

                                          Ethnicity                           Language                             Religion
                              Se seg   Sb seg Se inst   Sb inst   Se seg   Sb seg Se inst   Sb inst   Se seg   Sb seg Se inst   Sb inst
     Ethnicity    Se   seg       1
     Ethnicity    Sb   seg     0.96      1
     Ethnicity    Se   inst    0.40    0.48       1
     Ethnicity    Sb   inst    0.43    0.53     0.97       1
     Language     Se   seg     0.85    0.80     0.28     0.31       1




59
     Language     Sb   seg     0.80    0.84     0.41     0.46     0.80       1
     Language     Se   inst    0.20    0.22     0.53     0.47     0.28     0.29       1
     Language     Sb   inst    0.25    0.31     0.57     0.56     0.25     0.43     0.89      1
     Religion     Se   seg     0.32    0.21     0.12     0.11     0.46     0.16    -0.03    -0.10       1
     Religion     Sb   seg     0.33    0.22     0.13     0.13     0.41     0.13     0.01    -0.06     0.89       1
     Religion     Se   inst    0.28    0.23     0.32     0.31     0.20     0.18    -0.02    0.03      0.50     0.50       1
     Religion     Sb   inst    0.27    0.22     0.29     0.27     0.19     0.16    -0.04    0.01      0.52     0.58     0.96      1

            Note: “seg” indicates the actual indices of segregation; “inst” indicates their corresponding instruments.
                         Table A.4: Sources of control variables

            Variable    Definition
     ln (Population)    Natural log of population in the country. Average for the years 1995-2004. Source:
                        World Development Indicators 2006.
ln (GDP per capita)     Natural log of GDP in constant 2000 international dollars per capita. Average for
                        the years 1995-2004. Source: World Development Indicators 2006. For initial value
                        of GDP per capita we use natural log of GDP in constant 2000 international dollars
                        per capita. Average for the years 1975-1980. Source: World Development Indicators
                        2006.
            Religion    Identifies the percentage of the population of each country that belonged to the three
                        most widely spread religions in the world in 1980. For countries of recent formation,
                        the data is available for 1990-95. The numbers are in percent (scale from 0 to 100).
                        The three religions identified here are: (1) Romanic Catholic; (2) Protestant; and
                        (3) Muslim. Source: La Porta et. al. (1998). Original sources: World Christian
                        Encyclopedia 1982, Worldmark Encyclopedia of Nations 1995, Statistical Abstract of
                        the World 1995, Demographic Yearbook 1995, CIA World Factbook 1996
        Legal origin    Identifies the legal origin of the Company Law or Commercial Code of each country.
                        There are five possible origins: (1) English Common Law; (2) French Commercial
                        Code; (3) German Commercial Code; (4) Scandinavian Commercial Code; and (5)
                        Socialist/Communist laws. Source: La Porta et. al. (1998). Original sources: CIA
                        World Factbook 1996.
           Latitude     The absolute value of the latitude of the country, scaled to take values between 0 and
                        1. Source: La Porta et. al. (1998). Original source: CIA World Factbook 1996
Democratic tradition    Democracy score index. Scale from 0 to 10, with lower values indicating a less demo-
                        cratic environment. Average for the years 1975-2004. Source: Polity IV Project:
                        Political Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2006.
            Fertility   Fertility rate (births per woman). Average for the years 1975-2004. Source: World
                        Development Indicators 2006.
         Investment     Investment share as % of GDP. Average for the years 1975-2004. Source: Penn World
                        Table 6.2.
          Openness      Export plus Import as % of GDP. Average for the years 1975-2004. Source: Penn
                        World Table 6.2.
         Mountains      Measure of mountains in the country. Source: William Easterly’s data.
     Colonial origin    Identifies countries that were colonized by a Western overseas colonial power since
                        1700 for at least 10 years. Source: Teorell and Hadenius (2005).
             Region     Identifies the region where the country is situated. There are six possible regions:
                        (1) East Asia and Pacific; (2) Europe and Central Asia; (3) Latin America and
                        Carribean; (3) Middle East and North Africa; (4) North America; (5) South Asia;
                        and (6) Sub-Saharan Africa. Source: World Bank.
              Island    Identifies countries that are situated on islands and therefore have no bordering coun-
                        tries. Source: CIA World Factbook 1996
             OECD       Identifies countries that are currently members of OECD. These countries are Aus-
                        tralia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Ger-
                        many, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Mexico, Netherlands, New
                        Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
                        Turkey, United Kingdom, USA. Source: wikipedia.org.
          Transition    Identifies transition countries. These countries are Armenia, Belarus, Bulgaria, Croa-
                        tia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithua-
                        nia, Macedonia, Romania, Russian Federation, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Tajikistan,
                        Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Source: wikipedia.org.
         Partitioned    Percent of the population of each country that belongs to groups partitioned by the
                        border. Source: Alesina et. al. (2006).
        Squiggliness    Log of basic fractal index based on World Vector Shoreline Dataset (GIS format).
                        This variable measures squiggliness of each country’s border. Source: Alesina et. al.
                        (2006).
           Elevation    Standard deviation of elevation of each country in meters. Source: GIS dataset.
              Rivers    Share of area of the country covered by large perennial bodies (rivers, lakes, seas).
                        Source: GIS dataset.




                                                     60
