NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING BUSTS AND HOUSEHOLD MOBILITY
Fernando Ferreira
Joseph Gyourko
Joseph Tracy
Working Paper 14310
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14310

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York or the Federal Reserve System. We appreciate the helpful comments of Ed Glaeser,
Chris Mayer, Stuart Rosenthal, and seminar participants on NYU. Andrew Moore provided excellent
research assistance. Fernando Ferreira and Joseph Gyourko thank the Research Sponsor Program
of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at Wharton for financial support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Fernando Ferreira, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Housing Busts and Household Mobility
Fernando Ferreira, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy
NBER Working Paper No. 14310
September 2008
JEL No. R0,R21,R23
ABSTRACT
Using two decades of American Housing Survey data from 1985-2005, we estimate the impact on
household mobility of owners having negative equity in their homes and of rising mortgage interest
rates. We find that both lead to lower, not higher, mobility rates over time. The impacts are economically
large, with mobility being almost 50 percent lower for owners with negative equity in their homes.
This does not imply that current worries about defaults and owners having to move from their homes
are entirely misplaced. It does indicate that, in the past, the lock-in effects of these two factors were
dominant over time. Our results cannot simply be extrapolated to the future, but policy makers should
begin to consider the consequences of lock-in and reduced household mobility because they are quite
different from those associated with default and higher mobility.

Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Joseph Tracy
Director of Research
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045-0001
Joseph.tracy@ny.frb.org

I. Introduction

How do housing busts affect residential mobility? The current market downturn has raised
fears that local communities will suffer as social capital is depleted due to foreclosures forcing
defaulting homeowners to move. One recent media report indicates that 220,000 homes were lost
to foreclosure just during the second quarter of 2008, which is nearly triple the number over the
same time period in 2007.1 Default-induced moves always are the first mobility-related impact
observed during a downturn, but they need not be the last or the most importantly economically.
In fact, much previous research indicates that factors such as falling home prices or rising interest
rates that typically are associated with housing market declines can ‘lock-in’ people to their
homes—reducing, not raising mobility (Quigley (1987), Stein (1995), Genesove and Mayer (1997,
2001), Chan (2001), Engelhardt (2003)).
Whether negative equity or higher rates raises or lowers mobility is an empirical question
that depends upon whether the default or lock-in effect dominates over time. The homeowner’s
default option is well studied in the real estate finance literature2, and the exercise of that option
clearly has been increasing recently. However, the potential for the lock-in effect to dominate has
been known at least since Stein (1995), who argued that downpayment constaints arising from
falling house prices that reduce the mobility of repeat buyers could help account for the positive
correlation between house prices and transactions volumes over the cycle.
Empirical work has confirmed large negative impacts on mobility, although researchers
posit different mechanisms by which mobility is reduced. Housing finance researchers tend to
focus on financial constraints that are created when low or negative housing equity and rising
1

There were nearly 740,000 foreclosure filings over this same period according to the July 25, 2008, story written by
Les Christie that was posted on CNNMoney.com’s web site. The underlying data are from RealtyTrac, an online
marketer of foreclosed properties. This highlights the fact that just because one enters the foreclosure process does
not necessarily mean that a foreclosure or move will occur, as many defaults are cured. Also, see Gerardi, et. al.
(2008) for a recent study of the rise in defaults and foreclosures among subprime borrowers in Massachusetts.
2
See Quigley, et. al. (2000) for more on homeowner default.

1

interest rates require the owner to put up additional cash beyond standard closing costs (which
typically are 6%-8% of house value) to be able to move. Given both the high transactions costs
involved in purchasing a home and that lenders generally impose maximum leverage ratios below
one, households without access to sufficient liquid financial resources could become constrained
even if home equity does not turn strictly negative (Stein (1995), Chan (2001)). However, falling
house prices are not necessary to generate a financial lock-in, as Quigley (1987) has shown.
Because home mortgages generally are not assumable, if interest rates rise, the household may not
be able to afford the debt service payments on a new loan that would be used to finance the
purchase of the new residence, even if the new home is no more expensive.
Behavioral economists rely on prospect theory’s claim that reference points are important,
and that individuals will react differently to a housing bust based on their degree of loss aversion.
In this framework, a household without any financial constraint can become less mobile if nominal
loss aversion leads it not to sell the home after its price has fallen. Some of this research focuses
on impacts on time on the market conditional on the decision to sell, not on longer-run mobility
per se (e.g., Genesove and Mayer (1997, 2001)). However, Engelhardt (2003) concludes that loss
aversion leads to reduced mobility based on analysis of a sample of younger households.
Our interpretation of this research is that there is solid evidence that both the financial
constraint and loss aversion mechanisms are operative in affecting household mobility. We do not
attempt to distinguish between these mechanisms in this paper, focusing instead on the overall
impact on mobility. It is useful to revisit this issue for a number of reasons. How one should
think about possible policy responses is dramatically different depending upon whether negative
equity or higher rates lowers, rather than raises, mobility because the social and economic
consequences are markedly different if lower mobility results. Instead of dislocation from postforeclosure moves, reduced mobility leads to inefficient labor market matching. It also results in
2

lower utility from not being able to access desired levels of housing or of local public services if
household size changes or children move into or out of school attendance age while locked-in to
one’s home.
A new, more general, empirical analysis also is useful in gauging the size of the impacts on
mobility. While previous empirical work suggests that the net effect of both negative equity and
higher mortgage interest rates on household mobility is both negative and economically large,
much of that research works with special samples that are restrictive in terms of geographic,
temporal, or demographic coverage.3 To ascertain whether we can reliably generalize from those
results, a new analysis is conducted using national data from the biannual American Housing
Survey (AHS) that covers metropolitan areas across the United States from 1985-2005. We also
estimate interest rate and negative equity effects in the same specification, as well as control for a
host of other factors thought to influence household mobility, in order to deal with likely omitted
variable biases that could affect more narrowly defined studies that focus on one particular
mechanism by which mobility might be affected or a single market or demographic group.4
Our analysis begins by specifying a baseline empirical model of the household relocation
decision that relies on the foundation established by Hanushek and Quigley (1979) and Venti and
Wise (1984). The estimated impacts of lock-in on mobility are as large or larger than those
reported previously. For example, having negative equity reduces the two-year mobility rate by
5.6 percentage points (ceteris paribus), which is nearly 50 percent of baseline mobility. A $1,000

3

For example, Quigley’s (1987) analysis of mortgage interest rate lock-in effects, which found that a 200 basis point
increase in rates was associated with about a one-third lower probability of moving over an 8-year horizon, worked
with data from the 1979-1981 Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. Chan’s (2001) study, which concluded that
mobility was from one-quarter to one-third lower when equity constraints were present, was restricted to observations
from the New York City metropolitan area. Engelhardt’s (2003) study focused on younger owners from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth between 1985-1996 who were most likely to be constrained.
4
That said, we do not claim that our work is immune to all such criticism, only that it is more general in its scope and
set of controls. See below for more on this.

3

higher real annual mortgage interest cost is estimated to reduce mobility by 2.8 percentage points,
or by about one quarter of the baseline rate.
That the net impact of negative equity in particular has been to reduce, not raise, mobility
may surprise some given the high number of defaults and foreclosures in the current environment.
It is important to recognize that, by definition, lower mobility only can be observed over time, so
it will take a few years to know how the impact of negative equity will play out in this cycle. It
also should be emphasized that these findings cannot simply be extrapolated to the future because
housing market conditions are not the same over time. For example, the subprime market was
much smaller over most of our sample period, so the underlying riskiness of borrowers probably
was lower in the past. In addition, our sample is restricted to owner-occupied homes and excludes
investors and second homes, both of which may respond differently to negative equity situations
(Haughwout, Peach and Tracy (2008)).
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section documents that market conditions
have dramatically changed recently, and that lock-in effects could become economically important
once again. This is followed in Section III with the specification of our econometric model of
household mobility. The data use in the estimation are described in Section IV, with the empirical
results reported and discussed in Section V. The penultimate section then outlines the
implications of reduced mobility. There is a brief conclusion.

II. Housing Market Conditions and Implications for Mobility
There certainly have been some pronounced shifts over time in house values, leverage, and
mobility rates. For example, the span of years from 1985-1997 saw a substantial boom and bust in
California housing markets. Data from the biannual American Housing Survey (AHS) for
metropolitan areas in that state show a peak in mean nominal house prices of $253,617 in 1989,
4

with an average loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of 67 percent, and a two-year mobility rate of just over
15 percent.5 Prices in California then began to fall around 1991, but did not bottom out until 1997
when they reached $201,693, with an average LTV of 78 percent, and a two-year mobility rate of
only 11.7 percent. From peak to trough, nominal prices fell by just over 20 percent, with the mean
loan-to-value ratio increasing by 16 percent. It was not until the 1998-99 period that mobility
returned to the pre-1989 peak levels (at 15.8 percent). Other markets such as Boston that also
experienced sharp swings in prices and loan-to-value ratios over time show similar mobility
patterns.
While past variation such as this obviously is necessary for the estimation of mobility
effects, perhaps more interesting is that current conditions in various markets appear ripe for lockin effects to become economically important once again. The potential scope of the negative
equity problem in particular is well illustrated with recent data from the San Francisco Bay Area
housing market. Figure 1 depicts the evolution of mean and median nominal prices in this market
since the recent housing boom began in 1997.6 The typical sales price rose fourfold from about
$200,000 to $800,000 between 1997 and 2007. More recent price information just released by our
data vendor (but not yet obtained by us) indicates about a 12 percent decline in house prices in the
Bay Area since their peak in the summer of 2007.7 Many analysts are predicting that prices will
continue to fall. In fact, futures contracts on the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Index for this
market (as of May 2008) imply further drops in values at least through early 2009. Together,

5

Prices and LTVs were calculated from a sample of recent movers who had occupied their homes for less than two
years. Mobility rates use the full sample of homeowners.
6
These data represent all housing transactions from the first quarter of 1997 through the third quarter of 2007 that
were recorded in the six county region that comprises the heart of the Bay Area: Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San
Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara counties. The data were purchased from DataQuick, an industry data provider.
No adjustments are made to control for quality shifts in the homes that sell in any particular quarter. The total number
of transactions follows a similar pattern, as shown in Appendix Figure 1.
7
See the article in the Wall Street Journal on March 14, 2008, “California Home Price Plunge in Big Counties”. This
story reports on price data released by DataQuick for February 2008.

5

existing data and the only available futures market suggest the potential for a 25 percent or more
drop in Bay Area house prices from their peak.8
Of course, the extent to which a steep decline in housing prices would trigger the lock-in
effect also depends on high levels of housing debt. Figure 2 documents the very high loan-tovalue ratios (LTVs) that became common in the Bay Area market. Mean and median LTVs are
plotted for the same six county region from 1997-2007. The typical LTV on a home purchase was
fairly stable around 80 percent until the end of 2002.9 Beginning in 2003, there was a sharp
increase with the median LTV hitting 90 percent in 2004. Loan-to-value ratios stayed at that high
level for a few years, but have come down since then, returning to the 80 percent level in the most
recent data we have. Essentially, the typical new home buyer in the Bay Area bought a house for
$800,000 in 2006 using a $720,000 mortgage. If prices really do decline by 25 percent from their
peak, the underlying house value will be around $600,000, which is much lower than the typical
mortgage balance taken out that year.
Since further declines in home prices obviously would increase the number of homeowners
affected by the negative equity problem, Figure 3 reports information on the proportion of
homeowners with different leverage amounts. We computed four categories of LTVs: 0%-75%,
75%-85%, 85%-95%, and more than 95%. In the late 1990s, barely 10 percent of Bay Area
borrowers had LTVs above 95%. That number then rose significantly from 2002-2006, ultimately
reaching about 35 percent of buyers. Calendar year 2007 saw a fairly sharp decline, but 1-in-5

8

These futures contracts are very thinly traded, so their information content is suspect. Our point is not to posit some
precise number by which prices will fall, but simply to note that any relevant market data we can find is predicting
fairly large prices declines.
9
Information is available on up to three loans used to finance the home purchase. Our LTV figures are based on all
reported mortgage debt, not just the first loan.

6

purchasers still bought a home with less than a 5 percent equity downpayment that year. Over 50
percent of home buyers in the Bay Area in 2006 had leverage levels above 85 percent.10
Of course, owners also may be locked into their existing homes if mortgage interest rates
rise. This may have been an important constraint recently for borrowers who needed a jumbo
mortgage to finance a trade-up purchase. Over the period from 2003 to 2006, the average spread
between prime jumbo and prime conforming mortgage rates was 26 basis points. As financing
dried up in the jumbo market in the fall of 2007, the interest rate spread between prime jumbo and
prime conforming mortgages widened significantly, reaching 150 basis points in late March of
2008.11
We will not know how mobility in the Bay Area and other markets will change for some
time. We can, however, determine what happened in past cycles and what factors drove any
changes. It is to that effort that we now turn.

III. Econometric Model of Household Mobility
We begin by specifying a baseline empirical model for household relocation decisions.
For each household, we assume that the decision to move between survey periods is based on
comparing the indirect utility associated with staying in the current residence with that of moving
to a new residence. This new residence could be in the same metropolitan area or involve a longer
distance move. A move takes place if the monetized value of the gain in indirect utility exceeds
the transactions costs involved with the move.12

10

A large fraction of mortgages in 2005 and 2006 actually have LTVs of 1. This was possible because of very lax
lending standards, where banks based their lending on assessed values rather than on selling prices. Given the high
expectations about price appreciation, assessed values were usually higher than transaction prices in those years.
11
We computed these spreads with data obtained from a Bloomberg screen. The underlying data source is BankRate.
12
See Hanushek and Quigley (1979) and Venti and Wise (1984) for early expositions of this well-known framework.

7

Motivations for moving can include a wide variety of “quality-of-life” reasons, as well as
job-related reasons. Examples of the former include the desire for a different amount or type of
housing, a different set of neighborhood amenities, or a different set of natural/cultural amenities.
Job-related moves can reflect factors such as reducing the commute time to work, as well as taking
a new job in a different labor market. Factors such as having negative equity or higher interest
rates can change the cost-benefit calculus of moving.
We summarize these numerous factors involved in a household’s mobility decision by a
latent index, I it* . This index captures the monetized net change in indirect utilities less the
transactions costs of a move. We normalize this index so that a household is assumed to move
between periods when this index is positive, and remain in its current residence otherwise.
Equation (1) represents a simple linear specification for this latent index,
(1) I it* = X it β + ε it
where X it captures observed factors that affect household mobility and ε it is a random error term.
For each household and time period, there is an observed indicator, I it , which takes a value
of 1 if the household moves over the coming time period and 0 otherwise. Thus,
1 if I it* > 0, household moves
(2) I it =
.
0 otherwise, household stays
We assume that the random error term has a normal distribution.
Further, let Pit denote the probability that the household moves between period t and period
t+1. This probability of moving is characterized as follows:
(3) Pit = Pr( I it* > 0) = Pr( X it β + ε it > 0) .

Using data on I it and X it , we will estimate β using a Probit model.

8

An alternative estimation approach is to focus on the current years of tenure of the
household rather than on the mobility probability, Pit (e.g., Wasi and White (2005)). To contrast
approaches, assume for the moment that a house only experiences transitions from one owner to
another owner with no intervening periods of renting. By way of illustration, consider a house
that was built five periods ago. The probability that we currently observe a housing tenure (T) of 5
periods is given by
5

(4) Pr(Ti = 5) = ∏ (1 − Pit − n ) .
n =1

That is, observing a current tenure of five periods given the initial condition on when the house
was built implies that the household that initially moves into the new house does not move over
the next five periods. Similarly, the probability that we currently observe a housing tenure of 4
periods is given by
4

(5) Pr(Ti = 4) = Pjt −5 ∏ (1 − Pit − n ) .
n =1

In this case, after residing in the house for one period, household j sells the house to household i,
after which household i then stays in the house for the next four periods.
The important thing to note about these two simple examples is that the likelihood
associated with the current years of tenure in the house is a product of a set of current and
historical mobility probabilities. If we model each mobility probability as in (1), then the current
tenure is a function of current and past values of the explanatory variables for the current and
possibly previous households. However, the typical empirical specification applied to crosssection data relates current tenure only to current values for the explanatory variables. We can
see, though, that for time-varying explanatory variables such as the potential lock-in effects that

9

are the focus of this study, the current tenure specification will not produce coefficients that have a
ready interpretation. For this reason, we choose to directly model the mobility probabilities.

IV. Data

The American Household Survey (AHS) is the primary data source for our estimation of
tenure mobility probabilities. Since 1985, the AHS has been conducted every two years on a
continuous panel of houses. The AHS contains a unique identifier for each house, an indicator for
whether the house is currently owned or rented, and the year in which the house was purchased if
the unit is owned. We restrict our analysis to owned houses. It is noteworthy that our sample
likely is devoid of speculators. The survey process itself is such that the responding household
itself is the primary resident of the home, and questions are clearly asked to identify tenure
status.13
For this subsample, the house identifier and purchase year allow us to follow a household
over time. If a household continues to reside in the house over the two year period between
surveys, we observe this as the same purchase year associated with that house. If a household
moves residences over the two year period between surveys, we observe this as a new purchase
year associated with that house.14 Since the AHS is a house-based, not a household-based panel,
we can not follow the household to its new residence, nor do we observe any information about
the location of this new residence.
We restrict the sample to single detached homes owned by a household head between 21
and 59 in age. The timing convention is as follows. The mobility indicator captures moves
13

Consider an investor who misrepresents his occupancy status as owner-occupied to a lender. If the house is rented
and part of the overall AHS sample, the tenants would respond to the survey that they rent. If the house is vacant and
listed to be sold, it would not be included in our sample. Mortgage-based data, in contrast, would list the property as
owner-occupied.
14
We use demographic information on the household to help edit the panel structure of the data in order to eliminate
false moves that would be generated by measurement problems with the purchase year. Information on all data
cleaning and sample preparation procedures are available upon request.

10

between the survey conducted in year t and the subsequent survey conducted in year t+2. Changes
in household or neighborhood characteristics refer to changes between the survey conducted in
year t and the prior survey conducted in year t-2.
We are particularly interested in the roles of negative equity and increasing interest rates
which tend to vary significantly over the cycle and help characterize housing busts. To measure
negative equity, we first construct the homeowner’s current LTV ratio using the value of the
mortgage balance and the owner’s self-reported current value of the house. We code an indicator
that takes a value of one when the current LTV exceeds 1. To deal with likely measurement error,
an instrument for this indicator is constructed by replacing the current self-reported house value
with the implied current house value based on the purchase price and the house price appreciation
based on a repeat-sales house price index for that SMSA.
We follow Schwartz (2006) to determine mortgage rates, assuming that for fixed rate loans
the first reported interest rate, term and mortgage balance are the most accurate.15 We use the
annual average mortgage rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages as the measure for what rate the
household would receive on a new mortgage. The annual payment difference is computed
assuming that the new mortgage would match the existing mortgage’s balance and duration. We
control for the real annual difference in mortgage payments, where we set any negative payment
differences to zero.16 We also use an instrument to deal with measurement error for this financial
friction. Specifically, the real annual difference in mortgage payments is recalculated using the
average mortgage rate on 30-year fixed rate mortgages for the year the mortgage was originated in
place of the self-reported mortgage interest rate. Again, we recode all negative values as a zero
payment difference.
15

For these mortgages, we hold the mortgage balance constant at this initial reported value when calculating the
current LTV discussed earlier.
16
Quigley (1987) also included a measure of the present value of this difference in mortgage payments over the
remaining life of the mortgage.

11

The AHS also can be used to investigate another monetary friction akin to the one created
by higher mortgage interest rates. This one arises from California’s Proposition 13, which has
been recently studied by Wasi and White (2005) and Ferreira (2007). The AHS provides
information on the homeowners’ self-reported house value as well as their current annual property
taxes. For residents of California, we create a tax subsidy variable which is equal to the difference
between one percent of the self-reported house value and the reported annual property taxes.17
Given that the tax subsidy variable is constructed from two self-reported variables, it is likely
measured with error. To help address this, we create an instrument which is the difference
between the growth in the SMSA repeat-sales house price index and the maximum allowed
growth in the property tax over the same period multiplied by the fully assessed property tax on
the purchase value of the house. We also compute the same tax subsidy variable for residents
outside of California. If the tax subsidy is correctly picking up the incentives that are unique to
California, it should have no impact on mobility decisions for non-California residents.
Since the Proposition 13 lock-in variable is measured in dollar terms, it provides a natural
benchmark for judging the magnitude of the interest rate lock-in variable, which is also measured
in dollars. A natural test will be that the different variables have a similar impact on household
mobility decisions for a given dollar change in their worth.
Because this tax subsidy measure is our most important robustness test regarding the
magnitude of our estimates, some of its properties are examined here. We focus exclusively on
positive subsidies and set all negative values of the variable equal to zero. Since the property tax
wedge is a function of the degree of house price appreciation, it is useful to get a picture of the
different housing markets in California over our estimation period. Figure 4 shows the
distribution of cumulative growth in house prices as measured by SMSA level repeat-sales price
17

If the house is sold, the property taxes are reassessed at one percent of the sale price of the house.

12

indices. For each SMSA, we measure the cumulative growth in the house price index from 1978.
The line represents the weighted average cumulative price growth, where the weights are the share
of observations from each SMSA in our estimation sample. The figure makes clear that there is
considerable cross-sectional heterogeneity in the rate of price appreciation. This heterogeneity in
house price appreciation is reflected in the implied property tax subsidies. Figure 5 then displays
different percentiles of the tax subsidy for California residents over time. This heterogeneity will
allow us to include California-specific year effects in our mobility specification to sweep out any
omitted time effects that might be specific to that state.
Finally, the AHS’s rich set of detailed demographic information about each owneroccupied household also is useful in helping control for the many other forces which influence
mobility. For these variables, we start with the set used by Quigley (1987). Family size, as well
as changes in family size, can impact household mobility. Family size may proxy for a variety of
costs of moving, while changes in family size may trigger a move as households attempt to
optimize their housing space per capita. Other standard controls include a set of characteristics of
the household head such as age, race, and education.18 In addition to these characteristics, we
include the sex of the household head, marital status and the change in marital status of the
household head. Holding constant the change in family size, the nature of the change in family
size as captured by changes in marital status may have important mobility implications. Quigley
(1987) also controlled for family income. In addition to the level of family income, we allow for
changes in family income to affect mobility. In particular, we allow for asymmetric effects
between gains and losses in family income.

18

We allow for nonlinear effects, where Quigley assumed linear age and education effects. We enter age as a 3rd
order polynomial, and we include indicators for graduating from high school, attending some college, graduating from
college, and post-graduate education.

13

We further expand on Quigley’s specification using some additional information provided
in the AHS. The AHS identifies first-time homebuyers, so we include an indicator for a first-time
buyer to capture any systematic differences in their mobility relative to trade-up purchasers.
Because the AHS provides the year the household bought the house, we are able to calculate the
length of time that the household has lived in the current residence. We control for duration
dependence in the mobility decision by including a 3rd order polynomial in the current duration.
The AHS also asks households to rate the quality of their neighborhoods. We code two indicator
variables capturing whether the household reported a significant improvement or a significant
decline in the neighborhood between surveys in order to ascertain whether changes in the local
area affect mobility.

V. Empirical Results

Descriptive statistics for our sample are provided in Table 1. The average two-year
mobility rate for the estimation sample is 12 percent. The data indicate that only 2.6 percent of
our observations involve a household in a negative equity situation. Prior to the current housing
crisis, few households would be expected to find themselves in this situation, although this
fraction varies widely across markets and time, as discussed above. Table 2 then provides our
estimates of the determinants of residential mobility. The coefficients can be interpreted as
changes in the two-year mobility rate.
Two specifications are reported in Table 2. Our baseline model is reported in column
one.19 The results reported in the second column provide a robustness check on the Proposition 13

19

As explained in Section III, another estimation method from this literature uses current years of tenure as the
dependent variable instead of mobility probabilities. Since this alternative method only relates current tenure with
current values of the independent variables, its estimates could greatly differ from what we believe is a more
appropriate model. Indeed, treating our data as cross-sectional, we find that such a method generates estimates for
several demographic variables that have counterintuitive and opposite signs to the ones found in this paper.

14

variable by restricting the sample to households residing outside of California and are discussed
more fully below. In each specification, instruments to address potential measurement error in the
three lock-in variables were created as discussed above and in the notes to the table.20 In addition
to a range of covariates, each specification also controls for region-specific time effects as well as
California-specific time effects.
The results reported in the first row of column one of Table 2 indicate that households
who currently have a negative equity position in their house have 2-year mobility rates that are 5.6
percentage points lower than similar households with positive equity in their house. This
represents a decline of 47 percent relative to the average mobility rate. This net decline on
household mobility implies that over the past two decades the lock-in effect for owner-occupied
borrowers dominated the impact of foreclosures induced by negative equity.
We also experimented with an alternative specification (not reported in Table 2) that, in
addition to our negative equity indicator, included a variable that measures continuously any
nominal loss implied by the self-reported house values over the two years since the last survey.
To deal with likely measurement error, we instrument the continuous nominal loss measure with a
variable that measures the losses implied by the SMSA repeat-sales house price index.21 Two
findings emerge from this alternative specification. Controlling for any mobility effect from
negative equity, the results indicate that each $10,000 in nominal losses reduces mobility by 1.7
percentage points, so there is evidence that recent losses are associated with lower mobility.22

20

Attenuation bias from measurement error appears to be large. The results using the unadjusted variables, in lieu of
their measurement error-related instruments, always have the same sign, but are smaller in magnitude and never
statistically significant at conventional confidence levels.
21
Note that households may report a nominal loss since the last survey but still have positive equity, and households
can be in a negative equity situation and still report no nominal loss on their house since the last survey. In our data,
just over 15 percent of households with positive equity report a nominal loss since the last survey. Conversely, nearly
77 percent of households with a negative equity position report no nominal loss since the last survey.
22
We checked for evidence of a nonlinear response to this nominal loss by estimating a two-piece linear spline. We
set the break point at a loss of $20,000, which is between the median and 75th percentile, conditional on a loss being
reported. The results did not indicate any change in the response of mobility as the magnitude of the loss increases.

15

However, controlling for recent nominal losses only slightly lowers the coefficient on the negative
equity indicator. Thus, households in a negative equity situation still have substantially lower
mobility even after controlling for any impact arising from recent reported losses on the house.
For those households with fixed rate mortgages, we find that a $1,000 annual real
mortgage interest difference is associated with a 2.8 percentage point reduction in the mobility rate
(row 2 the first column of Table 2). The comparison of this effect with the one estimated from the
Proposition 13 financial friction in the next row finds a very similar result. A $1,000 annual real
property tax difference for California residents generated by Proposition 13 lowers household
mobility by 2.9 percentage points. The data can not reject the hypothesis that the fixed rate
mortgage lock-in effect and the Proposition 13 lock-in effect are of the same magnitude.
The second specification reported in column 2 tests the validity of the Proposition 13 lockin variable by checking to see if it is significant in a sample of households residing outside of
California. If the Proposition 13 variable is capturing some other unmeasured effects and not the
impact of the legislation, then we should see a similar impact in the non-California sample. This
does not appear to be the case, as the results show that the Proposition 13 variable is both
economically and statistically insignificant in the non-California sample (row 4, column 2).
Thus, we find negative equity and mortgage lock-in effects at least as large as those
reported in previous studies. Our national sample over a two-decade long period indicates these
sizable impacts are not peculiar to more narrowly-defined samples of people or time spans. While
our estimates are reduced form in nature, our more general specification that includes both
negative equity and mortgage interest rate effects simultaneously as well as a host of other

16

demographic and economic controls, increases confidence that the effects are not driven by
omitted variable bias.23
Returning to our baseline specification in column one finds the estimated impacts of the
other demographic and economic variables broadly consistent with Quigley (1987) whose
estimates were derived from hazard analysis using data from the 1979-81 PSID. For example, the
results in row 5 show that first-time homebuyers have a lower mobility rate than other households.
Duration in the unit also is important, as illustrated by Figure 6’s plot of the marginal effect of
years living in a house on the likelihood of a move. Mobility increases with years of tenure up to
9, and then decreases with years of tenure. This is consistent with a life-cycle pattern of housing
choices where households go through several trade-up purchases before owning a home that they
will live in for an extended period of time.24
Various demographic characteristics of the household are also important determinants of
mobility. Being married is not a statistically significant predictor of mobility in the national
sample (row 6 of column 1), but divorce is. Transitions out of marriage are associated with much
higher mobility, with the point estimate being more than double that for transitions into marriage
(compare rows 7 and 8 of column 1). The next few rows show that household mobility increases
with the education of the household head. A household headed by someone with at least some
graduate education has a 2-year mobility rate that is 4.2 percentage points higher than a household
headed by someone without a high school education (the omitted category). Whites are more

23

While we control for changes in household income as well as region and year effects, the most worrisome potential
confounder of our interpretation of the results arises from an economic shock that differentially affects high loan-tovalue owners. Consider a change that reduced house prices and employment simultaneously, but harmed the job
prospects of highly leveraged borrowers more. If our income, time, and location variables do not fully control for this,
it is possible that part of our estimated mobility effect could be due to the reduced employment opportunities of highly
leverage borrowers, not a housing lock-in mechanism. Future work should focus on accessing the magnitude of this
potential confounder, as the literature to date has not properly addressed this issue.
24
Not coincidently, this same pattern is exhibited by the typical sequence of job durations over a worker’s career.

17

likely to move than non-whites, while male-headed households are less likely to move than
female-headed households (see rows 13 and 14 of column 1).
Figure 7 depicts the marginal effect for the age of the household head on household
mobility. Each additional year of age reduces household mobility until the household head
reaches the early fifties. After this point, aging raises the likelihood of a move. Finally, larger
households tend to move less frequently, as indicated by the significantly negative coefficients on
the household size control (see row 15 near the bottom of the first page of the table). This is
consistent with the hypothesis that kids increase the transactions costs involved in moving.
However, the results in the next two rows show that, controlling for family size, mobility is higher
in response to increases in family size, but is not significantly impacted by decreases in family
size.25
Household income and its dynamics also impact household mobility. Households with
higher income are more likely to move all else the same (bottom row of the first page of Table 2).
Given a household’s income level, declines in household income are associated with higher
mobility. Finally, changes in neighborhood quality, whether positive or negative, are not
significantly associated with changes in mobility.

VI. Implications of Reduced Household Mobility

Because market conditions differ over time and the mobility impacts play out over a period
of years, one cannot simply use our point estimates to precisely gauge mobility effects associated
with the current housing market. However, it is clear that the consequences of lock-in and reduced
mobility are very different from those associated with foreclosure and increased mobility. For
example, lower mobility is likely to result in more inefficient matching in the labor market, as
25

Quigley (1987) finds this same asymmetry in the effects of changes in family size.

18

some households will not be able to move to access better jobs in alternative labor markets.
Utility also will be lower to the extent households are not able to move as readily as they would
like in order to access different amenities or public services (e.g., good schools), or just a
differently-sized home if family size changes.
Recent research also suggests that owners with negative equity behave more like renters
and reinvest less in their residences (Gyourko and Saiz, 2004). Harding et al. (2007) document the
important role of maintenance expenditures at reducing the depreciation rate on housing. It also is
possible that the reduced mobility associated with mortgage lock-in can have local public finance
effects. Previous research has shown that even households without children often support
investments to improve school quality because these improvements are capitalized into house
values (Hilber and Mayer (2004)). However, for households with negative equity in their home,
that linkage is broken because it is the lender, not the owner, who would benefit from any initial
increase in property values resulting from the improved public services.
Research is urgently needed to examine these potential consequences and assess their
importance. More thought and analysis also is necessary to determine whether there is a case for
public policy to intervene in response to mortgage lock-in. For example, it seems likely that
lenders would internalize the home maintenance/reinvestment externality. However, it is not at all
clear they would do so with respect to the inefficiencies in labor market matching and housing
market matching (in terms of accessing local services or amenities). Whether such costs would
justify government intervention is not obvious, but a clear accounting of the potential benefits of
such action is needed to weigh against the typical costs (e.g., moral hazard) that economists rightly
associate with such policies. Whatever the correct answer, the calculus is sure to be very different
from that associated with worries exclusively focused on the externalities associated with
foreclosure.
19

VII. Conclusion

The end of the recent housing boom and the weakness in many local housing markets raise
new questions about an old issue in housing research—namely, lock-in effects. We use a panel
data set from the American Housing Survey over a two-decade period predating the current
housing downturn to estimate the influence of negative equity and rising mortgage rates on
household mobility, controlling for a host of other factors known to influence mobility. Higher
interest rates are shown to lower mobility substantially, and we are able to confirm the magnitude
of this result using data on a comparable financial friction generated by property tax differentials
associated with California’s Proposition 13.
Having negative equity in one’s home reduces mobility rates by even more—by nearly 50
percent from its baseline level according to our estimates. That the net impact of negative equity
is to reduce, not raise, mobility certainly does not mean that defaults and foreclosures are
insignificant consequences of this condition. However, it does signify that the preponderant effect
is for owners to remain in their homes for longer periods of time, not to default and move to
another residence.
Finally, reduced mobility has its own unique set of consequences which have not been
clearly identified or discussed in the debate about the current housing crisis. Substantially lower
household mobility is likely to have various social costs including poorer labor market matches,
diminished support for local public goods, and lesser maintenance and reinvestment in the home.
Whether these costs are sufficient to warrant government intervention is unclear, with research
urgently needed to address this and other issues pertaining to the financial frictions associated with
potential mortgage lock-in.

20

Selected References

Chan, Sewin (2001), “Spatial Lock-In: Do Falling House Prices Constrain Residential Mobility?”
Journal of Urban Economics 49(3), p.567-586.
Engelhardt, Gary V. (2003), “Nominal Loss Aversion, Housing Equity Constraints, and
Household Mobility: Evidence from the United States,” Journal of Urban Economics
53(1), p.171-195.
Ferreira, Fernando (2007), “You Can Take It With You: Proposition 13 Tax Benefits, Residential
Mobility, and Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities,” mimeo, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer (1997), “Equity and Time to Sale in the Real Estate
Market,” American Economic Review 87(3), p.255-69.
Genesove, David, and Christopher Mayer (2001), “Loss-Aversion and Seller Behavior: Evidence
from the Housing Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(4), p.1233-60.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Shapiro, and Paul Willen (2008), “Subprime Outcomes: Risky
Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, Working Paper #07-15.
Gyourko, Joseph, and Albert Saiz (2004), “Reinvestment in the Housing Stock: The Role of
Construction Costs and the Supply Side,” Journal of Urban Economics 55, p.238-256.
Hanushek, Eric A., and John M. Quigley (1979), “The Dynamics of the Housing Market: A Stock
Adjustment Model of Housing Consumption,” Journal of Urban Economics 6, p.90-111.
Harding, John C., C.F. Sirmans, and Stuart S. Rosenthal (2007), “Depreciation of Housing
Capital, Maintenance, and House Price Inflation: Estimates from a Repeat-Sales Model,”
Journal of Urban Economics 61, p.193-217.
Haughwout, Andrew, Richard Peach, and Joseph Tracy (2008), “Juvenile Delinquent Mortgages:
Bad Credit or Bad Economy,” Journal of Urban Economics (forthcoming).
Hilber, Christian, and Christopher Mayer (2004), “Why Do Households without Children
Support Local Schools?” NBER Working Paper #10804.
Quigley, John M. (1987), “Interest Rate Variations, Mortgage Prepayments and Household
Mobility,” Review of Economics and Statistics 69, p.636-643.
Schwartz, Allie (2006), “Household Refinancing Behavior in Fixed Rate Mortgages,” Working
Paper, Harvard University.
Stein, Jeremy (1995), “Prices and Trading Volume in the Housing Market: A Model with DownPayment Effects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, p.379-406.
21

Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise (1984), “Moving and Housing Expenditure: Transaction
Costs and Disequilibrium,” Journal of Public Economics 23, p.207-243.
Wasi, Nada, and Michelle White (2005), “Property Tax Limitations and Mobility: The Lock-In
Effect of California’s Proposition 13,” NBER Working Paper #11108.

22

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

Move
First-time homebuyer
Duration in house
Married
Single to married
Married to single
High school graduate
Some college
College graduate
Some graduate school+
White
Male
Age
Household size
Positive change in household size
Negative change in household size
Log real household income
Positive change in log real
household income
Negative change in log real
household income
Positive change in neighborhood
quality
Negative change in neighborhood
quality
Negative home equity (indicator)
Fixed rate mortgage lockin ($000)
Proposition 13 property tax subsidy
($000)

Mean
0.12
0.50
8.21
0.72
0.02
0.02
0.27
0.26
0.23
0.17
0.84
0.73
42.30
3.24
0.11
0.12
10.51
0.14

Standard
Deviation
0.32
0.50
7.38
0.45
0.13
0.13
0.44
0.44
0.42
0.38
0.37
0.44
8.94
1.52
0.40
0.46
0.78
0.41

0.15

0.51

0.08

0.27

0.11

0.31

0.03
0.08
0.21

0.16
0.25
0.43

Notes: Income, fixed-rate mortgage subsidy, and property tax subsidy are
measured in real 1982-84 dollars.

23

Table 2. Household mobility
Variable

(1)
−0.056**
(0.021)

(2)
−0.052**
(0.024)

Fixed-rate mortgage lock-in ($1,000)2

−0.028**
(0.009)

−0.020*
(0.011)

Proposition 13 lock-in ($1,000) –
California

−0.029**
(0.014)

Negative home equity (indicator)1

0.011
(0.037)

Proposition 13 lock-in ($1,000) –
Non-California
First-time Homebuyer

−0.010**
(0.003)

−0.009**
(0.003)

Married

0.005
(0.004)

0.007**
(0.004)

Single to married

0.013
(0.010)

0.013
(0.011)

Married to single

0.042**
(0.011)

0.047**
(0.012)

High school graduate

0.015**
(0.006)

0.010
(0.007)

Some college

0.022**
(0.007)

0.017**
(0.007)

College graduate

0.033**
(0.007)

0.027**
(0.008)

Some graduate school +

0.042**
(0.007)

0.036**
(0.008)

White

0.028**
(0.004)

0.035**
(0.004)

Male

−0.013**
(0.003)

−0.017**
(0.004)

Household size

−0.009**
(0.001)

−0.010**
(0.001)

Positive change in household size

0.016**
(0.003)

0.015**
(0.004)

Negative change in household size

−0.000
(0.003)

−0.001
(0.004)

Log real household income

0.009**
(0.002)

0.009**
(0.003)

24

Table 2. Household mobility – continued
(1)
0.002
(0.003)

(2)
0.002
(0.004)

Negative change in log real household income

0.009**
(0.003)

0.007**
(0.004)

Positive change in neighborhood quality

0.000
(0.005)

0.001
(0.005)

Negative change in neighborhood quality

0.003
(0.004)

0.004
(0.005)

Observations

58,363

47,7004

Variable
Positive change in log real household income

Notes: Probit marginal effects with standard errors given in parentheses. Specifications contain
a cubic in years in the current house, a cubic in the age of the household head, and regionspecific year effects as well as CA-specific year effects in specification (1). Income, fixed-rate
mortgage subsidy, and property tax subsidy are measured in real 1982-84 dollars.
* significant at the 5 percent level ** significant at the 10 percent level.
1
Instrument for negative current LTV uses an estimate for the current house value based on the
value of the house at purchase and the appreciation of the value based on a repeat-sale house
price index for that SMSA.
2
Instrument for mortgage lock-in is the implied increase in mortgage payments assuming that
the current mortgage interest rate is the average rate for fixed-rate mortgages for the year the
mortgage was originated.
3
Instrument for the property tax subsidy is the implied subsidy calculated using the metro-area
repeat-sale house price appreciation.
4
Excludes observations from California.

25

Figure 1. Mean and Median Quarterly Sales Prices, SF Bay Area

Figure 2. Mean and Median LTVs, SF Bay Area

26

Figure 3. Distribution of LTVs Over Time, SF Bay Area

Figure 4. Cumulative House Price Appreciation in California Since 1978
7.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Year

27

Figure 5. Distribution of Property Tax Subsidies in California Over Time

$3,000
$2,500

Reall Dollars

$2,000
$1,500
90th

$1,000
75th

$500
25th Percentile

50th Percentile

$0
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Year

Figure 6. Marginal Effect of Year in Current House on Mobility
0.010
0.008

Probability of Move

0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

-0.002
-0.004
-0.006
Years in House

28

Figure 7. Marginal Effect of Age of Household Head on Mobility
0.012
0.010

Probability of Move

0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000
25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

65

-0.002
-0.004
-0.006
Age

Appendix Figure 1. Housing Transactions Volume Over Time, SF Bay Area

29

