NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS A DONOR IN HAND BETTER THAN TWO IN THE BUSH? EVIDENCE FROM
A NATURAL FIELD EXPERIMENT
Craig E. Landry
Andreas Lange
John A. List
Michael K. Price
Nicholas G. Rupp
Working Paper 14319
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14319

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

We are grateful to Jamie Brown-Kruse for working with us in her capacity as the Director of the Hazard
Center. We thank the Editor and three anonymous referees for excellent insights that markedly improved
the study. Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Glenn Harrison, Lise Vesterlund, and seminar participants at
several universities, conferences, and meetings also provided useful insights. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Craig E. Landry, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and Nicholas G. Rupp.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is a Donor in Hand Better than Two in the Bush? Evidence from a Natural Field Experiment
Craig E. Landry, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and Nicholas G. Rupp
NBER Working Paper No. 14319
September 2008
JEL No. C93,H41,Q5
ABSTRACT
This study develops theory and conducts an experiment to provide an understanding of why people
initially give to charities, why they remain committed to the cause, and what factors attenuate these
influences. Using an experimental design that links donations across distinct treatments separated in
time, we present several insights. For example, we find that previous donors are more likely to give,
and contribute more, than donors asked to contribute for the first time. Yet, how these previous donors
were acquired is critical: agents who are initially attracted by signals of charitable quality transmitted
via an economic mechanism are much more likely to continue giving than agents who were initially
attracted by non-mechanism factors.

Craig E. Landry
East Carolina University
landryc@ecu.edu

Michael K. Price
University of Nevada, Reno
mprice@cabnr.unr.edu

Andreas Lange
University of Maryland
alange@arec.umd.edu

Nicholas G. Rupp
East Carolina University
ruppn@ecu.edu

John A. List
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jlist@uchicago.edu

Charitable giving has historically been linked to religious activities. Dating at
least to ancient Egypt, religious gifts were believed to ensure a just reward in the afterlife.
More recently, tithing has become the traditional philanthropic ideal of Christianity,
wherein one-tenth of a person's income is expected to be contributed to charity.1 Yet,
charitable fund-raising has taken on a much broader role in the past several centuries. In
the Western world, near the mid-1800s, it was recognized that individuals and
corporations could play a part in financing non-profit agencies with the introduction of
new fund-raising techniques. The most innovative techniques can be traced to the Young
Men's Christian Association, an organization founded in London in 1844 as a response to
unhealthy social conditions arising near the end of the Industrial Revolution.2
Numerous non-profit agencies quickly followed, setting in motion the vibrant
industry of today. In the US alone, the American Association of Fundraising Counsel
estimates that annual giving now exceeds 2 percent of GDP. Increased individual wealth,
an aging population, and recent devolutionary trends across governments worldwide
combine to set the stage for continued rapid growth in the sector. This presents fundraisers, who typically rely on rules of thumb rather than hard scientific evidence, with a
unique opportunity.

Most commentators, however, view the industry as lacking an

appropriate understanding of the economic underpinnings to take full advantage of this
prospect.

Fund-raising consultant Tony Kneer (The Economist, July 29th, 2004)

highlights this belief by noting that “There is an extraordinary amount of money
available. The lack is of good ideas on how to get the basket under the apple tree.”

1

Of course, charity is important in other religions such as Islam, Judaism, and Buddhism.
The new approach to fund-raising put forth by the Young Men's Christian Association—intensive drives
over a short period of time using quite sophisticated techniques—was followed by solicitees during World
War I, leading to the creation of the United Way.
2

1

Accentuating this reality is the fact that even though there has been a tremendous amount
of new research, even the primitives of the economics of charity remain ill-understood.
Before one can begin to advance potential solutions as to the most efficient means
to attract and maintain donors to finance public goods, one must understand the basics of
giving. Even though the economics of charity has been well studied on the “supply” side
(see, e.g., Charles Clotfelter, 1985; William Randolph, 1995; John Peloza and Peirs Steel,
2005), critical gaps remain on the “demand” side (James Andreoni, 2006). In this regard,
fund-raisers have developed a variety of strategies aimed at successfully reaching specific
funding targets, but little systematically is known about (i) what induces donors to give in
the first place, (ii) what causes them to remain committed to the cause, and (iii) what
factors attenuate these influences. Answers to such questions are important not only to
further our understanding of what theoretical models best predict behavior, but also from
a public policy and practical viewpoint.
The first goal of this study is to provide a theoretical foundation of charitable
giving that examines how a donor’s historical interactions with a charitable organization
influence contribution decisions. The model provides a theoretical rationale to explain
why previous donors are more likely to contribute in future campaigns, and outlines
factors that may serve to attenuate such loyalty. Importantly, the model highlights an
asymmetry in the long-run effects of mechanism versus non-mechanism incentives.3 The
model also provides an explanation for why the appeal mode, for example door-to-door
and mail solicitation, might be critically important.

3

For convenience, we denote “mechanism” effects as the choice of announcing seed money, using
matching grants, using lotteries or auctions. We denote “non-mechanism” effects as factors that are not
related to economic institutional choice, such as the use of certain solicitor types.

2

A second goal of the study is to test the implications of the model. Because our
theory relies on a firm understanding of the temporal profile of previous gifts, it is
important to use an approach whereby we can adequately control for the distribution of
previous donors. This calls for a field experiment with a relatively new charity that
randomized previous donors into various treatment cells, and therefore has detailed
information on all previous gifts and knowledge of what factors initially attracted donors.
In this spirit, it is natural to organize a capital campaign for the Center for Natural
Hazards Research at East Carolina University (ECU). The Hazard Center was authorized
to begin operations in the fall of 2004 by the North Carolina state government;
importantly, there has been only one previous fund-raiser for the Center, a door-to-door
fund-raising drive which took place in late 2004, which randomized donors into various
treatment cells (see Landry et al., 2006). For our purposes, the most important insights
from Landry et al. (2006) are that linking contributions with the chance of winning a
lottery prize and the physical appearance of female solicitors both influenced giving to
the Hazard Center dramatically.
In designing our field experiment, we make use of detailed information on the
households that were previously approached and how they were approached. The fundraising effort used to test our theory is centered on a door-to-door drive, but we also
provide suggestive insights from a small-scale mail solicitation. Both campaigns took
place in the late spring/early summer of 2006. We designed the campaigns to test our
theory while maintaining the naturalness of each particular solicitation. We randomly
allocated previous givers (“warm” list subjects) and those who have never given (“cold”
list subjects) into one of three treatments: a standard voluntary contributions mechanism

3

(VCM—simply asking solicitees for money) and two gift treatments—asking solicitees
for money, but giving a large or a small gift to the potential donors. Our approach can
therefore go beyond typical efforts in the literature since we are able to examine the
dynamics of charitable fund-raising.4
Some interesting insights emerge that are consonant with our theory. First, the
warm-list enhances fund-raising success in the VCM door-to-door treatment: donors
who contributed in the first fund-raising drive are 19 percent more likely to give to the
Hazards Center and provide average gifts that are roughly twice as large as households
that have never given. Yet, when we provide potential donors with gifts, behavior of
warm list agents is statistically indistinguishable from that of cold list agents. Thus, a
donor in hand is better than two in the bush provided the mechanism used is a standard
“simply ask for money,” or VCM. When a solicitor has access to gifts for potential
contributors, however, two donors in the bush are preferred to one donor in hand because
in these treatments cold and warm list agents behave similarly.
Second, we find a fundamental difference in the efficacy of prior mechanism and
non-mechanism factors in our follow-up campaign. Removing a mechanism incentive
has no discernable impact on the behavior of warm-list households whereas removing
non-mechanism factors leads to a reduction in average contribution levels from such
households. This result is consonant with the initial mechanism incentive providing an

4

Recent fundraising studies that explore mechanism effects include the work on the efficacy of matching
funds (e.g., Yan Chen et al., 2006; Dean Karlan and List, 2007; Stephan Meier, 2007), seed money
announcements (e.g., List and David Lucking-Reiley, 2002), and lotteries (e.g., John Morgan 2000; Landry
et al. 2006; Lange et al. 2007). None of these studies attempt to explore long run effects of giving, except
Meier (2007), who finds that in the long run those who received the match give less than the control group.
Although not a study in the spirit of these mechanisms, Jen Shang and Rachel Croson (2007) also explore
the amounts individuals give over time.

4

enduring signal of charitable quality. In this case, a donor in hand is better than two in
the bush provided the mechanism that first attracted the donor transmitted a signal that
enhanced charitable quality.
Finally, we find that the loyalty of previous donors is attenuated when we change
the appeal mode. While warm-list households that originally gave in a door-to-door
campaign are more likely to donate in a subsequent mail solicitation than a randomly
selected individual, the noisiness of the data precludes strong inference. Comparing rates
of giving and gift sizes across our two campaigns yields a data pattern that is consistent
with several models, including one whereby social pressure is an important factor
influencing solicitees. Overall, these results highlight the potential usefulness of moving
beyond an experimental design that focuses on short run substitution effects, and provide
a deeper understanding of which theoretical models best predict donor behavior.
The remainder of our study proceeds as follows. The next section provides the
theoretical framework on which we base our field experiment. Section III describes our
field experimental design. Section IV summarizes our findings and Section V concludes.
I. Theoretical Model
To provide direction to our field experimental design, we extend the models
presented in Andreoni (1989, 1990) and Landry et al. (2006) to account for historical
interactions with the charity.

A key feature of our model is that it incorporates a

composite utility component, whose realization may depend upon both the interpersonal
interaction between potential donor and solicitor and the fund-raising method.
We model an agent i ∈ Ω whose utility is additively separable into utility ui from
consuming a numeraire good, yi , utility θ hi (G ) from a public good provided at some

5

aggregate level G , and a composite utility term, fi (•) . Throughout, we assume that
hi (•) is increasing and concave and that θ ∈ {0,1} reflects whether the charity is of high
( θ = 1 ) or low ( θ = 0 ) quality. The composite utility term is multidimensional, including

both a warm glow component as well as a disutility of not giving.
We allow each of these three utility components to depend on the current fundraising mechanism M c employed by the charity. M c encompasses both the institution
utilized and the mode of appeal (door-to-door or mail solicitation), and therefore the
interpersonal interaction.

In particular, we allow that interpersonal interactions can

influence both the shape and magnitude of fi (•) .5

This term therefore implicitly

includes both the extent to which a donor’s actions are observed and the characteristics of
the solicitor observing such actions.
We assume that agents have incomplete information regarding the true value of
the public good but attach a probability μi ∈ [0,1] that the charity is of high quality—i.e.,

θ hi (G ) = hi (G ) .6 As discussed in Lise Vesterlund (2003), a charity can gain credibility
and thereby increase μi by using mechanisms ( M c ) that provide credible signals of
charitable quality. Such approaches include the provision of matching funds/gifts to
potential donors or the announcement of seed money and lottery prizes.7 Intuitively, we
expect this effect to depend on both the current and previous interactions between

5

In many regards, our composite utility term generalizes the “moral” component of utility discussed in
Steven D. Levitt and List (2007). Importantly the definition of our composite utility term allows decisions
to vary based on the extent to which actions are scrutinized by expectant others.
6
Note that μi ∈ [0,1] thereby coincides with the expected value of θ ( μi = μi 1 + (1 − μi )0 ). In the
following, we therefore base the discussion on

μi

only.

7

Andreoni (1998) discusses a different effect of seed money: seed money in his model provides a device
to eliminate zero-contribution equilibrium in a threshold public good game.

6

solicitee and charity—i.e., both the current M c and any previously used fund-raising
mechanisms,

Mp,

are

expected

to

affect

the

instantaneous

realization

of

μ i = μi ( M c , M p ) .
In choosing her donation level bi , agent i derives utility according to:
Vi = u i ( y i (bi ; M c )) + μ i (M c , M P )hi (G ) + f i (bi ; M c )

(1)

In our model, numeraire consumption, is determined by the budget of the agent,
y i (bi ; M C ) = wi − bi + Ri (bi ; M C ) , where Ri (bi ; M C ) denotes any potential private

monetary or consumption benefits conveyed by a particular fund-raising drive. Finally,
we assume that fi (•) is concave in bi and both ui (•) and hi (•) are (strictly) increasing
and concave.
Agent i selects a contribution level to maximize utility and contributes a positive
amount if
(2)

u i′ ( y i (0; M C ))

∂
∂
y i (0; M C ) + μ i (M C , M P )hi′(G−i ) +
f i (0; M C ) > 0
∂bi
∂bi

at bi = 0 and contributes zero otherwise.

Assuming an interior solution, the agent

maximizes utility by selecting a contribution level bi* that satisfies the following firstorder condition:
(3)

( (

u i′ y i bi* ; M C

)) ∂∂b y (b ; M ) + μ (M
i

*
i

C

i

C

( )

, M P )hi′ G * +

i

Aggregate contributions for the charity are given by

∑b
i∈Ω

*
i

∂
f i bi* ; M C = 0
∂bi

(

)

and total public good

provision by G * = ∑ bi* − C (M c ) , where C (M c ) represents any expenditures—i.e.,
i∈Ω

lottery prizes/gifts—accrued by a charity employing a particular mechanism.

7

A. Contribution Decisions and the Choice of Fund-raising Mechanism
In many fund-raising campaigns, charities place importance on both participation
rates and aggregate contribution levels. As such, it is important to examine individual
participation rates in conjunction with aggregate contribution levels.

We therefore

analyze how the current choice of fund-raising mechanism M c impacts the left-hand
sides of equations (2) and (3). We highlight three distinct channels through which the
choice of a particular fund-raising mechanism can influence such decisions.
First, recall that we allow numeraire consumption y i (bi ; M C ) to depend on the
private monetary/consumption benefits Ri (bi ; M C ) conveyed by participation in a fundraising drive.

Fund-raisers can thus influence numeraire consumption by selecting

mechanisms such as charitable lotteries or donor gifts that provide a direct link between
private benefits and contribution decisions.

This would lead to gains on both the

intensive and extensive margins – i.e., changes in conditions (2) and (3), respectively.
Second, the (expected) utility from the public good, μi ( M c , M p )hi (G ) , may be

increased by announcing seed money donations, lottery prizes, or providing gifts to
potential donors.

If so, then we would expect such mechanisms to induce greater

aggregate contribution levels. As previously used fund-raising mechanisms M p may
have altered the perceived credibility of the charity, however, we allow an interaction
between historical and current mechanisms.8

8

For example, the marginal effect of providing donor gifts on the perceived credibility of the charity may
differ across households previously approached in a charitable lottery and those previously approached in a
VCM (or those approached for the first time).

8

Finally, the composite utility term fi (•) may depend upon non-monetary factors,
such as the characteristics of a solicitor in a door-to-door fund-raising drive or the appeal
mode. Consonant with this notion, Landry et al. (2006) find that solicitor characteristics,
such as female physical attractiveness, influence giving. Likewise, social pressures may
be greater in door-to-door fund-raising efforts than in mail solicitations. If agents receive
disutility from not giving, and such feelings are related to the extent actions are observed
by others (such as an expecting solicitor), then the appeal mode might have important
effects on giving.
B. Warm-list vs. cold- list

Fund-raising strategists typically rank building and maintaining a “donor
development pyramid” as the most important aspect of a successful long-term fundraising effort. While we are unable to find any clean empirical evidence that quantifies
the value of a warm-list, our model highlights factors important in measuring the value of
a warm-list agent. We partition the set Ω of agents into two types: (i) individuals who
have never given to the charity, ( Ω CL , cold list) and (ii) previous givers to the charity
( Ω WL , warm-list):

Ω = Ω WL ∪ Ω CL

(4)

The set of cold-list agents, Ω CL , will contain some agents who elect to contribute to the
charity (reflecting characteristics similar to an agent drawn from the warm-list) and some
who do not contribute to the charity.
Under our model, those who have contributed in a prior campaign reveal either a
high marginal valuation for the public good or a high realization of the composite utility
term—i.e., a large warm glow or a distaste for not giving. Ceteris paribus, we would

9

thus expect that warm-list households are more likely to contribute and provide larger
donations than a randomly approached household. However, the economic value of a
warm-list depends on how the marginal donor was acquired, which will influence their
propensity to give in future campaigns.
For example, as noted in Landry et al. (2006), both lottery incentives and the
attractiveness of female solicitors can be used to elicit contributions from extra-marginal
donors. Yet, these two effects work through entirely different channels in our model.
Charitable lotteries alter consumption utility and may serve to signal charitable quality.
In contrast, beauty works solely via the instantaneous realization of the composite utility
term. As such, the long-run impact of these mechanisms for the marginal donor could
differ substantially.
As a thought experiment, consider the marginal donor who contributed previously
to a physically attractive solicitor in a VCM. If such an agent is approached in a followup campaign by a solicitor of average attractiveness in a similar VCM, the realization of
the composite utility term would be lower. Ceteris paribus, we would therefore expect a
weakly lower contribution from such an agent. Alternatively, if this marginal donor was
attracted via a lottery incentive, future contributions might remain high if the lottery sent
an important quality signal that is durable; on the other hand, removing the lottery
incentive might lower contributions because ceteris paribus it reduces consumption
utility and could undermine prior quality signals.
II. Experimental Design

We designed a door-to-door fund-raising drive and a parallel mail solicitation to
explore various aspects of the theoretical model. In each appeal mode, we use three basic

10

treatments—a VCM, a small gift treatment, and a large gift treatment.9 We begin with a
summary of the original Landry et al. (2006) design, and proceed to our door-to-door and
mail solicitation field experiments.
A. Precursors

The Center for Natural Hazards Research at ECU was authorized to begin
operations in the fall of 2004 by the North Carolina state government. The Hazard
Center was founded in response to the widespread devastation in eastern North Carolina
caused by hurricanes Dennis and Floyd, and designed to provide support and
coordination for research on natural hazard risks.
The Hazard Center conducted an initial capital campaign in the Fall of 2004. As
reported in Landry et al. (2006), this initial campaign was a completely randomized
design that randomized households into various treatments. The experimental treatments
were conducted on four weekends between October 2nd and November 13th, 2004.
Their design resulted in a sample of 4833 households approached—1186 in a VCM
treatment, 1282 in a seed money treatment, and 2356 in a lottery treatment. Of the
households approached, a total of 1755 answered the door and spoke to a solicitor, and
522 made a contribution to the Hazard Center.
Importantly, we have data detailing the manner in which the households were
initially approached along with the size of their gift. Further, as explained below, there
has been no subsequent contact with the donors until our second set of field treatments.

9

Our gift treatments included both conditional and unconditional small and large gift treatments with
various price points. Herein we pool these gift data into “small” and “large.” While conditionality does
matter in terms of levels of gifts, the treatment effects of interest in this study are not influenced by this
distinction. Hence, for parsimony we pool the data. We direct the reader to the supplementary appendix on
the AER website for results examining the data split along conditional and unconditional treatments.

11

In this new set of field treatments, we approach households that have given in the past
and households that have never given, randomizing them into one of the three door-todoor or mail solicitation treatments.10
Before proceeding, we should note that the mission of the Hazard Center—to
provide support and coordination for research on natural hazard risk—is of importance
when interpreting our results. It is well understood amongst economists that individuals
are more generous in the wake of emergency situations (see, e.g., Christopher Douty,
1972; Louis De Alessi, 1975; Jack Hirshleifer, 1987).

Although the initial capital

campaign for the Hazard Center was conducted nearly five years after Hurricanes Floyd
and Dennis devastated eastern North Carolina in 1999, it is possible that some of our
initial donors may have given in response to the memory of these events. Given that the
long-term effects of such events on donor behavior are unknown, there may be added
noise when extrapolating results on dynamics from our setting to charitable fund-raising
in general. However, it is important to note that these past events should not correlate
with any of our treatments.
B. Door-to-Door Fund-raiser

In each of our three door-to-door treatments, households in predetermined
neighborhood blocks in Pitt County, North Carolina were approached by a paid solicitor
and asked if they would like to make a contribution. The neighborhood blocks were
selected to provide a representative sample of two distinct household types in each of the
10

To increase the number of warm-list households, we pool data from Landry et al. (2006) with that from
the gift exchange treatments in Uri Gneezy and List (2006). Solicitors in Gneezy and List (2006) spoke
with 645 households in a lottery treatment and elicited contributions from 315 (or 48.9%) of these
individuals. The sole difference across these two experiments is that solicitors in Gneezy and List (2006)
were informed that their wages would be doubled after arriving for their first day of work. Importantly,
solicitors in the two studies were recruited and trained using the same protocol and every aspect of the
interaction between solicitor and potential donor was identical.

12

three treatments: (i) households that contributed to the Hazard Center in the first fundraising effort and (ii) households that have never contributed.11
Households that answered the door were provided an informational brochure
detailing the activities of the Hazard Center since its inception in 2004 and read a fixed
script that outlined the reason for the solicitor’s visit.

The script included a brief

introduction that informed the resident of who the solicitors were, the purpose of their
visit, a two-sentence summary of the non-profit organization, and a description of the gift
(when applicable).

Copies of the informational brochure and solicitation script are

provided in Appendix 1.
Across all treatments, potential donors were informed that proceeds raised in the
campaign would be used to fund research that benefits Pitt County and the surrounding
area. In the small gift treatment, potential donors were provided a bookmark containing
the logo of either the Hazard Center or ECU as a gift from the Hazard Center. In the
large gift treatment, potential donors were provided a copy of the book Freakonomics as
a gift from the Hazard Center. While these two goods might not be in exactly the same
dimension (i.e., same gift but larger, as in Armin Falk, 2007), they are both related to an
academic endeavor; and given the thickness of the book market for best sellers several
bookmarks could be had for one Freakonomics book.
Table 1 summarizes the door-to-door portion of the experimental design. The
experimental treatments were conducted between April 21st and June 24th, 2006 with six
sessions conducted between 9am and 5pm on Saturday and another five sessions

11

Category (ii) household types can be more finely split: (a) those that were visited in the first effort but
elected not to contribute and (b) those that did not speak to a solicitor in the first fund-raising drive. Since
the qualitative results do not change, we pool these household types but we note that empirical results more
finely splitting the data can be found in the tabled results on the AER website.

13

conducted on Wednesday and Thursday evenings between 5pm and 8pm. Our design
resulted in a sample of 4186 total households approached—878 in the VCM, 1148 in the
small gift, and 1142 in the large gift.12 Of the households approached, 1039 answered the
door and spoke to a solicitor, and 277 made a contribution to the Hazard Center. Of the
households that answered the door, 151 were warm-list households that contributed to the
Hazard Center in 2004 and 888 were cold-list households that were not approached (or
chose not to contribute to the Hazard Center) in the earlier door-to-door campaign.
C. Recruiting and Training of Solicitors
As Table 1 reveals, we employed a within-solicitor design using a total of thirtytwo unique solicitors. Of the thirty-two solicitors employed in our experiment, nineteen
participated in the VCM treatment, twenty-four participated in the small gift treatment,
and sixteen participated in the large gift treatment.13 To control for possible order effects,
solicitors were randomly assigned to treatments, and we were careful to run multiple
treatments in every round of the experiment.
Each solicitor’s experience followed four steps: (1) consideration of an invitation
to work as a paid volunteer for the research center, (2) an in-person interview, (3) a
training session, and (4) participation as a solicitor in the door-to-door campaign.14
Undergraduate solicitors were recruited from the student body at ECU via flyers posted
around campus, announcements on a university electronic bulletin board, advertisements

12

We approached a total of 274 warm-list households—74 in the VCM, 98 in the small gift treatment, and
102 in the large gift treatment. We would have preferred a larger sample of such households and revisited
many of those who did not answer the door. Unfortunately the costs of such efforts became prohibitive and
we were unable to speak with approximately 45 percent of the targeted warm-list households.
13
Twelve of our solicitors worked in a single treatment. Of the remaining twenty solicitors, thirteen
participated in two of the treatments and seven participated in all three treatments.
14
A portion of the experimental design write-up follows Landry et al. (2006) since recruitment and training
was similar.

14

in the local campus newspaper, and direct appeal to student groups and students enrolled
in undergraduate economics courses. All potential solicitors were told that they would be
paid $10 per hour and would be expected to work multiple days. Interested solicitors
were instructed to contact the Economics Department to schedule an interview.
Initial ten-minute interviews were conducted in private offices of the Economics
Department faculty. Upon arrival to the interview, students completed an application
form and a short survey questionnaire.15 Upon concluding the interview, every applicant
was offered employment as a solicitor. Once hired, all solicitors attended a one-hour
training session conducted by the same researcher. The training sessions provided the
solicitor with background/historical information of the Hazard Center and reviewed the
data collection procedures. Next, the trainer reviewed the solicitation script for the VCM
treatment and explained the procedures for distributing gifts to potential donors. At the
conclusion of the training session, the solicitors practiced the script for the VCM
treatment in front of the trainer and other personnel in the Economics Department. When
necessary, the trainer provided immediate feedback to the solicitor on ways in which the
pitch could be improved.
D. Further Solicitor Information: Rating Physical Appearance

In the final step, we gathered one last piece of information. In the spirit of the
procedures of Jeffrey Biddle and Daniel Hamermesh (1998), we derived measures of
physical attractiveness for each solicitor. Digital photographs of each solicitor were
randomly allocated into files that contained the pictures of three other solicitors and
independently evaluated by 175 different observers—undergraduate students from a large

15

The application form and survey questionnaire are identical to those employed in Landry et al. (2006).

15

introductory-level economics course at the University of Maryland–College Park. Each
observer evaluated twelve different photographs and was asked to place each photograph
on a scale of (1) homely, extremely unattractive, to (10) model beautiful or handsome.
Each rater’s scores were normalized to yield a standardized scale (distributed as a
standard normal) across different raters. To generate our final personal attractiveness
measure, the standardized ratings for each solicitor were averaged over all evaluators.
Before proceeding to the mail solicitation discussion, we should highlight a few
important design issues. First, as previously noted, in carrying out our door-to-door
campaign we wished to solicit donors in a way that matched how fund-raisers carry out
the task in the field. Second, in order to provide a formal, standardized appearance,
solicitors were given an attractive ECU t-shirt and were instructed to wear khaki pants (or
shorts) during their door-to-door solicitations. Third, each solicitor wore an identification
badge that included his or her picture, name, and city solicitation permit number. Fourth,
solicitors distributed an information brochure after introducing themselves to potential
donors. Fifth, we randomly allocated solicitors across neighborhoods and treatment type,
and solicitors remained in the same treatment throughout each given session. Sixth,
households were randomized into treatments and we attempted to provide temporal
variation in both solicitor characteristics as well as mechanism type.
Finally, to summarize, we have gathered a rich set of solicitor and household
control variables. Not only do we have measures of several potentially relevant solicitor
attributes (race, gender, and beauty), we also have gathered data on the households that
our solicitors approached.

After the interaction with the household, each solicitor

16

completed data collection forms that included the estimated age, gender, and race of the
potential contributor.
E. Mail Solicitation

To complement the door-to-door fund-raiser, we ran a parallel mail solicitation
natural field experiment to provide a further test of the theoretical model. Similar to the
door-to-door drive, we allocated a certain number of households to one of the several
treatments. We were careful not to place a household in more than one treatment and
each household was only contacted once—either in the door-to-door drive or the mail
solicitation. Again, we examined behavior across the two household types: households
that have and have not previously contributed to the Hazard Center.
In total, we mailed 6563 solicitation letters across our three treatments—1837 in
the VCM treatment, 3783 in the small gift treatment, and 943 in the large gift. Each
mailing contained a copy of the informational brochure detailing the activities of the
Hazard Center since its inception in 2004 and a solicitation letter.
solicitation letter is included in Appendix B.

A copy of the

Previous donors accounted for

approximately 8.5 percent of the sample (or 555 of the 6563 total letters mailed). In
keeping with best fund-raising practices, we included a sentence in the solicitation letter
for previous donors thanking them for their donation in 2004 and expressing our hope
that they will continue their generosity.
It should be noted that in preparing the letters for the mail survey, we used the
White Pages on-line to gather the name associated with a given address and were unable
to find a listing for approximately 25.1 percent (1649 of 6563) of all households. Letters
sent to such a household for were addressed to “Pitt County Resident”. As none of these

17

letters were returned with a donation, we restrict the sample to the 4914 households that
received a personalized greeting—1363 in the VCM, 2831 in the small gift treatment, and
720 in the large gift treatment. Of these 4914 households, 399 (or approximately 8.1
percent) are warm-list individuals.
III. Experimental Results

We begin with a discussion of the door-to-door fund-raising results and then
summarize results from the mail solicitation.
A. Door-to-Door Fund-raiser

Table 2 presents summary statistics, including information on the success of the
various treatments, as well as solicitor and household characteristics. Table 2 indicates,
for example, that our solicitors approached 878 households in the VCM treatment, and
spoke with 286 of these households, of which 21.3 percent (61 of 286) contributed to the
Hazard Center. In total, we raised approximately $2602 (or $2.96 per solicitation) for the
Hazard Center: $543.40 in the VCM treatment ($1.90 per solicitation), $677 in the small
gift treatment ($1.82 per solicitation), and $1361.40 in the large gift treatment ($3.68 per
solicitation).
The Golden Rule in fund-raising emphasizes that securing a warm-list is essential
to long-term viability. While we cannot test this Golden Rule directly, to our best
knowledge little formal evidence exists concerning whether, and to what extent, previous
donors remain committed to the cause. Our data set is sufficiently rich to examine these
issues by matching our new field experimental data with the data contained in Landry et
al. (2006). A first result emerges:
Result 1: Warm-list households are more likely to give and provide larger
average contributions per contact.

18

Preliminary evidence for this result can be found in column 1 (second and third panels) of
Table 2, which summarizes the contribution decisions of warm and cold list households.
Table 2 indicates, for example, that our solicitors had a chance to speak with 40 warm-list
households in the VCM treatment, of which 40 percent (16 of 40) contributed to the
Hazard Center. This figure far exceeds the 18.3 percent giving rate among cold list
agents. Furthermore, considering average contributions, a warm-list household in our
VCM treatment gave $4.75 whereas the average donation of a household that has never
given was $1.44. Figures 1 and 2 complement these insights by providing a graphical
depiction of differences across household type.

These figures highlight that both

participation rates and average contributions are higher among previous donors.
Using solicitor specific average earnings per treatment as the unit of observation,
we find that the $3.21 difference in average donations between warm and cold-list
households in the VCM is significant at the p < 0.05 level. When comparing differences
in participation rates, we find that the approximate 20 percentage point difference is also
statistically significant at the p < 0.05. To complement these unconditional statistical
insights, we estimate a series of linear regression models that explicitly control for
observable and unobservable differences across solicitors.

Specifically, following

Landry et al. (2006), we estimate a regression model of the amount contributed for each
household that answered the door (including zero contributions) on dummy variables for
our experimental treatments and other covariates:16
(5)

Lij = Z ij δ + X ij β + ε ij ,

16

Qualitative insights are similar if we use a Tobit specification or if we estimate a standard two-stage
selection equation with the yes-no contribution decision modeled in the first stage and the dollars
contributed in the second. We direct the reader to the AER website for these robustness tests.

19

where Lij is the contribution level of the jth household to the ith solicitor, Z is a vector of
treatment group status indicators, and X is a vector of other covariates – including
observable characteristics of potential donors and donor-specific controls for warm- and
cold-list households. To account for unobservable heterogeneities at the solicitor level,
we include solicitor fixed effects.
To gain insights into the factors that influence the decision of households to
contribute to the Hazard Center, we estimate a linear probability model of the
contribution decision of households that answered the door:
(6)

C ij = Z ij δ + X ij β + eij ,

where Cij equals unity if solicitor i received a contribution from household j, and equals
zero otherwise. We again include solicitor fixed effects.
These empirical estimates are contained in Model A of Tables 3 and 4. In terms
of average contribution decisions, Model A in Table 3 provides insights consistent with
our unconditional results: warm-list households contribute an average of $1.29 more to
the Hazard Center than a cold-list household, with this difference being significant at the
p < 0.05 level. Model A in Table 4 reports that this effect is partly driven by increased
participation: warm-list households are 13 percent more likely to contribute to the
Hazard Center than a household approached for the first time.
Exploring this result a level deeper, leads to a second result:
Result 2: Differences in contribution patterns between warm and cold list
households are only found in the VCM treatment—in the gift treatments previous
donors and cold-list households behave similarly.

Evidence for this result is contained in Model B in Tables 3 and 4, which permits the
warm-list effect to be heterogeneous across our gift and VCM treatments. For example,

20

empirical estimates in Table 3 for Model B suggest that a warm-list household in our
VCM treatment contributes $3.14 more than a counterpart cold-list household with this
difference significant at the p < 0.05 level. However, warm-list households in our gift
treatments behave no differently than a household approached for the first time in the gift
treatment: the $0.19 ($1.06) increase in contributions from warm-list households in our
small (large) gift treatments is not significant at any meaningful level.
Further, our data suggest that warm-list households contribute more in the VCM
than either gift treatment with the approximate $2.88 difference between the VCM and
small gift treatments significant at the p < 0.05 level.17 In contrast, cold-list counterparts
contribute more in both gift treatments than in the VCM with the $2.07 difference
between the large gift and VCM treatments significant at the p < 0.05 level.
Model B in Table 4 reports similar differences for participation rates.

For

example, warm-list households in our VCM (small gift) treatment are approximately 19
percent (14 percent) more likely to contribute to the Hazard Center than a cold-list
counterpart with both of these differences being statistically significant at the p < 0.05
level. Yet, there is no statistically significant difference in participation rates for warmand cold-list households in our large gift treatment nor is there a significant difference in
participation rates for warm-list households across our VCM and gift treatments. In
contrast, cold-list households are 14–17 percent more likely to contribute when
approached in a gift treatment with these differences significant at the p < 0.05 level.
17

The average contribution level of a warm-list household in the small gift (large gift) treatment is given by
the sum of the coefficients for the overall model constant, the indicator for a small gift (large gift)
treatment, and the indicator for a warm-list household in the small gift (large gift) treatment. The average
contribution level of a warm-list household in the VCM is simply the sum of the overall model constant
and the indicator for a warm-list household in the VCM treatment. For cold-list households, the marginal
effect of a small (large) gift is simply given by the coefficient on the indicator for a small (large) gift
treatment.

21

Combined, these insights form a third result:
Result 3: Cold-list households are influenced by the presence of a gift, whereas
previous donors are less influenced by gifts.

In sum, Results 2 and 3 suggest an important consideration for practitioners in the field
when designing capital campaigns. Prior donors do not require added incentives to
induce contributions; in fact, providing such incentives to warm-list households may
actually crowd-out contributions. Figure 3 complements this insight by showing the
current and prior donation amounts for warm-list households across our various
treatments.

The figure highlights an interesting pattern of behavior: households

approached in our VCM contribute more than in the initial fundraising drive whereas
those approached in a gift treatment contribute less than in the initial campaign.18
One interesting aspect of our data is that they suggest a potential conflict between
intrinsic and extrinsic motives for giving—particularly for small incentives (gifts). For
prior donors (perhaps intrinsically motivated individuals), there is a significant reduction
in average contribution levels when provided with a small donor gift (see Bruno S. Frey
and Felix Oberholzer-Gee, 1997; Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini, 2000). In contrast,
even small extrinsic incentives have a positive effect on those households who had never
given.
B. Long-Run Impacts of Mechanism Incentives

The above results provide insights into why people initially give to charities, and
what factors delineate warm and cold list solicitees. Yet, our data permit us to explore

18

One aspect of our setting that deserves further investigation is how the presence of gifts is related to
perceived charity overhead, and how the gift exacerbates or attenuates our treatment effect differences
across warm and cold list agents. Little is known about these questions, but the evidence is mixed
concerning the relationship between overhead ratios and giving rates (see, e.g., Woods Bowman, 2006, and
the work of Richard Steinberg). This represents an interesting area of future research.

22

deeper into specific variables that might influence why previous donors remain
committed to the cause. A key insight in John Morgan (2000), Morgan and Martin
Sefton (2000), and Landry et al. (2006) is the efficacy of lotteries as an instrument to
raise funds for the provision of public goods. For example, Landry et al. (2006) find that
charitable lotteries induce higher participation rates and greater average contribution
levels than those observed in VCM treatments. Conceptually, charitable lotteries can
induce a greater level of giving for at least two reasons: (i) the announcement of lottery
prizes can signal the credibility of the charity via the signaling theories discussed above
and/or (ii) the provision of lottery prizes change monetary incentives and may induce
higher contribution rates. As these effects work through different channels in our model,
the effect of removing lottery incentives on the marginal donor is ex ante ambiguous.
For instance, if the signaling story is mainly responsible for the increased
participation rates observed in Landry et al. (2006), then the marginal donor will continue
to give at rates higher than counterparts initially attracted by the VCM—provided that
prior quality signals carry through to future campaigns. Alternatively, if the marginal
donors were initially attracted by the lure of the lottery prize itself, or if prior quality
signals are mitigated in future campaigns, then we would expect lower relative giving
rates amongst these donor types upon removal of the lottery incentive. Such an empirical
test is quite demanding of the data given that our fund-raising drives were separated by
one and one-half years. Nevertheless, to provide a test of these competing explanations,
we return to equations (5) and (6) and augment the models to yield a first result:
Result 4: Donors initially attracted by mechanisms that can signal charitable
quality are weakly more loyal to the cause than donors attracted by a VCM.

23

Empirical evidence for this result is contained in Model C in Tables 3 and 4 and the
difference-in-differences estimates presented in Table 5. Results in Tables 3 and 4
suggest that even though the previous lottery treatment attracted considerably more
donors than the VCM attracted, these donor types remain weakly more loyal to the cause:
warm-list households that contributed in a prior lottery (VCM) treatment give average
gifts that are approximately $1.57 ($0.65) greater than those observed at households
approached for the first time.19
Further, in Table 4 we find that the probability of eliciting a contribution from a
donor initially attracted by the lottery is 17 percent greater than a household approached
for the first time, a difference that is more than three times larger than the 5 percent effect
observed for those initially attracted by the VCM. Yet, neither this twelve percent
difference in participation rates nor the $0.92 difference in average contributions across
donor types is statistically significant at conventional levels (however, the difference
nearly reaches the p < 0.10 level of significance in Table 4). Importantly, for our
purposes, results in Tables 3 and 4 reveal that there is little evidence suggesting that
removing the lottery incentives has a negative impact on donor behavior.
A stronger test of whether lotteries signal charitable quality is to compare
individual changes in donation levels for households originally approached in a VCM
with those for households originally attracted by a lottery. In this spirit, we provide
Table 5 which extends our analysis to consider the manner in which the donor was
acquired.

To construct the numbers in Table 5 we first compute the average

19

Similar results emerge if we allow the lottery effect to differ for households from single- and multipleprize treatments—both participation rates and average donations are greater than those for households from
a prior VCM. Given this result, it is important to note that there were no discernable differences in either
participation rates or average contributions across lottery treatments in Landry et al. (2006).

24

contributions in both the current and prior fund-raising efforts for two household types:
(i) those who gave initially in a VCM and (ii) those who gave initially in a lottery
treatment. We then compare the difference in these averages along with the differencein-differences.

Figures in Table 5 can be read as follows:

households originally

approached in a lottery (VCM) treatment give $0.05 less ($2.00 less) on average in the
current fund-raiser.

The $1.95 difference-in-differences estimate is statistically

significant at the p < 0.10 level.
Together, these two insights combined with the lottery results in Landry et al.
(2006) highlight the significant benefits from lotteries. For practitioners in the field,
Result 4 is important since it provides support for a “double-dividend” when one uses
charitable lotteries. The increased participation rates induced via charitable lotteries
provides not only current benefits but also a larger warm-list that leads to greater
contributions in future fund-raising drives.
C. Long-Run Impacts of Non-Mechanism Incentives

Having examined the impact of altering institutional factors on donor behavior,
we now explore the effect of changing non-mechanism effects, such as solicitor
appearance. Landry et al. (2006) provide insights which reveal that attractive females
elicited greater rates of participation and average contributions than other solicitor types:
a one standard deviation increase in female solicitor physical attractiveness is similar to
that of the lottery incentive. As noted in our theoretical model, such factors effect
contribution decisions via the realization of the composite utility term. Ceteris paribus
we would thus expect such solicitor specific characteristics to have no lasting impact on
behavior in future capital campaigns. Our data are sufficiently rich to allow us to explore

25

this conjecture by systematically changing the physical characteristics—i.e., gender and
physical appearance—of the solicitor approaching a household. In doing so, we report a
next result:
Result 5: Donors initially attracted by non-mechanism factors do not remain
loyal to the charitable cause.

To provide evidence for this result, we classify solicitors into two types—
attractive white females and all other solicitors—and divide warm-list households into
three groups; (i) those visited by the same solicitor type on both occasions, (ii) those
visited in the original study by an attractive white female, and in the current study by
some other solicitor type, and (iii) those visited in the current study by an attractive white
female, and in the original study by some other solicitor type. Under this classification,
households in group (ii) represent those for which we removed an important noninstitutional incentive and those in group (iii) represent those for which we have
introduced a previously non-existent incentive—white female beauty.
Figure 4 illustrates the effect of changing beauty effects by summarizing average
contributions in the current and prior fund-raising drives for warm-list households visited
by two different solicitor types. The figure highlights an interesting pattern of behavior:
removing the non-institutional beauty incentive leads to reduction in average contribution
levels whereas introducing a non-institutional incentive generates an increase in average
contributions.

Pooled over all treatments, when we remove a pre-existing beauty

incentive, households contribute approximately 27.6 percent less ($3.30 versus $4.21)
than they did in the initial fund-raising drive. In contrast, when we introduce new beauty
incentives, average contributions increase by approximately 36.2 percent ($4.85 versus

26

$3.56).

As noted in Table 5, however, the $2.20 difference-in-differences is not

statistically significant at any meaningful level.20
Combined with insights garnered in Result 4, these data suggest a fundamental
difference in the efficacy of institutional versus non-institutional factors: while both
factors lead to increased participation rates and average donations in the short-run, only
institutional factors influence contribution decisions in future fund-raising drives. Hence
the manner in which previous donors are acquired is an important determinant of
behavior in future campaigns.

Consistent with the model, donors who are initially

attracted by mechanisms that potentially signal charitable quality—i.e., charitable
lotteries or the announcement of seed money—are more likely to remain loyal than those
enticed by non-mechanism factors that operate via warm-glow (or the realization of our
composite utility term).
D. Mail Solicitation

Comparing empirical results across the door-to-door and the mail solicitations
allows us to provide a first, albeit rough, test of the importance of changing approaches
within fund-raising drives and evaluating whether our findings translate across different
appeal modes. Yet, we should take great care when interpreting these results both
because of the small number of donators in the mail solicitation and the fact that many
important variables change when moving from the door-to-door drive to the mail
solicitation (e.g., the gift is present in the door-to-door conditional gift treatment, but not

20

As noted in Table 5, similar insights emerge if we expand the analysis to consider changes in female
beauty rather than restricting the sample to Caucasian females only. Consonant with results from Landry et
al. (2006) such differences are less pronounced because the influence of beauty for minorities is less
pronounced than for their Caucasian counterparts.

27

in the mail campaign). In the end, we view the data patterns presented in this section as
merely suggestive, and representing fertile areas for future research.
Table 6 presents summary statistics from our mail solicitation field experiment,
which includes information on the success of the various treatments across all households
pooled and the subset of warm-list households. Table 6 indicates, for example, that we
sent 1363 letters in the VCM treatment and received donations from two (or 0.15 percent)
of these households.21 In total, we raised $560 (or approximately $0.11 per solicitation)
for the Hazard Center: $125 in the VCM treatment, $240 in the small gift treatment, and
$195 in the large gift treatment.
A striking feature of Table 6 is the substantial reduction in response rates and
corresponding increase in conditional contribution levels relative to our door-to-door
campaign. For example, in our VCM treatment only 0.15 percent of the 1363 households
who received a letter made a contribution to the Hazard Center. In contrast, 21.3 percent
of the 286 households contacted (and 6.94 percent of the 878 households approached) in
a VCM in the door-to-door component of the experiment elected to donate to the Hazard
Center. Examining conditional contributions, we observe the direct opposite: households
in the mail study contributed nearly seven-fold more ($62.50 versus $8.92) than those
approached door-to-door.
Combined, these data are in line with recent results from laboratory experiments,
which suggest the important influence of the nature and extent of scrutiny on individual
behavior.

In the door-to-door drive, actions are directly observed by an expectant

outsider—perhaps leading to increased participation amongst marginal agents for whom

21

We restrict the sample to only those 4914 households that received a personalized greeting when
analyzing the data.

28

feelings of guilt (or the realization of composite utility) are enhanced during face to face
interaction. In contrast, our mail solicitations provide individuals “moral wiggle room,”
as contribution decisions are made privately and are not directly observed by an
expecting outsider. This makes it easier for the marginal agent to opt out of giving.
Thus, we observe lower overall participation rates and higher conditional contribution
levels in our mail study. In this regard, our results are consistent with recent laboratory
evidence suggesting the importance of context on social preferences (see, e.g., Jason
Dana et al., 2005; Edward Lazear et al., 2006).22
Having used a comparison of mail and door-to-door solicitations to highlight the
importance of social pressures on donor behavior, we now examine whether insights
regarding the loyalty of previous donors translates across appeal modes. In this spirit,
consider the third and fourth panels of Table 6 which summarize contribution decisions
in our mail solicitation by household type—warm or cold list. In total, we mailed
personalized letters to 399 warm-list households and received contributions from six (or
approximately 1.5 percent) of these individuals for an average donation of approximately
$0.83 per solicitation.

In contrast, only 0.13 percent (6 of 4515) of the cold list

households receiving a letter from the Hazard Center contributed in our mail campaign
and the average gift amongst these households was $0.05 per letter. While both of these
differences are significant at the p < 0.05 level, the small number of donors across both
household types precludes strong inference.23

22

Of course, the door-to-door approach might also lower transactions costs and provide solicitees with a
clearer “channel” to give, both of which would lead to a similar data pattern.
23
Interestingly, every warm-list household that contributes in the mail campaign was originally approached
in a charitable lottery. This suggests that, as in the door-to-door campaign, agents initially attracted via
mechanisms that signal charitable quality are more likely to contribute and provide larger average gifts in
future fund-raising drives.

29

IV. Concluding Remarks
Economists have only recently begun to explore the basics of charitable giving.
Fundamental insights pertaining to why people give to certain causes, why they remain
loyal, and why they compose their gifts in the temporal profiles observed remain beyond
most theoretical models.

This study seeks to make a modest advance by linking

charitable contributions across separate field experiments over time. In doing so, we are
able to explore the long-run dynamics of charitable fund-raising apart from the short-run
substitution effects observed in previous fund-raising field experiments.
Empirical results emphasize not only the value of securing a warm list but also the
critical importance of how fund-raisers secure initial contributions. Donors initially
attracted via economic mechanisms are more loyal to the cause than those attracted via
non-mechanism factors, such as solicitor physical attractiveness. Yet such loyalty is
mitigated when prior donors are provided extrinsic incentives, such as a token gift.
Together, these results begin to shed light on the question posed in the title of this study,
of which we can supply a definitive “it depends.” Our results suggest that a charity
prefers a donor in hand to two in the bush when (i) they do not have access to donor gifts,
(ii) the donor was initially attracted via an economic mechanism, and (iii) the approach
minimizes variation in the non-institutional factors that influence composite (warm-glow)
utility. Conversely, a charity prefers two donors in the bush when (i) they have access to
donor gifts, (ii) the donor was initially attracted via a mechanism that runs through the
composite utility term, and (iii) the approach introduces large changes in the noninstitutional factors underlying composite utility.

30

From a methodological viewpoint, our study showcases the usefulness of moving
beyond an experimental design that focuses on short run substitution effects. While the
literature has learned a great deal from that approach, a complementary framework that
explores both short-run and long-run treatment effects can potentially provide a deeper
understanding of many economic issues that our theoretical models are built to describe.

31

References

Andreoni, James. 1989. “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy 97(6): 1147-1458.
—. 1990. “Impure Altruism, and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
Giving,” The Economic Journal, 100(401): 464-477.
—. 1998. “Toward a Theory of Charitable Fundraising,” Journal of Political Economy,
106(6): 1186-1213.
—. 2006. “Philanthropy,” In Handbook of Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism, eds. S-C.
Kolm and J. Mercier Ythier, 1201-1269, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Bowman, Woods. 2006. “Should Donors care About Overhead Costs? Do They Care?
Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 2006, 35(2): 288-310.

Biddle, Jeff, and Daniel Hamermesh. 1998. “Beauty, Productivity, and Discrimination:
Lawyers’ Looks and Lucre,” Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1): 172-201.
Chen, Yan, Xin Li and Jeffrey K. Mackie-Mason.

2006. “Online Fundraising

Mechanisms: A Field Experiment,” Contributions to Economic Analysis and
Policy, 5 (2). http://www.bepress.com/bejeap/contributions/vol5/iss2/art4.

Clotfelter, Charles T. 1985. Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Dana, Jason, Roberto A. Weber, and Jason Xi Kuang. 2005. “Exploiting moral wiggle
room: Experiments demonstrating an illusory preference for fairness,” Working
paper, Carnegie Mellon University.
De Alessi, Louis. 1975. “Toward an Analysis of Post Disaster Cooperation,” American
Economic Review, 65(1): 127-138.

32

Douty, Christopher. 1972.

“Disasters and Charity: Some Aspects of Cooperative

Economic Behavior,” American Economic Review, 62(4): 580-590.
Falk, Armin. 2007. “Gift Exchange in the Field,” Econometrica, 75(5): 1501-1511.
Frey, Bruno S. and Felix Oberholzer-Gee. 1997. “The Cost of Price Incentives: An
Empirical Analysis of Motivation Crowding Out,” American Economic Review,
87(4): 746-755.
Gneezy, Uri and John A. List.

2006.

“Gift Exchange in Experimental Markets,”

Econometrica, 74(5): 1365-1384.

Gneezy, Uri and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. “Pay Enough or Don't Pay At All.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 115(3): 791-810.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1987. Economic Behaviour in Adversity. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Karlan, Dean and John A. List.

2007.

“Does Price Matter in Charitable Giving?

Evidence from a Large-Scale Natural Field Experiment,” American Economic
Review, 97(5): 1774-1793.

Landry, Craig, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael Price, and Nicholas G. Rupp. 2006.
“Toward an Understanding of the Economics of Charity: Evidence from a Field
Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 747-782.
Lange, Andreas, John A. List, and Michael Price. 2007. “Using Lotteries to Finance
Public Goods: Theory and Experimental Evidence,” International Economic
Review, 48(3): 901-927.

Lazear, Edward, Ulrike Malmendier, and Roberto Weber. 2006. “Sorting in Experiments
with Application to Social Preferences,” NBER Working Paper No. 12041.

33

Levitt, Steven D. and John A. List. 2007. “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring
Social Preferences Reveal About the Real World?,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 21(2): 153-174.

List, John A. and David Lucking-Reiley. 2002. “Effects of Seed Money and Refunds on
Charitable Giving: Experimental Evidence from a University Capital Campaign,”
Journal of Political Economy, 110(1): 215-233.

Meier, Stephan. 2007. “Do Subsidies Increase Charitable Giving in the Long-Run?
Matching Donations in a Field Experiment,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 5(6): 1203-1222.

Morgan, John. 2000. “Financing Public Goods by Means of Lotteries,” Review of
Economic Studies, 67(4): 761-784.

Morgan, John and Martin Sefton.

2000.

“Funding Public Goods with Lotteries:

Experimental Evidence,” Review of Economic Studies, 67(4): 785-810.
Peloza, John and Peirs Steel. 2005. “The Price Elasticities of Charitable Contributions:
A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 24(2): 260-272.
Randolph, William. 1995. “Dynamic Income, Progressive Taxes, and the Timing of
Charitable Contributions,” Journal of Political Economy, 103(4): 709-738.
Shang, Jen and Rachel Croson. 2007. “Field Experiments in Charitable Contribution:
The Impact of Social Influence on the Voluntary Provision of Public Goods,”
University of Texas at Dallas, Center for Behavioral and Experimental Economic
Science Working Paper 07-08.
Vesterlund, Lise. 2003. “The Informational Value of Sequential Fundraising,” Journal
of Public Economics, 87(3-4): 627-657.

34

Table 1: Experimental Design – Door to Door Solicitation

Session 1
April 22nd
Session 2
April 29th
Session 3
May 3rd – 4th

Voluntary
Contributions
Mechanism
6 Solicitors
168 Visit
69 Home
3 Solicitors
162 Visit
55 Home
4 Solicitors
181 Visit
71 Home

Session 4
May 6th
Session 5
June 7th
Session 6
June 10th
Session 7
June 15th
Session 8
June 17th
Session 9
June 22nd
Session 10
June 24th

3 Solicitors
66 Visit
24 Home
3 Solicitors
244 Visit
52 Home
2 Solicitors
57 Visit
15 Home

Small Gift

Large Gift

7 Solicitors
201 Visit
90 Home
5 Solicitors
239 Visit
78 Home

4 Solicitors
190 Visit
77 Home

3 Solicitors
198 Visit
62 Home
3 Solicitors
92 Visit
28 Home
2 Solicitors*
25 Visit
8 Home
5 Solicitors
147 Visit
43 Home
4 Solicitors
143 Visit
35 Home
1 Solicitor
18 Visit
8 Home
2 Solicitors
85 Visit
31 Home

3 Solicitors
171 Visit
49 Home
3 Solicitors
74 Visits
40 Home
8 Solicitors
446 Visit
128 Home
2 Solicitors
45 Visit
18 Home
3 Solicitors
86 Visit
22 Home
2 Solicitors
43 Visit
18 Home
2 Solicitors
87 Visit
18 Home

Note: Each cell represents one unique session in which we gathered data using one of the three treatments.
For example, row 1, column 1, denotes that session one of the VCM treatment employed six solicitors that
approached a total of 168 houses, of which 69 answered the door.
* In this treatment the solicitors only worked 2 hours before quitting due to illness.

35

Table 2: Summary Statistics – Door-to-Door Solicitations
Voluntary
Contributions
Mechanism

Small Gift

Large Gift

Contribution Decisions
All Data Pooled
Households (HH’s) Approached
Total HH’s Home
% of HH’s Donating
Average Donation
Avg. Conditional Donation

878
286
21.3%
$1.90
$8.92

1148
383
27.4%
$1.82
$6.65

1142
370
30%
$3.68
$12.26

Warm List Only
HH’s Approached
Total HH’s Home
% of HH’s Donating
Average Donation
Avg. Conditional Donation
Avg. Previous Donation
% from Previous VCM
% from Previous Lottery

74
40
40%
$4.75
$11.88
$4.19
32.5%
67.5%

98
60
40%
$1.65
$4.13
$3.28
16.7%
83.3%

102
51
35.3%
$4.37
$12.38
$4.73
41.2%
58.8%

HH’s Approached
Total HH’s Home
% of HH’s Donating
Average Donation
Avg. Conditional Donation

804
246
18.3%
$1.44
$7.87

1050
323
25.1%
$1.86
$7.40

1030
319
29.2%
$3.56
$12.23

Solicitor Characteristics
Total Number of Solicitors
% of White Male Solicitors
Mean Beauty Rating
% of White Female Solicitors
Mean Beauty Rating
% of Minority Male Solicitors
Mean Beauty Rating
% of Minority Female Solicitors
Mean Beauty Rating

19
10.5%
0.01
42.1%
0.09
21.1%
0.03
26.3%
0.005

24
16.7%
0.006
33.3%
0.18
25%
-0.08
25%
-0.001

16
12.5%
0.02
37.5%
0.07
25%
-0.03
25%
-0.003

Household Characteristics
% of White Males
% of White Females
% of Minority Males
% of Minority Females
Estimated Average Age

45.5%
51.0%
1.0%
2.5%
44.13

42.5%
45.6%
6.9%
5.0%
44.25

39.2%
48.1%
6.2%
6.5%
41.95

Cold List Only

Note: Figures in the table represent summary statistics across the different treatments.

36

Table 3: Average Donation per Household (HH) – Fixed Effects Regression Models

Baseline – Cold List HH in VCM
Indicator for a Small Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Large Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List Household

Model A

Model B

Model C

$’s Given
1.83**
(0.45)
-0.41
(0.61)
1.79**
(0.64)
1.29**
(0.59)

$’s Given
1.56**
(0.47)
0.06
(0.66)
2.07**
(0.68)

$’s Given
1.84**
(0.45)
-0.44
(0.61)
1.80**
(0.64)

Indicator for a Warm List HH in the
VCM
Indicator for a Warm List HH in a
Small Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List HH in a
Large Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List HH from a
Prior VCM
Indicator for a Warm List HH from a
Prior Lottery
Solicitor Fixed Effects
Observations
R-Squared

3.14**
(1.13)
0.19
(0.95)
1.06
(1.00)
0.65
(1.02)
1.57**
(0.69)
Yes - 32

Yes - 32

Yes – 32

1039
0.02

1039
0.03

1039
0.02

** Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.05 level
Note: Cell entries provide parameter estimates for a fixed effects linear regression model of contribution
levels (including the zeroes) for our experiment. Cell entries can be read as follows – average contribution
levels in our small gift treatments are approximately $0.41 less than those in our baseline VCM treatment.

37

Table 4: Probability of Contributing – Fixed Effects Regression Model

Baseline – Cold List HH in VCM
Indicator for a Small Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Large Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List Household

Model A

Model B

Model C

Pr (Give)
0.15**
(0.03)
0.13**
(0.04)
0.15**
(0.04)
0.13**
(0.04)

Pr (Give)
0.14**
(0.03)
0.14**
(0.04)
0.17**
(0.04)

Pr (Give)
0.15**
(0.03)
0.13**
(0.04)
0.15**
(0.04)

Indicator for a Warm List HH in the
VCM
Indicator for a Warm List HH in a
Small Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List HH in a
Large Gift Treatment
Indicator for a Warm List HH from a
Prior VCM
Indicator for a Warm List HH from a
Prior Lottery
Solicitor Fixed Effects
Observations
R-Squared

0.19**
(0.07)
0.14**
(0.06)
0.07
(0.06)
0.05
(0.07)
0.17**
(0.04)
Yes - 32

Yes - 32

Yes – 32

1039
0.02

1039
0.02

1039
0.02

** Denotes statistical significance at the p < 0.05 level
Note: Cell entries provide parameter estimates for a fixed effects model estimating the dichotomous
decision of whether or not a household made a contribution to the Hazards Center. Cell entries can be read
as follows – agents in a small gift treatment are 13 percent more likely on average to contribute to the
Hazards Center than in the VCM.

38

Table 5: Changing Incentives in the Long-Run: Difference in Differences Estimates
Donation
3.47
(0.70)
3.20
(1.00)

Donation Prior
3.52
(0.37)
5.20
(0.74)

Difference
-0.05
(0.65)
-2.00
(1.28)
1.95*
(1.31)

Remove WF Beauty
N = 33
Add WF Beauty
N = 27
Diff-in-Diff

3.30
(1.08)
4.85
(1.91)

4.21
(0.65)
3.56
(0.49)

-0.91
(1.22)
1.29
(1.96)
2.20
(2.24)

Remove Fem Beauty
N = 78
Add Fem Beauty
N = 38
Diff-in-Diff

3.31
(0.75)
4.39
(1.49)

3.49
(0.38)
4.36
(0.63)

-0.19
(0.82)
0.03
(1.48)
0.22
(1.56)

Prior Lottery
N = 107
Prior VCM
N = 44
Diff-in-Diff

* Denotes statistical significance at p < 0.10 level
Note: Cell entries provide average contribution levels for current and prior donation levels for warm-list
households in our data with standard errors in parentheses. The final column provides the difference in
contributions across the two campaigns including the associated difference-in-differences estimate.

39

Table 6: Summary Statistics – Mail Solicitation
VCM Treatment

Small Gift
Treatment

Large Gift
Treatment

1837

3783

943

2

6

4

% of HH’s Donating

0.11%

0.15%

0.42%

Average Donation

$0.07

$0.06

$0.21

Avg. Conditional Donation
All Addresses with Names
Letters Mailed

$62.50

$40.00

$48.75

1363

2831

720

2

6

4

% of HH’s Donating

0.15%

0.21%

0.56%

Average Donation

$0.09

$0.08

$0.27

Avg. Conditional Donation
Cold List with Names
Letters Mailed

$62.50

$40.00

$48.75

1256

2596

663

1

3

2

% of HH’s Donating

0.08%

0.152

0.30%

Average Donation

$0.08

$0.03

$0.08

$100.00

$25.67

$25.00

107

235

57

1

3

2

% of HH’s Donating

0.93%

1.3%

3.51%

Average Donation

$0.24

$0.68

$2.54

Avg. Conditional Donation

$25.00

$53.33

$72.50

All Data Pooled
Letters Mailed
Total Letters Returned

Total Letters Returned

Total Letters Returned

Avg. Conditional Donation
Warm List with Names
Letters Mailed
Total Letters Returned

Note: Figures in the table represent summary statistics across the various treatments.

40

Figure 1: Average Contribution per Household (in dollars)
5
4.75
4.5

Warm List

4.25

Cold List

4
3.75
3.5
3.25
3
2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
VCM

Large Gift

Small Gift

Figure 2: Percentage of Households Contributing
0.45
Warm List

0.425

Cold List

0.4
0.375
0.35
0.325
0.3
0.275
0.25
0.225
0.2
0.175
0.15
0.125
0.1
0.075
0.05
0.025
0
VCM

Large Gift

Small Gift

41

Figure 3: Current and Prior Donations - Warm List Households
5
4.75

Prior Donation

4.5
Current Donation
4.25
4
3.75
3.5
3.25
3
2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
VCM

Large Gift

Any Gift

Small Gift

Figure 4: Changing Female Beauty and Changing Average Contribution Levels
5.25
5
Current Donation
4.75

Prior Donation

4.5
4.25
4
3.75
3.5
3.25
3
2.75
2.5
2.25
2
1.75
1.5
1.25
1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
Add WF Beauty

Remove WF Beauty

42

Appendix A – Solicitation Scripts and Informational Brochure

- Hi, my name is _____________________. I am an ECU student visiting Pitt County
households today on behalf of the ECU Center for Natural Hazards Research.
- The Hazard Center provides support and coordination for research on natural
hazard risks, such as hurricanes, tornadoes, and flooding.
- Our newsletter describes recent research initiatives in the wake of Hurricane Katrina,
and the Center’s mission.
- The primary goal of the center is to reduce the loss of life and property damages
due to severe weather events.
- We are collecting contributions today on behalf of the ECU Hazards Center.
(Unconditional Small Gift Treatment – Added Sentence)
As a gift from the Hazard Center, please accept this handsome bookmark.
(Conditional Small Gift Treatment – Added Sentence)
If you make a donation today, we will give you this handsome bookmark.
(Unconditional Large Gift – Added Sentence)
As a gift from the Hazard Center, please accept this copy of the Bestselling book
FREAKONOMICS.
(Conditional Large Gift Treatment – Added Sentence)
If you make a donation today, we will give you a copy of the Bestselling book
FREAKONOMICS
- The Center is a non-profit organization and these funds will be used to conduct
research that benefits Pitt County and the surrounding area.
- Would you like to make a contribution today?

(If you receive a contribution, please write a receipt that includes their name and
contribution amount. If the resident asks, contributions are tax deductible).

- If you have questions regarding the Center or want additional information, visit the web
site listed in the newsletter.
Thank you.

43

ECU Center for Natural Hazards Research- Informational Brochure

44

45

Appendix B – Solicitation Letter Small Gift Treatment

46

