                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             PHILLIPS CURVE INFLATION FORECASTS

                                                James H. Stock
                                                Mark W. Watson

                                             Working Paper 14322
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w14322


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 2008




Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference, "Understanding Inflation and the Implications
for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Retrospective," June 9-11, 2008. We thank Ian Dew-Becker
for research assistance and Michelle Barnes of the Boston Fed for data assistance. This research was
funded in part by NSF grant SBR-0617811. Data and replication files are available at http://www.princeton.edu/~mwatson.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts
James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson
NBER Working Paper No. 14322
September 2008
JEL No. C53,E37

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper surveys the literature since 1993 on pseudo out-of-sample evaluation of inflation forecasts
in the United States and conducts an extensive empirical analysis that recapitulates and clarifies this
literature using a consistent data set and methodology. The literature review and empirical results
are gloomy and indicate that Phillips curve forecasts (broadly interpreted as forecasts using an activity
variable) are better than other multivariate forecasts, but their performance is episodic, sometimes
better than and sometimes worse than a good (not naïve) univariate benchmark. We provide some
preliminary evidence characterizing successful forecasting episodes.


James H. Stock
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center M4
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
James_Stock@harvard.edu

Mark W. Watson
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
mwatson@princeton.edu
                                     1. Introduction


       Inflation is hard to forecast. There is now considerable evidence that Phillips
curve forecasts do not improve upon good univariate benchmark models. Yet the
backward-looking Phillips curve remains a workhorse of many macroeconomic
forecasting models and continues to be the best way to understand policy discussions
about the rates of unemployment and inflation.
       After some preliminaries in Section 2, this paper begins in Section 3 by surveying
the past fifteen years of literature (since 1993) on inflation forecasting, focusing on
papers that conduct a pseudo out-of-sample forecast evaluation. 1 A milestone in this
literature is Atkeson and Ohanian (2001), who consider a number of standard Phillips
curve forecasting models and show that none improve upon a four-quarter random walk
benchmark over the period 1984-1999. As we observe in this survey, Atkeson and
Ohanian (2001) deserve the credit for forcefully making this point, however their finding
has precursors dating back at least to 1994. The literature after Atkeson-Ohanian (2001)
finds that their specific result depends rather delicately on the sample period and the
forecast horizon. If, however, one uses other univariate benchmarks (in particular, the
unobserved components-stochastic volatility model of Stock and Watson (2007)), the
broader point of Atkeson-Ohanian (2001) – that, at least since 1985, Phillips curve
forecasts do not outperform univariate benchmarks on average – has been confirmed by
several studies. The development of this literature is illustrated empirically using six
prototype inflation forecasting models: three univariate models, Gordon’s (1990)
“triangle” model, an autoregressive-distributed lag model using the unemployment rate,
and a model using the term spread.
       It is difficult to make comparisons across papers in this literature because the
papers use different sample periods, different inflation series, and different benchmark

1
 Experience has shown that good in-sample fit of a forecasting model does not
necessarily imply good out-of-sample performance. The method of pseudo out-of-
sample forecast evaluation aims to address this by simulating the experience a forecaster
would have using a forecasting model. In a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting exercise,
one simulates standing at a given date t and performing all model specification and
parameter estimation using only the data available at that date, then computing the h-
period ahead forecast for date t+h; this is repeated for all dates in the forecast period.


                                              1
models, and the quantitative results in the literature are curiously dependent upon these
details. In Section 4, we therefore undertake an empirical study that aims to unify and to
assess the results in the literature using quarterly U.S. data from 1953:I – 2008:I. This
study examines the pseudo out of sample performance of a total of 192 forecasting
procedures (157 distinct models and 35 combination forecasts), including the six
prototype models of Section 3, applied to forecasting five different inflation measures
(CPI-all, CPI-core, PCE-all, PCE-core, and the GDP deflator). This study confirms the
main qualitative results of the literature, although some specific results are found not to
be robust. Our study also suggests an interpretation of the strong dependence of
conclusions in this literature on the sample period. Specifically, one of our key findings
is that the performance of Phillips curve forecasts is episodic: there are times, such as the
late 1990s, when Phillips curve forecasts improved upon univariate forecasts, but there
are other times (such as the mid-1990s) when a forecaster would have been better off
using a univariate forecast. This provides a rather more nuanced interpretation of the
Atkeson-Ohanian (2001) conclusion concerning Phillips curve forecasts, one that is
consistent with the sensitivity of findings in the literature to the sample period.
       A question that is both difficult and important is what this episodic performance
implies for an inflation forecaster today. On average, over the past fifteen years, it has
been very hard to beat the best univariate model using any multivariate inflation
forecasting model (Phillips curve or otherwise). But suppose you are told that next
quarter the economy would plunge into recession, with the unemployment rate jumping
by two percentage points. Would you change your inflation forecast? The literature is
now full of formal statistical evidence suggesting that this information should be ignored,
but we suspect that an applied forecaster would nevertheless reduce their forecast of
inflation over the one- to two-year horizon. In the final section, we suggest some reasons
why this might be justified.




                                              2
               2. Notation, Terminology, Families of Models, and Data


        This section provides preliminary details concerning the empirical analysis and
gives the six prototype inflation forecasting models that will be used in Section 3 as a
guide to the literature. We begin by reviewing some forecasting terminology.


2.1 Terminology


        h-period inflation. Inflation forecasting tends to focus on the one-year or two-
year horizons. We denote h-period inflation by π th = h −1 ∑ i =0 π t −i , where πt is the
                                                                 h −1




quarterly rate of inflation at an annual rate, that is, πt = 400ln(Pt/Pt-1) (using the log
approximation), where Pt is the price index in quarter t. Four-quarter inflation at date t is
π t4 = 100ln(Pt/Pt-4), the log approximation to the percentage growth in prices over the
previous four quarters.
        Direct and iterated forecasts. There are two ways to make an h-period ahead
model-based forecast. A direct forecast has π th+ h as the dependent variable and t-dated
variables (variables observed at date t) as regressors, for example π th+ h could be regressed
on π th and the date-t unemployment rate (ut). At the end of the sample (date T), the
forecast of π Th + h is computed “directly” using the estimated forecasting equation. In
contrast, an iterated forecast is based on a one-step ahead model, for example πt+1 could
be regressed on πt, which is then iterated forward to compute future conditional means of
πs, s > T+1, given data through time t. If predictors other than past πt are used then this
requires constructing a subsidiary model for the predictor, or alternatively modeling πt
and the predictor jointly (for example as VAR) and iterating the joint model forward.
        Pseudo out-of-sample forecasts; rolling and recursive estimation. Pseudo out-
of-sample forecasting simulates the experience of a real-time forecaster by performing all
model specification and estimation using data through date t, making a h-step ahead
forecast for date t+h, then moving forward to date t+1 and repeating this through the




                                                3
sample. 2 Pseudo out-of-sample forecast evaluation captures model specification
uncertainty, model instability, and estimation uncertainty, in addition to the usual
uncertainty of future events.
        Model estimation can either be rolling (using a moving data window of fixed size)
or recursive (using an increasing data window, always starting with the same
observation). In this paper, rolling estimation is based on a window of 10 years, and
recursive estimation starts in 1953:I or, for series starting after 1953:I, the earliest
possible quarter.
        Root mean squared error and rolling RMSE. The root mean squared forecast
error (RMSE) of h-period ahead forecasts made over the period t1 to t2 is


                                1         t2

                                        ∑     (π th+ h − π th+ h|t )
                                                                     2
             RMSEt1 ,t2 =                                                                                  (1)
                            t2 − t1 + 1 t =t1



where π th+ h|t is the pseudo out-of-sample forecast of π th+ h made using data through date t.

This paper uses rolling estimates of the RMSE, which are computed using a weighted
centered 15-quarter window:


                                       t +7                                                t +7

                                       ∑         K ( s − t ) (π sh+ h − π sh+ h|s )       ∑ K( s − t ) ,
                                                                                      2
             rolling RMSE(t) =                                                                             (2)
                                      s = t −7                                            s = t −7




where K is the biweight kernel, K(x) = (15/16)(1 – x2)21(|x|≤1).


2.2 Prototypical Inflation Forecasting Models


        Single-equation inflation forecasting models can be grouped into four families:
(1) forecasts based solely on past inflation; (2) forecasts based on activity measures
(“Phillips curve forecasts”); (3) forecasts based on the forecasts of others; and (4)

2
  A strict interpretation of pseudo out-of-sample forecasting would entail the use of real-
time data (data of different vintages), but we interpret the term more generously to
include the use of final data.


                                                            4
forecasts based on other predictors. This section lays out these families and provides
prototype examples of each.
        (1) Forecasts based on past inflation. This family includes univariate time series
models such as ARIMA models and nonlinear or time-varying univariate models. We
also include in this family forecasts in which one or more inflation measure, other than
the series being forecasted, is used as a predictor; for example, past CPI core inflation or
past growth in wages could be used to forecast CPI-all inflation.
        Three of our prototype models come from this family and serve as forecasting
benchmarks. The first is a direct autoregressive (AR) forecast, computed using the direct
autoregressive model,


                        π th+ h – πt = μh + αh(L)Δπt + vth+ h      (AR(AIC))                   (3)


where μh is a constant, αh(L) is a lag polynomial written in terms of the lag operator L,
vth+ h is the h-step ahead error term (we will use v generically to denote regression error

terms), and the superscript h denotes the quantity for the h-step ahead direct regression.
In this prototype AR model, the lag length is determined by the Akaike Information
Criterion (AIC) over the range of 1 to 6 lags. This specification imposes a unit
autoregressive root.
        The second prototype model is the Atkeson-Ohanian (2001) random walk model,
in which the forecast of the four-quarter rate of inflation, π t4+4 , is the average rate of
inflation over the previous four quarters, π t4 (Atkeson and Ohanian only considered four-
quarter ahead forecasting). The Atkeson-Ohanian model thus is,


             π t4+ 4 = π t4 + vt4+ 4                       (AO).                               (4)


        The third prototype model is the Stock-Watson (2007) unobserved components-
stochastic volatility (UC-SV) model, in which πt has a stochastic trend τt, a serially
uncorrelated disturbance ηt, and stochastic volatility:




                                                     5
                      πt = τt + ηt,        where ηt = ση,tζη,t             (UC-SV)                     (5)
                      τt = τt–1 + εt, where εt = σε,tζε,t                                              (6)
                      ln σ η2,t = ln σ η2,t −1 + νη,t                                                  (7)

                      ln σ ε2,t = ln σ ε2,t −1 + νε,t                                                  (8)


where ζt = (ζη,t, ζε,t) is i.i.d. N(0, I2), νt = (νη,t, νε,t) is i.i.d. N(0, γI2), and ζt and νt are
independently distributed, and γ is a scalar parameter. Although ηt and εt are
conditionally normal given ση,t and σε,t, unconditionally they are random mixtures of
normals and can have heavy tails. This is a one-step ahead model and forecasts are
iterated.
          This model has only one parameter, γ, which controls the smoothness of the
stochastic volatility process. Throughout, we follow Stock and Watson (2007) and set γ
= 0.04.
          (2) Phillips curve forecasts. We interpret Phillips curve forecasts broadly to
include forecasts produced using an activity variable, such as the unemployment rate, an
output gap, or output growth, perhaps in conjunction with other variables, to forecast
inflation or the change in inflation. This family includes both backwards-looking Phillips
curves and new Keynesian Phillips curves, although the latter appear infrequently (and
only recently) in the inflation forecasting literature.
          We consider two prototype Phillips curve forecasts. The first is Gordon’s (1990)
“triangle model,” which in turn is essentially the model in Gordon (1982) with the minor
modifications. 3 In the triangle model, inflation depends on lagged inflation, the
unemployment rate ut, and supply shock variables zt:


              πt+1 = μ + αG(L)πt + β(L)ut+1 + γ(L)zt + vt+1.               (triangle)                  (9)


3
  The specification in Gordon (1990), which is used here, differs from Gordon (1982,
Table 5, column 2) in three ways: (a) Gordon (1982) uses a polynomial distributed lag
specification on lagged inflation, while Gordon (1990) uses the step function; (b) Gordon
(1982) includes additional intercept shifts in 1970Q3-1975Q4 and 1976Q1-1980Q4,
which are dropped in Gordon (1990); (c) Gordon (1982) uses Perry-weighted
unemployment whereas here we use overall unemployment.


                                                        6
The prototype triangle model used here is that in Gordon (1990), in which (9) is specified
using the contemporaneous value plus four lags of ut (total civilian unemployment rate
ages 16+, seasonally adjusted), contemporaneous value plus four lags of the rate of
inflation of food and energy prices (computed as the difference between the inflation
rates in the deflator for “all-items” personal consumption expenditure (PCE) and the
deflator for PCE less food and energy), lags one through four of the relative price of
imports (computed as the difference of the rates of inflation of the GDP deflator for
imports and the overall GDP deflator), two dummy variables for the Nixon wage-price
control period, and 24 lags of inflation, where αG(L) imposes the step-function restriction
that the coefficients are equal within the groups of lags 1-4, 5-8, …, 21-24, and also that
the coefficients sum to one (a unit root is imposed).
        Following Gordon (1998), multiperiod forecasts based on the triangle model (9)
are iterated using forecasted values of the predictors, where those forecasts are made
using subsidiary univariate AR(8) models of ut, food and energy inflation, and import
inflation.
        The second prototype Phillips curve model is direct version of (9) without the
supply shock variables, specifically, the autoregressive distributed (ADL) lag model in
which forecasts are computed using the direct regression,


             π th+ h − πt = μh + αh(L)Δπt + βh(L)ut + vth+ h ,   (ADL-u)                 (10)


where the degrees of αh(L) and βh(L) are chosen separately by AIC (maximum lag of 4),
and (like the triangle model) the ADL-u specification imposes a unit root in the
autoregressive dynamics for πt.
        (3) Forecasts based on forecasts of others. The third family computes inflation
forecasts from explicit or implicit inflationary expectations or forecasts of others. These
forecasts include regressions based on implicit expectations derived from asset prices,
such as forecasts extracted from the term structure of nominal Treasury debt (which by
the Fisher relation should embody future inflation expectations) and forecasts extracted
from the TIPS yield curve. This family also includes forecasts based on explicit forecasts


                                                    7
of others, such as median forecasts from surveys such as the Survey of Professional
Forecasters.
       Our prototypical example of forecasts in this family is a modification of the
Mishkin (1990) specification, in which the future change in inflation is predicted by a
matched-maturity spread between the interest rates on comparable government debt
instruments, with no lags of inflation. Here we consider direct four-quarter ahead
forecasts based on an ADL model using as a predictor the interest spread, spread1_90t,
between 1-year Treasury bonds and 90-day Treasury bills:


           π t4+4 − πt = μ + α(L)Δπt + β(L)spread1_90t + vt4+4 . (ADL-spread)             (11)


We emphasize that Mishkin’s (1990) regressions appropriately use term spread maturities
matched to the change in inflation being forecasted, which for (11) would be the change
in inflation over quarters t+2 to t+4, relative to t+1. (A matched maturity alternative to
spread1_90t in (11) would be the spread between 1-year Treasuries and the Fed Funds
rate, however those instruments have different risks.) Because the focus of this paper is
Phillips curve regressions we treat this regression simply as an example of this family and
provide references to recent studies of this family in Section 3.3.
       (4) Forecasts based on other predictors. The fourth family consists of inflation
forecasts that are based on variables other than activity or expectations variables. An
example is a 1970s-vintage monetarist model in which M1 growth is used to forecast
inflation. Forecasts in this fourth family perform sufficiently poorly relative to the three
other approaches that they play negligible roles both in the literature and in current
practice, so to avoid distraction we do not track a model in this family as a running
example.


2.3 Data and transformations


       The data set is quarterly for the United States from 1953:I – 2008:I. Monthly data
are converted to quarterly by computing the average value for the three months in the
quarter prior to any other transformations; for example quarterly CPI is the average of the


                                              8
three monthly CPI values, and quarterly CPI inflation is the percentage growth (at an
annual rate, using the log approximation) of this quarterly CPI.
        We examine forecasts of five measures of price inflation: the GDP deflator
(PGDP), the CPI for all items (CPI-all), CPI excluding food and energy (CPI-core), the
personal consumption expenditure deflator (PCE-all), and the personal consumption
expenditure deflator excluding food and energy (PCE-core).
        In addition to the six prototype models, in Section 4 we consider forecasts made
using a total of 15 predictors, most of which are activity variables (GDP, industrial
production, housing starts, the capacity utilization rate, etc.). The full list of variables
and transformations is given in Appendix A.
        Gap variables. Consistent with the pseudo out-of-sample forecasting philosophy,
the activity gaps used in the forecasting models in this paper are all one-sided. Following
Stock and Watson (2007), gaps are computed as the deviation of the series (for example,
log GDP) from a symmetric two-sided MA(80) approximation to the optimal lowpass
filter with pass band corresponding to periodicities of at least 60 quarters. The one-sided
gap at date t is computed by padding observations at dates s > t and s < 1 with iterated
forecasts and backcasts based on an AR(4), estimated recursively through date t.


            3. An Illustrated Survey of the Literature on Phillips Curve
                                  Forecasts, 1993-2008


        This section surveys the literature during the past fifteen years (since 1993) on
inflation forecasting in the United States. The criterion for inclusion in this survey is
providing empirical evidence on inflation forecasts (model- and/or survey-based) in the
form of a true or pseudo out-of-sample forecast evaluation exercise. Such an evaluation
can use rolling or recursive forecasting methods based on final data; it can use rolling or
recursive methods using real-time data; or it can use forecasts actually produced and
recorded in real time such as survey forecasts. Most of the papers discussed here focus
on forecasting at horizons of policy relevance, one or two years. Primary interest is in
forecasting overall consumer price inflation (PCE, CPI), core inflation, or economy-wide




                                               9
inflation (GDP deflator). There is little work on forecasting producer prices, although a
few papers consider producer prices as a predictor of headline inflation.
       This survey also discusses some papers in related literatures, however we do not
attempt a comprehensive review of those related literatures. One such literature concerns
the large amount of interesting work that has been done on inflation forecasting in
countries other than the U.S.; see Rünstler (2002), Hubrich (2005), Canova (2007), and
Diron and Mojon (2008) for recent contributions and references. Another closely related
literature concerns in-sample statistical characterizations of changes in the univariate and
multivariate inflation process in the U.S. (e.g. Taylor (2000), Brainard and Perry (2000),
Cogley and Sargent (2002, 2005), Levin and Piger (2004), and Pivetta and Reis (2007))
and outside the U.S. (e.g. the papers associated with the European Central Bank Inflation
Persistence Network (2007)). There is in turn a literature that asks whether these changes
in the inflation process can be attributed, in a quantitative (in-sample) way, to changes in
monetary policy; papers in this vein include Estrella and Fuhrer (2003), Roberts (2004),
Sims and Zha (2004) and Primiceri (2006). A major theme of this survey is time-
variation in the Phillips curve from a forecasting perspective, most notably at the end of
the disinflation of the early 1980s but more subtly throughout the post-1984 period. This
time-variation is taken up in a great many papers (for example estimation of a time-
varying NAIRU and time variation in the slope of the Phillips curve), however those
papers are only discussed in passing unless they have a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting
component.


3.1 The 1990s: Warning Signs


       The great inflation and disinflation of the 1970s and the 1980s was the formative
experience that dominated the minds and models of inflation forecasters through the
1980s and early 1990s, both because of the forecasting failures of 1960s-vintage (“non-
accelerationist”) Phillips curves and, more mechanically, because most of the variation in
the data comes from that period. The dominance of this episode is evident in Figure 1,
which plots the three measures of headline inflation (GDP, PCE-all, and CPI-all) from
1953Q1 to 2007Q4, along with the unemployment rate.



                                             10
       By the early 1980s, despite theoretical attacks on the backwards-looking Phillips
curve, Phillips curve forecasting specifications had coalesced around the Gordon (1982)
type triangle model (9) and variants. Figure 2 plots the rolling RMSE of the four-quarter
ahead pseudo out-of-sample forecast of CPI-all inflation, computed using (2), for the
recursively estimated AR(AIC) benchmark (3), the triangle model (9), and the ADL-u
model (10). As can be seen in Figure 2, these “accelerationist” Phillips curve
specifications (unlike their non-accelerationist ancestors) did in fact perform well during
the 1970s and 1980s.
       The greatest success of the triangle model and the ADL-u model was forecasting
the fall in inflation during the early 1980s subsequent to the spike in the unemployment
rate in 1980, but in fact the triangle and ADL-u models improved upon the AR
benchmark nearly uniformly from 1965 through 1990. The main exception occurred
around 1986, when there was a temporary decline in oil prices. Figure 3 shows the four-
quarter ahead pseudo out-of-sample forecasts produced by the AR(AIC), triangle, and
ADL-u models are shown respectively in panels A-C of Figure 3. As can be seen in
Figure 3, the triangle model initially failed to forecast the decline in inflation in 1986,
then incorrectly predicted to last longer than it did. Interestingly, unlike the AR(AIC)
and ADL-u models, triangle model forecasts did not over-extrapolate the decline in
inflation in the early 1980s.
       Stockton and Glassman (1987) documented the good performance of a triangle
model based on the Gordon (1982) specification of the triangle model over the 1977-
1984 period (they used the Council of Economic Advisors output gap instead of the
unemployment rate and a 16-quarter, not 24-quarter, polynomial distributed lag). They
reported a pseudo out-of-sample relative RMSE of the triangle model, relative to an
AR(4) model of the change in inflation, of 0.80 (eight quarter ahead iterated forecasts of
inflation measured by the Gross Domestic Business Product fixed-weight deflator) 4 .
Notably, Stockton and Glassman (1987) also emphasized that there seem to be few good
competitors to this model: a variety of monetarist models, including some that
incorporate expectations of money growth, all performed worse – in some cases, much

4
 Stockton and Glassman (1987), Table 6, ratio of PHL(16,FE) to ARIMA RMSE for
average of four intervals.


                                              11
worse – than the AR(4) benchmark. This said, the gains from using a Phillips curve
forecast over the second half of the 1980s were slimmer than during the 1970s and early
1980s.
         The earliest documentation of this relative deterioration of Phillips curve forecasts
of which we are aware is a little-known (2 Google Scholar cites) working paper by Jaditz
and Sayers (1994). They undertook a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting exercise of CPI-
all inflation using industrial production growth, the PPI, and the 90-day Treasury Bill rate
in a VAR and in a vector error correction model (VECM), with a forecast period of 1986-
1991 and a forecast horizon of one month. They reported a relative RMSE of .985 for the
VAR and a relative MSE in excess of one for the VECM, relative to an AR(1)
benchmark.
         Cecchetti (1995) also provided early evidence of instability in Phillips curve
forecasts, although that instability was apparent only using in-sample break tests and did
not come through in his pseudo out-of-sample forecasting evaluation because of his
forecast sample period. He considered forecasts of CPI-all at horizons of 1-4 years based
on 18 predictors, entered separately, for two forecast periods, 1977-1994 (10 year rolling
window) and 1987-1994 (5 year rolling window). Inspection of Figure 2 indicates
Phillips curve forecasts did well on average over both of these windows, but that the
1987-1994 period was atypical of the post-1984 experience in that it is dominated by the
relatively good performance of Phillips curve forecasts during the 1990 recession.
Despite the good performance of Phillips curve forecasts over this period, using in-
sample break tests Cecchetti (1990) found multiple breaks in the relation between
inflation and (separately) unemployment, the employment/population ratio, and the
capacity utilization rate. He also found that good in-sample fit is essentially unrelated to
future forecasting performance.
         Stock and Watson (1999) undertook a pseudo out-of-sample forecasting
assessment of CPI-all and PCE-all forecasts at the one-year horizon using (separately)
168 economic indicators, of which 85 were measures of real economic activity (industrial
production growth, unemployment, etc). They considered recursive forecasts computed
over two subsamples, 1970-1983 and 1984-1996. The split sample evidence indicated
major changes in the relative performance of predictors in the two subsamples, for



                                              12
example the RMSE of the forecast based on the unemployment rate, relative to the AR
benchmark, was .89 in the 1970-1983 sample but 1.01 in the 1984-1996 sample. Using
in-sample test statistics, they also found structural breaks in the inflation – unemployment
relation, although interestingly these breaks were more detectable in the coefficients on
lagged inflation in the Phillips curve specifications than on the activity variables.
       Cechetti, Chu and Steindel (2000) examined CPI inflation forecasts at the two-
year horizon using (separately) 19 predictors, including activity indicators. They
reported dynamic forecasts in which future values of the predictors are used to make
multi-period ahead forecasts (future employment is treated as known at the time the
forecast is made, so these are not psueduo out-of-sample). Notably, they found that over
this period the activity-based forecasts (unemployment, employment-population ratio,
and capacity utilization rate) typically underperformed the AR benchmark over this
period at the one-year horizon.
       A final paper documenting poor Phillips curve forecasting performance,
contemporaneous with Atkeson-Ohanian (2001), is Camba-Mendezand and Rodriguez-
Palenzuela (2003; originally published as ECB working paper April 2001). They showed
that inflation forecasts at the one-year horizon based on realizable (that is, backwards-
looking) output gap measures, for the forecast period 1980 – 1999, underperform the AR
benchmark.
       In short, during the 1990s a number of papers provided results that activity-based
inflation forecasts provided a smaller advantage relative to an AR benchmark since the
mid-1980s than they had before. Ambiguities remained, however, because this
conclusion seemed to depend on the sample period and specification, and in any event
one could find predictors which were exceptions in the sense that they appeared to
provide improvements in the later sample, even if their performance was lackluster in the
earlier sample.


3.2 Atkeson-Ohanian (2001)


       Atkeson and Ohanian (2001) (AO) resolved the ambiguities in this literature of
the 1990s by introducing a new, simple univariate benchmark: the forecast of inflation



                                             13
over the next four quarters is the value of four-quarter inflation today. AO showed that
this four-quarter random walk forecast improved substantially upon the AR benchmark
over 1984-1999. Figure 4 plots the moving RMSE of four-quarter ahead forecasts of
CPI-all inflation for three univariate forecasts: the AR(AIC) forecast (3), the AO forecast
(4), and the UC-SV forecast (5) - (8). Because the AO benchmark improved over the
1984-1999 period on the AR forecast, and because the AR forecast had more or less the
same performance as the unemployment-based Phillips curve on average over this period
(see Figure 2), it is not surprising that the AO forecast outperformed the Phillips curve
forecast over the 1984-1999 period. As AO dramatically showed, across 264
specifications (three inflation measures, CPI-all, CPI-core, and PCE-all, 2 predictors, the
unemployment rate and the CFNAI, and various lag specifications), the relative RMSEs
of a Phillips curve forecast to the AO benchmark ranged from 0.99 to 1.94: gains from
using a Phillips curve forecast were negligible at best, and some Phillips curve forecasts
went badly wrong. AO went one step further and demonstrated that, over the 1984-1999
period, Greenbook forecasts of inflation also underperformed their four-quarter random
walk forecast.
       As Figures 2 and 4 demonstrate, one important source of the problem with
Phillips curve forecasts was their poor performance in the second half of the 1990s, a
period of strong, but at the time unmeasured, productivity growth that held down
inflation. The apparent quiescence of inflation in the face of strong economic growth
was puzzling at the time (for example, see Lown and Rich (1997)).
       An initial response to the AO was to check whether their claims were accurate;
with a few caveats, by and large they were. Fisher, Liu, and Zhou (2002) used rolling
regressions with a 15-year window and showed that Phillips curve models outperformed
the AO benchmark in 1977-1984, and also showed that for some inflation measures and
some periods the Phillips curve forecasts outperform the AO benchmark post-1984 (for
example, Phillips curve forecasts improve upon AO forecasts of PCE-all over 1993-
2000). They also pointed out that Phillips curve forecasts based on the CFNAI achieve
60-70% accuracy in directional forecasting of the change of inflation, compared with
50% for the AO coin flip. Fisher, Liu, and Zhou (2002) suggested that Phillips curve




                                             14
forecasts do relatively poorly in periods of low inflation volatility and after a regime
shift.
         Stock and Watson (2003) extended the AO analysis to additional activity
predictors (as well as other predictors) and confirmed the dominance of the AO forecast
over 1985-1999 at the one-year horizon. Brave and Fisher (2004) extended the AO and
Fisher, Liu, and Zhou (2002) analyses by examining additional predictors and
combination forecasts. Their findings are broadly consistent with Fisher, Liu, and Zhou
(2002) in the sense that they found some individual and combination forecasts that
outperform AO over 1993-2000, although not over 1985-1992. Orphanides and van
Norden (2005) focused on Phillips curve forecasts using real-time gap measures, and they
concludeed that although ex-post gap Phillips curves fit well using in-sample statistics,
when real-time gaps and pseudo out-of-sample methods are used these too improve upon
the AR benchmark prior to 1983, but fail to do so over the 1984-2002 sample.
         There are three notable recent studies that confirm the basic AO finding and
extend it, with qualifications. First, Stock and Watson (2007) focused on univariate
models of inflation and pointed out that the good performance of the AO random walk
forecast, relative to other univariate models, is specific to the four-quarter horizon and (as
can be seen by comparing the AO and UC-SV rolling RMSEs in Figure 4) to the AO
sample period. At any point in time, the UC-SV model implies an IMA(1,1) model for
inflation, with time-varying coefficients. The forecast function of this IMA(1,1) closely
matches the implicit AO forecast function over the 1984-1999 sample, however the
models diverge over other subsamples. Moreover, the rolling IMA(1,1) is in turn well
approximated by a ARMA(1,1) because the estimated AR coefficient is nearly one. 5
Stock and Watson (2007) also reported some (limited) results for bivariate forecasts using
activity indicators (unemployment, one-sided gaps, and output growth) and confirmed the




5
  The UC-SV model imposes a unit root in inflation so is consistent with the Pivetta-Reis
(2007) evidence that the largest AR root in inflation has been essentially one throughout
the postwar sample. But the time-varying relative variances of the permanent and
transitory innovation allows for persistence to change over the course of the sample and
for spectral measures of persistence to decline over the sample, consistent with Cogley
and Sargent (2002, 2005).


                                             15
AO finding that these Phillips curve forecast fail to improve systematically on the AO
benchmark or the UC-SV benchmark.
       Second, Canova (2007) undertook a systematic evaluation of 4- and 8-quarter
ahead inflation forecasts for G7 countries using recursive forecasts over 1996-2000, using
a variety of activity variables (unemployment, employment, output gaps, GDP growth)
and other indicators (yield curve slope, money growth) as predictors. He found that, for
the U.S., bivariate direct regressions and trivariate VARs and BVARs did not improve
upon the univariate AO forecast. (Generally speaking, Canova (2007) also did not find
consistent improvements for multivariate models over univariate ones for the other G7
countries, and he reported evidence of instability of forecasts based on individual
predictors.) Canova (2007) also considered combination forecasts and forecasts
generated using a new Keynesian Phillips curve. Over the 1996-2000 sample, the
combination forecasts in the U.S. provided a small improvement over the AO forecast,
and the new Keynesian Phillips curve forecasts were never best and generally fared
poorly. In the case of the U.S., at least, these findings are not surprising in light of the
poor performance of Phillips curve forecasts during the low-inflation boom of the second
half of the 1990s.
       Third, Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007) conducted a thorough assessment of
forecasts of CPI, CPI-core, CPI ex housing, and PCE inflation, using ten variants of
Phillips curve forecasts, 15 variants of term structure forecasts, combination forecasts,
and ARMA(1,1) and AR(1)-regime switching univariate models in addition to AR and
AO benchmarks. They too confirmed the basic AO message that Phillips curve models
fail to improve upon univariate models over forecast periods 1985-2002 and 1995-2002,
and their results constitute a careful summary of the current state of knowledge of
inflation forecasting models (both Phillips curve and term structure) in the U.S. One
finding in their study is that combination forecasts do not systematically improve on
individual indicator forecasts, a result that is puzzling in light of the success reported
elsewhere of combination forecasts (we return to this puzzle below). Ang, Bekaert, and
Wei (2007) also considered survey forecasts, and their most striking result is that survey
forecasts (the Michigan, Livingston, and Survey of Professional Forecasters surveys)
perform very well: for the inflation measures that the survey respondents are asked to



                                              16
forecast, the survey forecasts nearly always beat the ARMA(1,1) benchmark, their best-
performing univariate model over the 1985-2002 period.6 Further study of rolling
regressions led them to suggest that the relatively good performance of the survey
forecasts might be due to the ability of professional forecasters to recognize structural
change more quickly than automated regression-based forecasts. 7
       An alternative forecast, so far unmentioned, is that inflation is constant. This
forecast works terribly over the full sample but Diron and Mojon (2008) found out that,
for PCE-core from 1995Q1-2007Q4, a forecast of a constant 2.0% inflation rate
outperforms AO and AR forecasts at the 8-quarter ahead horizon, although the AO
forecast is best at the 4-quarter horizon. They choose 2.0% as representative of an
implicit inflation target over this period, however because the U.S. does not have an
explicit ex-ante inflation target and this value was chosen retrospectively, this choice
does not constitute a psueduo out-of-sample forecast.
       All these papers – from Jaditz and Sayers (1994) through Ang, Bekaert, and Wei
(2007) – point to time variation in the underlying inflation process and in Phillips curve
forecasting relations. Most of this evidence is based on changes in relative RMSEs, in
some cases augmented by Diebold-Mariano (1995) or West (1996) tests using asymptotic
critical values. As a logical matter, the apparent statistical significance of the changes in
the relative RMSEs between sample periods could be a spurious consequence of using a
poor approximation to the sampling distribution of the relevant statistics. Accordingly,


6
  Koenig (2003, Table 3) presented in-sample evidence that real-time markups
(nonfinancial corporate GDP divided by nonfinancial corporate employee compensation),
in conjunction with the unemployment rate, significantly contribute to a forecast
combination regression for 4-quarter CPI inflation over 1983-2001, however he did not
present pseudo out-of-sample RMSEs. Two of Ang, Bekaert, and Wei’s (2007) models
(their PC9 and PC10) include the output gap and the labor income share, specifications
similar to the Koenig’s (2003), and the pseudo out-of-sample performance of these
models is poor: over the two Ang, Bekaert, and Wei’s (2007) subsamples and four
inflation measures, the RMSEs, relative to the ARMA(1,1) benchmark, range from 1.17
to 3.26. These results suggest that markups are not a solution to the poor performance of
Phillips curve forecasts over the post-85 samples.
7
  Cecchetti et. al. (2007, Section 7) provided in-sample evidence that survey inflation
forecasts are correlated with future trend inflation, measured using the Stock-Watson
(2007) UC-SV model. Thus a different explanation of why surveys perform well is that
survey inflation expectations anticipate movements in trend inflation.


                                             17
Clark and McCracken (2006) undertook a bootstrap evaluation of the relative RMSEs
produced using real-time output gap Phillips curves for forecasting the GDP deflator and
CPI-core. They reached the more cautious conclusion that much of the relatively poor
performance of forecasts using real-time gaps could simply be a statistical artifact that is
consistent with a stable Phillips curve, although they found evidence of instability in
coefficients on the output gap. One interpretation of the Clark-McCracken (2006)
finding is that, over the 1990-2003 period, there are only 14 nonoverlapping observations
on the four-quarter ahead forecast error, and estimates of ratios of variances with 14
observations inevitably have a great deal of sampling variability.


3.3 Attempts to Resuscitate Multivariate Inflation Forecasts, 1999 - 2007


       One response to the AO findings has been to redouble efforts to find reliable
multivariate forecasting models for inflation. Some of these efforts used statistical tools,
including dynamic factor models, other methods for using a large number of predictors,
time-varying parameter multivariate models, and nonlinear time series models. Other
efforts exploited restrictions arising from economics, in particular from no-arbitrage
models of the term structure. Unfortunately, these efforts have failed to produce
substantial and sustained improvements over the AO or UC-SV univariate benchmarks.
       Many-predictor forecasts I: dynamic factor models. The plethora of activity
indicators used in Philips curve forecasts indicates that there is no single, most natural
measure; in fact, these indicators can all be thought of as different ways to measure
underlying economic activity. This suggests modeling the activity variables jointly using
a dynamic factor model (Geweke (1977), Sargent-Sims (1977)), estimating the common
latent factor (underlying economic activity), and using that estimated factor as the
activity variable in Phillips curve forecasts. Accordingly, Stock and Watson (1999)
examined different activity measures as predictors of inflation, estimated (using principal
components, as justified by Stock and Watson (2002)) as the common factor among 85
monthly indicators of economic activity, and also as the first principal component of 165
series including the activity indicators plus other series. In addition to using information
in a very large number of series, Stock and Watson (2002) showed that principal



                                             18
components estimation of factors can be robust to certain types of instability in a dynamic
factor model. Stock and Watson’s (1999) empirical results indicated that these estimated
factors registered improvements over the AR benchmark and over single-indicator
Phillips curve specifications in both 1970-1983 and 1984-1996 subsamples.
       A version of the Stock-Watson (1999) common factor, computed as the principal
component of 85 monthly indicators of economic activity, has been published in real time
since January 2001 as the Chicago Fed National Activity Index (CFNAI) (Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, various). Hansen (2006) confirmed the main findings in Stock
and Watson (1999) about the predictive content of these estimated factors for inflation,
relative to a random walk forecast over a forecast period of 1960-2000.
       Recent studies, however, have raised questions about the marginal value of
Phillips curve forecasts based on estimated factors, such as the CFNAI, for the post-1985
data. As discussed above, Atkeson and Ohanian showed that the AO forecast
outperformed CFNAI-based Phillips curves over the 1984-1999 period; this is consistent
with Stock and Watson’s (1999) findings because they used an AR benchmark. Banerjee
and Marcellino (2006) also found that Phillips curve forecasts using estimated factors
perform relatively poorly for CPI-all inflation over a 1991-2001 forecast period. On the
other hand, for the longer sample of 1983-2007, Gavin and Kliesen (2008) found that
recursive factor forecasts improve upon both the direct AR(12) (monthly data) and AO
benchmarks (relative RMSEs are between .88 and .95). In a finding that is inconsistent
with AO and with Figure 4, Gavin and Kliesen (2008) also found that the AR(12) model
outperforms AO at the 12-month horizon for three of the four inflation series; presumably
this surprising result is either a consequence of including earlier and later data than AO or
indicates some subtle differences between using quarterly data (as in AO and in Figure 4)
and monthly data.
       Additional papers which use estimated factors to forecast inflation include
Watson (2003), Bernanke, Bovin, and Elias (2005), Boivin and Ng (2005, 2006),
D’Agostino and Giannone (2006), Giaccomini and White (2006). In an interesting meta-
analysis, Eichmeier and Ziegler (2006) considered a total of 46 studies of inflation and/or
output forecasts using estimated factors, including 19,819 relative RMSEs for inflation
forecasts in the U.S. and other countries. They concluded that factor model forecasts



                                             19
tend to outperform small model forecasts in general, that the factor inflation forecasts
generally improve over univariate benchmarks at all horizons, and that rolling forecasts
generally outperform recursive forecasts. One difficulty with interpreting the Eichmeier-
Ziegler (2006) findings, however, is that their unit of analysis is a reported relative
RMSE, but the denominators (benchmark models) differ across studies; in the U.S. in
particular, it matters whether the AR or AO benchmark is used because their relative
performance changes over time.
       Many-predictor forecasts II: Forecast combination, BMA, Bagging, and other
methods. Other statistical methods for using a large number of predictors are available
and have been tried for forecasting inflation. One approach is to use leading index
methods, in essence a model selection methodology. In the earliest high-dimensional
inflation forecasting exercise of which we are aware, Webb and Rowe (1995) constructed
a leading index of CPI-core inflation formed using 7 of 30 potential inflation predictors,
selected recursively by selecting indicators with a maximal correlation with one-year
ahead inflation over a 48 month window, thereby allowing for time variation. This
produced a leading index with time-varying composition that improved upon an AR
benchmark over the 1970-1994 period, however Webb and Rowe (1995) did not provide
sufficient information to assess the success of this index post-83.
       A second approach is to use forecast combination methods, in which forecasts
from multiple bivariate models (each using a different predictor, lag length, or
specification) are combined. Combination forecasts have a long history of success in
economic applications, see the review in Timmermann (2006), and are less susceptible to
structural breaks in individual forecasting regressions because they in effect average out
intercept shifts (Hendry and Clements (2002)). Papers that include combination forecasts
(pooled over models) include Stock and Watson (1999, 2003), Clark and McCracken
(2006), Canova (2007), Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007), and Inoue and Kilian (2008).
Although combination forecasts often improve upon the individual forecasts, on average
they do not substantially improve upon, and are often slightly worse than, factor-based
forecasts.
       A third approach is to apply model combination or model averaging tools, such as
Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA), bagging, and LASSO, developed in the statistics



                                              20
literature for prediction using large data sets. Wright (2003) applied BMA to forecasts of
CPI-all, CPI-core, PCE, and the GDP deflator, obtained from 30 predictors, and finds that
BMA tended to improve upon simple averaging. Wright’s (2003) relative RMSEs are
considerably less than one during the 1987-2003 sample, however this appears to be a
consequence of a poor denominator model (an AR(1) benchmark) rather than good
numerator models. Inoue and Kilian (2008) considered CPI-all forecasts with 30
predictors using bagging, LASSO, factor-based forecasts (first principal component),
along with BMA, pretest, shrinkage, and some other methods from the statistical
literature. They reported a relative RMSE for the single-factor forecast of .80, relative to
an AR(AIC) benchmark at the 12 month horizon over their 1983-2003 monthly sample.
This is a surprisingly low value in light of the AO and subsequent literature, but (like
Wright (2003)) this low relative RMSE appears to be driven by the use of the AR (instead
of AO or UC-SV) benchmark and by the sample period, which includes 1983. Inoue and
Kilian (2008) found negligible gains from using the large data set methods from the
statistics literature: the single-factor forecasts beat almost all the other methods they
examine, although in most cases the gains from the factor forecasts are slight (the relative
RMSEs, relative to the single-factor model, range from .97, for LASSO, to 1.14).
       A fourth approach is to model all series simultaneously using high-dimensional
VARs with strong parameter restrictions. Bańbura, Gianonne, and Reichlin (2008)
performed a pseudo out-of-sample experiment forecasting CPI-all inflation using
Bayesian VARs with 3 to more than 100 variables. Over the 1970-2003 sample, they
found substantial improvements of medium to large-dimensional VARs relative to very
low-dimensional VARs, but their results are hard to relate to the others in this literature
because they do not report univariate benchmarks and do not examine split samples.
       Eichmeier and Ziegler’s (2006) meta-analysis found that the alternative high-
dimensional methods discussed in this section slightly outperform factor-based forecasts
on average (here, averaging over both inflation and output forecasts for multiple
countries), however as mentioned above an important caveat is that the denominators in
Eichmeier-Ziegler’s (2006) relative RMSEs differ across the studies included in their
meta-analysis.




                                             21
       In summary, in some cases (some inflation series, some time periods, some
horizons) it appears to be possible to make gains using many predictor methods, either
factor estimates or other methods, however those gains are modest and not systematic and
do not substantially overturn the negative AO results.
       Nonlinear models. If the true time series model is nonlinear (that is, if the
conditional mean of inflation given the predictors is a nonlinear function of the
predictors) and if the predictors are persistent, then linear approximations to the
conditional mean function can exhibit time variation. Thus one approach to the apparent
time variation in the inflation-output relation is to consider nonlinear Phillips curves and
nonlinear univariate time series models. Papers that do so include Dupasquier and
Ricketts (1998), Moshiri and Cameron (2000), Tkacz (2000), Ascari and Marrocu (2003),
and Marcellino (2008) (this omits the large literature on nonlinear Phillips curves that
reports only in-sample measures of fit, not pseudo out-of-sample forecasts; see
Dupasquier and Ricketts (1998) for additional references).
       We read the conclusions of this literature as negative. Although this literature
detects some nonlinearities using in-sample statistics, the benefits of nonlinear models for
forecasting inflation appear to be negligible or negative. Marcellino (2008) examined
univariate rolling and recursive CPI-all forecasts (over 1980-2004 and 1984-2004) using
logistic smooth transition autoregressions and neural networks (a total of 28 nonlinear
models) and found little or no improvement from using nonlinear models. He also
documented that nonlinear models can produce outlier forecasts, presumably as a result
of overfitting. Ascari and Marrocu (2003) and, using Canadian data, Moshiri and
Cameron (2000) also provided negative conclusions.
       Structural term structure models. Until now, this survey has concentrated on
forecasts from the first two families of inflation forecasts (prices-only and Phillips curve
forecasts). One way to construct inflation forecasts in the third family – forecasts based
on forecasts of others – is to make inflation forecasts using the term structure of interest
rates as in (11). Starting with Barsky (1987), Mishkin (1990a, 1990b, 1991) and Jorion
and Mishkin (1991), there is a large literature that studies such forecasting regressions.
The findings of this literature, which is reviewed in Stock and Watson (2003), is
generally negative, that is, term spread forecasts do not improve over Phillips curve



                                             22
forecasts in the pre-1983 period, and they do not improve over a good univariate
benchmark in the post-1984 period.
        This poor performance of first-generation term spread forecasts is evident in
Figure 5, which plots the rolling RMSE of the pseudo out-of-sample forecast based on
the recursively estimated term spread model (11), along with the RMSEs of the AR(AIC)
and AO univariate benchmarks. Term spreads are typically one of the variables included
in the forecast comparison studies discussed above (Fisher, Liu, and Zhou (2002),
Canova (2007), and Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007)) and these recent studies also reach
the same negative conclusion about unrestricted term spread forecasting regressions,
either as the sole predictor or when used in addition to an activity indicator.
        Recent attempts to forecast inflation using term spreads have focused on
employing economic theory, in the form of no-arbitrage models of the term structure, to
improve upon the reduced-form regressions such as (11). Most of this literature uses
full-sample estimation and measures of fit; see Ang, Bekaert, and Wei (2007),
DeWachter and Lyrio (2006), and Berardi (2007) for references. The one paper of which
we are aware that produces pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of inflation is Ang, Bekaert,
and Wei (2007), who considered 4-quarter ahead forecasts of CPI-all, CPI-core, CPI-ex
housing, and PCE inflation using two no-arbitrage term structure models, one with
constant coefficients and one with regime switches. Neither model forecasted well, with
relative RMSEs (relative to the ARMA(1,1)) ranging from 1.05 to 1.59 for the four
inflation series and two forecast periods (1985-2002 and 1995-2002).
        We are not aware of any papers that evaluate the performance of inflation
forecasts backed out of the TIPS yield curve, and such a study would be of considerable
interest.
        Forecasting using the cross-section of prices. Another approach is to try to
exploit information in the cross section of inflation indexes (percentage growth of
sectoral or commodity group price indexes) for forecasting headline inflation. Hendry
and Hubrich (2007) used four high-level subaggregates to forecast CPI-all inflation.
They explored several approaches, including combining disaggregated univariate
forecasts and using factor models. They found that exploiting the disaggregated
information directly to forecast the aggregate improves modestly over an AR benchmark



                                             23
in their pseudo out-of-sample forecasts of CPI-all over 1970-1983 but negligibly over the
AO benchmark over 1984-2004 at the 12-month horizon (no single method for using the
subaggregates works best). If one uses heavily disaggregated inflation measures, then
some method must be used to control parameter proliferation, such as the methods used
in the many- predictor applications discussed above. In this vein, Hubrich (2005)
presented negative results concerning the aggregation of components forecasts for
forecasting the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) in Europe. Reis and
Watson (2007) estimated a dynamic factor using a large cross-section of inflation rates
but did not conduct any pseudo out-of-sample forecasting.
       Rethinking the notion of core inflation suggests different approaches to using the
inflation subaggregates. Building on the work of Bryan and Cecchetti (1994), Bryan,
Cecchetti and Wiggins (1997) suggested constructing core as a trimmed mean of the
cross-section of prices, where the trimming was chosen to provide the best (in-sample)
estimate of underlying trend inflation (measured variously as a 24- to 60-month centered
moving average). Smith (2004) investigated the pseudo out-of-sample forecasting
properties of trimmed mean and median measures of core inflation (forecast period 1990-
2000). Smith (2004) reported that the inflation forecasts based on weighted-median core
measures have relative RMSEs of .85 for CPI-all and .80 for PCE-all, relative to an
exponentially-declining AR benchmark (she does not consider the AO benchmark),
although oddly she found that the trimmed mean performed worse than the benchmark.


          4. A Quantitative Recapitulation: Changes in Univariate and
                    Phillips Curve Inflation Forecast Models


       This section undertakes a quantitative summary of the literature review in the
previous section by considering the pseudo out-of-sample performance of a range of
inflation forecasting models using a single consistent data set. The focus is on activity-
based inflation forecasting models, although some other predictors are considered. We
do not consider survey forecasts or inflation expectations implicit in the TIPS yield curve.
As Ang, Bekaert and Wei (2007) showed, median survey forecasts perform quite well




                                             24
and thus are useful for policy work; but our task is to understand how to improve upon
forecasting systems, not to delegate this work to others.


4.1 Forecasting Models


         Univariate models. The univariate models consist of the AR(AIC), AO, and UC-
SV models in Section 2.2, plus direct AR models with a fixed lag length of 4 lags
(AR(4)) and Bayes Information Criterion lag selection (AR(BIC)), iterated AR(AIC),
AR(BIC), and AR(4) models of Δπt, AR(24) models (imposing the Gordon (1990) step
function lag restriction and the unit root in πt), and a MA(1) model. AIC and BIC model
selection used a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 6 lags. Both rolling and recursively
estimated versions of these models are considered. In addition some fixed-parameter
models were considered: MA(1) models with fixed MA coefficients of 0.25 and 0.65
(these are taken from Stock and Watson (2007)), and the monthly MA model estimated
by Nelson and Schwert (1977), temporally aggregated to quarterly data (see Stock and
Watson (2007), equation (7)).
         Triangle and TV-NAIRU models. Four triangle models are considered:
specification (9), the results of which were examined in Section 3; specification (9)
without the supply shock variables (relative price of food and energy, import prices, and
Nixon dummies); and these two versions with a time-varying NAIRU. The time-varying
NAIRU specification introduces random walk intercept drift into (9) following Staiger,
Stock, and Watson (1997) and Gordon (1998), specifically, the TV-NAIRU version of (9)
is


              πt+1 = αG(L)πt + β(L)(ut+1 – ut ) + γ(L)zt + vt+1,                             (12)

              ut +1 = ut + ηt+1,                                                             (13)


where vt and ηt are modeled as independent i.i.d. normal errors with relative variance
σ η2 / σ v2 (recall that αG(1) = 1 so a unit root is imposed in (12)). For the calculations here,

σ η2 / σ v2 is set to 0.1.


                                                 25
       ADL Phillips curve models. The ADL Phillips curve models are direct models of
the form,


            π th+ h − πt = μh + αh(L)Δπt + βh(L)xt + vth+ h ,                                                                (14)


where xt is an activity variable (an output gap, growth rate, or level, depending on the
series). Lag lengths for πt and xt are chosen separately by AIC or BIC.
       ADL models using other predictors. ADL models are specified and estimated the
same way as the ADL Phillips curve model (14), but the activity variable xt is replaced by
another predictor (term spreads, core inflation, etc.).
       Combination forecasts. Let { πˆih,t + h|t } denote a set of n forecasts of π th+ h , made

using data through date t. Combined forecasts are computed in three ways: by
“averaging” (mean, median, trimmed mean); by a MSE-based weighting scheme; or by
using the forecast that is most recently best. The MSE-based combined forecasts ft are of

                ∑       λ πˆih,t + h|t , where six methods are used to compute the weights {λit}:
                    n
the form ft =       i =1 it




                                           n                               39
                (A) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) , with σˆ it2 =   ∑ 0.9 e             j       2
                                                                                                      i ,t − j               (15)
                                          j =1                             j =0

                                         n                                39
                (B) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) , with σˆ it2 =   ∑ 0.95 e                j       2
                                                                                                          i ,t − j           (16)
                                         j =1                             j =0

                                         n                                39
                (C) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) , with σˆ it2 =   ∑e       2
                                                                                   i ,t − j                                  (17)
                                         j =1                             j =0

                                             n                                   39
                (D) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) 2 / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) 2 , with σˆ it2 =    ∑ 0.9 e                j        2
                                                                                                               i ,t − j      (18)
                                           j =1                                  j =0

                                             n                                   39
                (E) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) 2 / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) 2 , with σˆ it2 =    ∑ 0.95 e                    j      2
                                                                                                                  i ,t − j   (19)
                                           j =1                                  j =0

                                             n                                   39
                (F) λit = (1/ σˆ it2 ) 2 / ∑ (1/ σˆ 2jt ) 2 , with σˆ it2 =    ∑e        2
                                                                                         i ,t − j                            (20)
                                           j =1                                  j =0




                                                         26
where ei,t = π th – πˆih,t|t −h is the pseudo out-of-sample forecast error for the ith h-step ahead

forecast and the MSEs are estimated using a 10 year rolling window and, for methods
(A), (B), (D), and (E), discounting.
        Inverse MSE weighting (based on population MSEs) is optimal if the individual
forecasts are uncorrelated, and methods (A) – (C) are different ways to implement inverse
MSE weighting. Methods (D) – (F) give greater weight to better-performing forecasts
than does inverse MSE weighting. Optimal forecast combination using regression
weights as in Bates and Granger (1969) is not feasible with the large number of forecasts
under consideration. As Timmerman (2006) notes, equal-weighting (mean combining)
often performs well and Timmerman (2006) provides a discussion of when mean
combining is optimal under squared error loss.
        The “recent best” forecasts are the forecasts from the model that has the lowest
cumulative MSE over the past 4 (or, alternatively, 8) quarters.
        Finally, in an attempt to exploit the time-varying virtues of the UC-SV and
triangle models, the recent best is computed using just the UC-SV and triangle model
(with time varying NAIRU and z variables).
        The complete description of models considered is given in the notes to Table 1.


4.2 Results


        The pseudo out-of-sample forecasting performance of each forecasting procedure
(model and combining method) is summarized in tabular and graphical form.
        The tabular summary consists of relative RMSEs of four-quarter ahead inflation
forecasts, relative to the UC-SV benchmark, for six forecast periods; these are tabulated
in Tables 1-5 for the five inflation series. The minimum model estimation sample was 40
quarters, and blank cells in the table indicate that for at least one quarter in the forecast
period there were fewer than 40 observations for estimation.
        The graphical summary of each model’s performance is given is Figures 6-11 for
the five inflation series. Figure 6 presents the rolling RMSE for the UC-SV benchmark
model for the five inflation series, and figures 7-11 show the RMSE of the various
forecasts relative to the UC-SV benchmark. Part (a) of Figure 7-11 displays the rolling


                                                27
relative RMSE for the prototype models, where the rolling MSE for each model is
computed using (2). Parts (b) – (d) plot the ratio of the rolling RMSE for each category
of models, relative to the UC-SV model: univariate models in part (b), Phillips curve
forecasts (ADL and triangle) in part (c), and combination forecasts in part (d). In each of
parts (b) – (d), leading case models or forecasts are highlighted.
       These tables and figures present a great many numbers and facts. Inspection of
these results leads us to the following conclusions:


       1. There is strong evidence of time variation in the inflation process, in
           predictive relations, and in Phillips curve forecasts. This is consistent with the
           literature review, in which different authors reach different conclusions about
           Phillips curve forecasts depending on the sample period.


       2. The performance of Phillips curve forecasts, relative to the UC-SV
           benchmark, has a considerable systematic component (part (c) of the figures):
           during periods in which the ADL-u prototype model is forecasting well,
           reasonably good forecasts can be made using a host of other activity variables.
           In this sense, the choice of activity variable is secondary to the choice of
           whether one should use an activity-based forecast.


       3. Among the univariate models considered here, with and without time-varying
           coefficients, there is no single model, or combination of univariate models,
           that has uniformly better performance than the UC-SV model. Of the 82 cells
           in Table 1 that give relative RMSEs for univariate CPI-all forecasts in
           different subsamples, only 4 have RMSEs less than 1.00, the lowest of which
           is .95, and these instances are for fixed-parameter MA models in the 1960s
           and in 1985-1992. Similar results are found for the other four inflation
           measures. In some cases, the AR models do quite poorly relative to the UC-
           SV, for example in the 2001-2007 sample the AR forecasts of CPI-all and
           PCE-all inflation have very large relative MSEs (typically exceeding 1.3). In
           general, the performance of the AR model, relative to the UC-SV (or AO)



                                             28
   benchmarks, is series- and period-specific. This reinforces the remarks in the
   literature review about the importance of using a consistently good
   benchmark: in some cases, apparently good performance of a predictor for a
   particular inflation series over a particular period can be the result of a large
   denominator, not a small numerator.


4. Although some of the Phillips curve forecasts improved substantially on the
   UC-SV model during the 1970s and early 1980s, there is little or no evidence
   that it is possible to improve upon the UC-SV model on average over the full
   later samples. This said, there are notable periods and inflation measures for
   which Phillips curve models do quite well. The triangle model does
   particularly well during the high unemployment disinflation of the early 1980s
   for all five inflation measures. For CPI-all, PCE-all, and the GDP deflator, it
   also does well in the late 1990s, while for CPI-core and PCE-core the triangle
   model does well emerging from the 1990 recession. This episodically good
   behavior of the triangle model, and of Phillips-curve forecasts more generally,
   provides a more nuanced interpretation of the history of inflation forecasting
   models than the blanket Atkeson-Ohanian (2001) conclusion that “none of the
   NAIRU forecasts is more accurate than the naïve forecast” (AO abstract).


5. Forecast combining, which has worked so well in other applications
   (Timmerman (2006)), generally improves upon the individual Phillips-curve
   forecasts, however the combination forecasts generally do not improve upon
   the UC-SV benchmark in the post-1993 periods. For example, for PCI-all, the
   mean-combined ADL-activity forecasts have a relative RMSE of .86 over
   1977-1982 and .96 over 1985-1992; these mean-combined forecasts compare
   favorably to individual activity forecasts and to the triangle model. In the
   later periods, however, the forecasts being combined have relative RMSEs
   exceeding one and combining them works no magic and fails to improve upon
   the UC-SV benchmark. Although some of the combining methods improve
   upon equal weighting, these improvements are neither large nor systematic.



                                     29
           In addition, consistent with the results in Fisher, Liu, and Zhou (2002), factor
           forecasts (using the CFNAI) fail to improve upon the UC-SV benchmark on
           average over the later periods. These results are consistent with the lack of
           success found by attempts in the literature (before and after Atkeson-Ohanian
           (2001)) to obtain large gains by using many predictors and/or model
           combinations.


       6. Forecasts using predictors other than activities variables, while not the main
           focus of this paper, generally fare poorly, especially during the post-1992
           period. For example, the relative RMSE of the mean-combined forecast using
           non-activity variables is at least 0.99 in each subsample in Tables 1-5 for
           forecasts of all five activity variables. We did not find substantial
           improvements using alternative measures of core (median and trimmed mean
           CPI) as predictors. 8 Although our treatment of non-activity variables is not
           comprehensive, these results largely mirror those in the literature.


          5. When Were Phillips Curve Forecasts Successful, and Why?


       If the relative performance of Phillips curve forecasts has been episodic, is it
possible to characterize what makes for a successful or unsuccessful episode?
       The relative RMSEs of the triangle and ADL-u model forecasts for headline
inflation (CPI-all, PCE-all, and GDP deflator), relative to the UC-SV benchmark, are
plotted in Figure 12, along with the unemployment rate. One immediately evident
feature is that the triangle model has substantially larger swings in performance than the
ADL-u model. This said, the dates of relative success of these Phillips curve forecasts
bear considerable similarities across models and inflation series. Both models perform

8
  The exceptions are median and trimmed mean rolling forecasts for CPI-core and GDP
inflation for the 2001-2007 sample. However, the relative RMSEs exceed one (typically,
they exceed 1.15) for other inflation series, other samples, and for recursive forecasts,
and we view these isolated cases as outliers. Most likely, the difference between our
negative results for median CPI and Smith’s (2004) positive results over 1990-2000 are
differences in the benchmark model, in her case a univariate AR with exponential lag
structure imposed.

                                            30
relatively well for all series in the early 1980s, in the early 1990s, and around 1999; both
models perform relatively poorly around 1985 and in the mid-1990s. These dates of
relative success correspond approximately to dates of different phases of business cycles.
       Figure 13 is a scatterplot of the quarterly relative RMSE for the triangle (panel
(a)) and ADL-u (panel (b)) prototype models, vs. the two-sided unemployment gap (the
two-sided gap was computed using the two-sided version of the lowpass filter described
in Section 2.3), along with kernel regression estimates. The most striking feature of these
scatterplots is that the relative RMSE is minimized, and is considerably less than one, at
the extremes values of the unemployment gap, both positive and negative. (The kernel
regression estimator exceeds one at the most negative values of the unemployment gap
for the triangle model in panel (a), but there are few observations in that tail.) When the
unemployment rate is near the NAIRU (as measured by the lowpass filter), both Phillips
curve models do worse than the UC-SV model. But when the unemployment gap
exceeds 1.5 in absolute value, the Phillips curve forecasts improve substantially upon the
UC-SV model. Because the gap is largest in absolute value around turning points, this
finding can be restated that the Phillips curve models provide improvements over the UC-
SV model around turning points, but not during normal times.
       Figure 14 takes a different perspective on the link between performance of the
Phillips curve forecasts and the state of the economy, by plotting the relative RMSE
against the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate. The relative improvements in
the Phillips curve forecasts do not seem as closely tied to the change in the
unemployment rate as to the gap (the apparent improvement at very high changes of the
unemployment rate is evident in only a few observations)
       Figures 15-17 examine a conjecture in the literature, that Phillips curve forecasts
are relatively more successful when inflation is volatile, by plotting the rolling relative
RMSE against the 4-quarter change in 4-quarter inflation. These figures provide only
limited support for this conjecture, as do similar scatterplots (not provided here) of the
rolling RMSE against the UC-SV estimate of the instantaneous variance of the first
difference of the inflation rate. It is true that the quarters of worst performance occur
when in fact inflation is changing very little but, other than for GDP deflator, the




                                             31
episodes of best performance do not seem to be associated with large changes in
inflation.
        As presented here, these patterns cannot yet be used to improve forecasts: the
sharpest patterns are ones that appear using two-sided gaps. Still, these results are
suggestive, and they seem to suggest a route toward developing a response to the AO
conundrum in which real economic activity seems to play little or any role in inflation
forecasting. The results here suggest that, if times are quiet – if the unemployment rate is
close to the NAIRU – then in fact one is better off using a univariate forecast than
introducing additional estimation error by making a multivariate forecast. But if the
economy is near a turning point – if the unemployment rate is far from the NAIRU – then
knowledge of that large unemployment gap would be useful for inflation forecasting.
Further work is needed to turn these observations into formal empirical results.




                                             32
                                      References
Ang, A., G. Bekaert, and M. Wei (2007), “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or
      Surveys Forecast Inflation Better?” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1163-
      1212.

Ascari, Guido and Emanuela Marrocu (2003), “Forecasting Inflation: A Comparison of
        Linear Phillips Curve Models and Nonlinear Time Series Models,” Working
        Paper CRENoS 200307, Centre for North South Economic Research, University
        of Cagliari and Sassari, Sardinia.

Atkeson, A. and L.E. Ohanian (2001), “Are Phillips Curves Useful for Forecasting
      Inflation?” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25(1):2-11.

Ball, Laurence M. (2006), “Has Globalization Changed Inflation?” NBER Working
       Paper 12687.

Bańbura, Marta, Domenico Gianonne, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2008). “Large Bayesian
      VARs,” forthcoming, Journal of Applied Econometrics.

Banerjee, Anindya and Massimiliano Marcellino (2006), “Are There Any Reliable
       Leading Indicators for U.S. Inflation and GDP Growth?,” International Journal of
       Forecasting 22, 137-151.

Barsky, R.B. (1987), “The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastability and Persistence of
       Inflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 19:3-24.

Bates, J.M. and Clive W.J. Granger (1969). “The Combination of Forecasts,” Operations
        Research Quarterly 20, 451-468.

Berardi, Andrea (2007), “Term Structure, Inflation, and Real Activity,” Journal of
       Financial and Quantitative Analysis, forthcoming.

Bernanke, B.S., J. Bovian and P. Eliasz (2005), “Measuring the effects of monetary
      policy: a factor-augmented vector autoregressive (FAVAR) approach”, Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 120:387-422.

Boivin, Jean and Serena Ng (2005). “Understanding and Comparing Factor-Based
       Forecasts,” International Journal of Central Banking 1, 117-151.

Boivin, Jean and Serena Ng (2006). “Are More Data Always Better for Factor Analysis?”
       Journal of Econometrics 132, 169-194.

Bos, Charles S., Philip Hans Franses, and Marius Ooms (2002), “Inflation, Forecast
       Intervals and Long Memory Regression Models, International Journal of
       Forecasting 18, 243-264.


                                           33
Brainard, William and George Perry (2000). “Making Policy in a Changing World.” in
       Perry, George and James Tobin (eds), Economic Events, Ideas, and Policies: The
       1960s and After. Brookings Institution Press: Washington.

Brave, Scott and Jonas D.M. Fisher (2004), “In Search of a Robust Inflation Forecast,”
       Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, 2004Q4, 12-31.

Bryan, Michael F. and Stephen G. Cecchetti (1994). “Measuring Core Inflation” in N.
       Gregory Mankiw (ed.), Monetary Policy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press
       for NBER), 195-215.

Bryan, Michael F., Stephen G. Cecchetti, and Rodney L. Wiggins II (1997). “Efficient
       Inflation Estimation,” NBER Working Paper No. 6183.

Camba-Mendez, Gonazlo and Diego Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2003), “Assessment Criteria
      for Output Gap Estimates,” Economic Modeling 20, 529-562 (first published as
      ECB Working Paper no. 54, 2001).

Canova, Fabio (2007), “G-7 Inflation Forecasts: Random Walk, Phillips Curve, or What
      Else?,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 11, 1-30.

Cecchetti, Stephen G. (2005), “Inflation Indicators and Inflation Policy,” NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 10, 189-219.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Rita S. Chu, and Charles Steindel (2000), “The Unreliability of
      Inflation Indicators,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in
      Economics and Finance, 6 (4), 1-6.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., Peter Hooper, Bruce C. Kasman, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and
      Mark W. Watson (2007). “Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process,” U.S.
      Monetary Policy Forum.

Clark, Todd E. and Michael W. McCracken (2006), “'The Predictive Content of the
       Output Gap for Inflation: Resolving In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Evidence,”
       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38: 1127-1148.

Clark, Todd E. and Michael W. McCracken (2006), “Combining Forecasts from Nested
       Models,” manuscript, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2002). “Evolving Post-World War II U.S.
      Inflation Dynamics,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, MIT Press,
      Cambridge.




                                           34
Cogley, Timothy and Thomas J. Sargent (2005). “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary
      Policies and Outcomes in the Post World War II U.S.” Review of Economic
      Dynamics 8, 262-302.

D’Agostino, A. and Domenico Giannone (2006). “Comparing Alternative Predictors
      Based on Large-Panel Factor Models,” ECB Working Paper 680.

Dielbold, F. and R. Mariano (1995). “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal of
       Business and Economic Statistics 13, 253-265.

DeWachter, Hans and Marco Lyrio (2006). “Macro Factors and the Term Structure of
     Interest Rates,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38, 119-140.

Diron, Marie and Benoît Mojon (2008). “Are Inflation Targets Good Inflation
       Forecasts?” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2008 Q2,
       33-45.

Dupasquier, Chantal, and Nicholas Ricketts (1998). “Nonlinearities in the Output-
      Inflation Relationship," in Price Stability, Inflation Targets and Monetary Policy,
      Ottawa: Bank of Canada.

Eichmeier, Sandra and Christina Ziegler (2006), “How Good are Dynamic Factor Models
      at Forecasting Output and Inflation? A Meta-Analytic Approach,” manuscript,
      Deutsche Bundesbank.

Estrella, Arturo. (2005), “Why Does the Yield Curve Predict Output and Inflation,” The
        Economic Journal 115:722-744.

Estrella, Arturo and Jeffrey Fuhrer (2003), “Monetary Policy Shifts and the Stability of
        Monetary Policy Models,” Review of Economics and Statistics. 85(1): 94-104.

Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (various dates), “The Chicago Fed National Activity
       Index,” http://www.chicagofed.org/economic_research_and_data/cfnai.cfm.

Fisher, Jonas D.M., C.T. Liu, and R. Zhou (2002), “When Can We Forecast Inflation?”
        Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 1Q/2002, 30-42.

Gavin, W.T. and K.L. Kliesen (2008). “Forecasting Inflation and Output: Comparing
       Data-Rich Models with Simple Rules,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
       Review, May/June 2008, 90(3, Part 1), pp. 175-92.

Geweke, John (1977). “The Dynamic Factor Analysis of Economic Time Series,” in: D.J.
     Aigner and A.S. Goldberger, eds., Latent Variables in Socio-Economic Models,
     (North-Holland, Amsterdam).




                                            35
Giacomini, Rafaella, and Halbert White (2006). “Tests of Conditional Predictive
      Ability,” Econometrica 74, 1545-1578.

Gordon, Robert J. (1982). “Inflation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and the Natural Rate of
      Unemployment.” in Workers, Jobs and Inflation, Martin N. Baily (ed).
      Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,. 89-158.

Gordon, Robert J. and Stephen R. King (1982). “The Output Cost of Disinflation in
      Traditional and Vector Autoregressive Models,” Brookings Papers on Economic
      Activity 1982:I, 205-244.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990). "U.S. Inflation, Labor's Share, and the Natural Rate of Un-
      employment." In Economics of Wage Determination (Heinz Konig, ed.). Berlin:
      Springer-Verlag.

Gordon, Robert J. (1998). Foundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and
      the Time-Varying NAIRU,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998:2, 297-
      333.

Hansen, Peter R. (2006), “A Test for Superior Predictive Ability,” Journal of Business
      and Economic Statistics 23(4), 365-380.

Hardouvelis, Gikas and Dimitrios Malliaropulos, “The Yield Spread as a Symmetric
      Predictor of Output and Inflation, manuscript, CEPR

Hendry, D.F., and M.P. Clements (2002), “Pooling of forecasts”, Econometrics Journal
      5:1-26.

Hendry, David F. and Kirstin Hubrich (2007). “Combining Disaggregate Forecasts or
      Combining Disaggregate Information to Forecast an Aggregate,” manuscript,
      Oxford University.

Hubrich, Kirstin (2005). “Forecasting Euro Area Inflation: Does Aggregating Forecasts
      by HICP Component Improve Forecast Accuracy?” International Journal of
      Forecasting 21, 119-136.

Ihrig, Jane, Steve Kamin, and Jaime Marquez (2007), “Some Simple Tests of the
        Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” Board of Governors of the Federal
        Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper no. 891.

Inoue, Atsushi and Lutz Kilian (2008), “How Useful is Bagging in Forecasting Economic
       Time Series? A Case Study of U.S. CPI Inflation,” Journal of the American
       Statistical Association, forthcoming

Inflation Persistence Network (2007): see
        http://www.ecb.eu/home/html/researcher_ipn_papers.en.html



                                           36
Jaditz, Ted and Chera Sayers (1994), “Predicting Inflation,” manuscript, Bureau of Labor
        Statistics.

Jorion, Philippe and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1991. “A Multi-Country Comparison of Term
        Structure Forecasts at Long Horizons,” Journal of Financial Economics 29, pp.
        59 – 80.

Koenig, Evan F. (2003), “Is the Markup a Useful Real-Time Predictor of Inflation?,”
      Economics Letters 80, 261-267.

Lansing, Kevin (2002), “Can the Phillips Curve Help Forecast Inflation?,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2002-29.

Laxton, Douglas, David Rose, and Demosthenes Tambakis (1999). “The U.S. Phillips
       Curve: The Case for Asymmetry,” Journal of Econ omic Dynamics and Control
       23, 1459-1485.

Levin, Andrews and Jeremy Piger (2004). “Is Inflation Persistence Intrinsic in Industrial
       Economice?” ECB Working Paper 334.

Lown, Cara S. and Robert W. Rich (1997), “Is There an Inflation Puzzle?,” Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, December 1997, 51-69.

Marcellino, Massimiliano (2008) “A Benchmark Model for Growth and Inflation”,
       Journal of Forecasting, forthcoming.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1990a) “What Does the Term Structure Tell Us About Future
      Inflation?” Journal of Monetary Economics 25, pp. 77 – 95.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1990b). “The Information in the Longer-Maturity Term Structure
      About Future Inflation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 55, pp. 815 – 828.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1991). “A Multi-Country Study of the Information in the Term
      Structure About Future Inflation,” Journal of International Money and Finance
      19, pp. 2 – 22.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007), “Inflation Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper 13147.

Moshiri, Saeed and Norman Cameron (2000). “Neural Network Versus Econometric
      Models in Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Forecasting 19, 201-217.

Nason, James M. (2006). “Instability in U.S. Inflation: 1967-2005,” Federal Reserve
       Bank of Atlanta Economic Review 2006, 2nd quarter, 39-59




                                            37
Nelson, C.R. and G.W. Schwert (1977), “Short-Term Interest Rates as Predictors of
       Inflation: On Testing the Hypothesis that the Real Rate of Interest Is Constant,”
       American Economic Review 67:478-486.

Orphanides, A. and S. van Norden (2005), “The Reliability of Inflation Forecast Based
      on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
      37:583-600.

Pivetta , Frederic and Ricardo Reis (2007). “The Persistence of Inflation in the United
        States,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31 (4), 1326-1358.

Primiceri, Giorgio (2006). “Why Inflation Rose and Fell: Policymakers’ Beliefs and US
       Postwar Stabilization Policy,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 121, 867-901.

Reis, Ricardo and Mark W. Watson (2007). “Relative Goods’ Prices and Pure Inflation,”
       manuscript, Princeton University.

Roberts, J.M. (2004), “Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics,” FEDS Discussion
       Paper 2004-62, Federal Reserve Board.

Rünstler, Gerhard (2002). “The Information Content of Real-Time Output Gap Estimates:
       An Application to the Euro Area,” ECB Working Paper 182.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Christopher A. Sims (1977), “Business cycle modeling without
       pretending to have too much a-priori economic theory,” in: C. Sims et al., eds.,
       New Methods in Business Cycle Research (Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
       Minneapolis).

Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (2004). “Were there Regime Switches in U.S.
       Monetary Policy?” manuscript, Princeton University.

Smith, Julie K. (2004), “Weighted Median Inflation: Is This Core Inflation?,” Journal of
       Money, Credit and Banking 36(2), 253-263.

Staiger, Doug, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), “The NAIRU,
        Unemployment, and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11
        (Winter 1997), 33-51.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting Inflation,” Journal of Monetary
        Economics 44:293-335.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2002). “Forecasting Using Principal Components from a
        Large Number of Predictors,” Journal of the American Statistical Association
        97:1167–1179.




                                            38
Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2003), “Forecasting output and inflation: The role of
        asset prices,” Journal of Economic Literature 41:788-829.

Stock, J.H., and M.W. Watson (2007), “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to
        Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39, 3-34.

Stockton, David J. and James E. Glassman (1987). “An Evaluation of the Forecast
       Performance of Alternative Models of Inflation,” The Review of Economics and
       Statistics 69, 108-117.

Taylor, John (2000). “Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the Pricing Power of Firms,”
       European Economic Review 44, 1389-1408.

Timmermann, Alan (2006). “Forecast Combinations,” in Handbook of Economic
     Forecasting, in Graham Elliott, Clive W.J. Granger and Allan Timmermann
     (eds.). Elsevier.

Tkacz, Greg (2000), “Non-Parametric and Neural Network Models of Inflation
       Changes,” Bank of Canada Working Paper 2000-7

Watson, Mark W. (2003). “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Many Predictors.” In
      Dewatripont, M., L. Hansen, and S. Turnovski (eds), Advances in Econometrics:
      Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress of the Econometric Society,
      Vol. III, 87-115.

Webb, Roy H. and Tazewell S. Rowe (1995), “An Index of Leading Indicators for
      Inflation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 81(2), 75-96.

West, K. (1996). “Asymptotic Inference about Predictive Accuracy,” Econometrica 64,
       1067-1084.

Wright, Jonathan (2003), “Forecasting U.S. Inflation by Bayesian Model Averaging,”
       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance
       Discussion Paper no. 780.




                                          39
                                           Data Appendix

The definitions and sources of the series used in this analysis are summarized in the
following table. The “trans” column indicates the transformation applied to the series:
logarithm (ln), first difference of logarithm ((1−L)ln), accumulation ((1−L)−1), or no
transformation (level). When the original series is monthly, quarterly data are
constructed as the average of the monthly values in the quarter before any other
transformation. Sources are Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis FRED database (F), the
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), and other Federal Reserve banks as indicated.


Short name      Trans                           Definition                       Mnemonic (Source)
                                            Inflation series
     CPI-all    (1-L)ln   CPI, all items                                         CPIAUCSL (F)
   CPI-core     (1-L)ln   CPI less food and energy                               CPILFESL (F)
    PCE-all     (1-L)ln   PCE deflator, all items                                PCECTPI (F)
  PCE-core      (1-L)ln   PCE deflator, less food and energy                     JCXFE (F)
GDP deflator    (1-L)ln   GDP deflator                                           GDPCTPI (F)
                                                Predictors
         UR      level    Unemployment rate, total civilian 16+                  UNRATE (F)
        GDP        ln     Real GDP                                               GDPC96 (F)
          IP       ln     Index of Industrial Production (total)                 INDPRO (F)
        EMP        ln     Nonagricultural civilian employment (total)            PAYEMS (F)
       CapU      level    Capacity utilization rate                              TCU (F)
      HPerm        ln     Housing permits (starts)                               PERMIT (F)
      CFNAI     (1−L)−1   Chicago Fed National Activity Index (accumulated)      FRB-Chicago
     UR-5wk      level    Unemployment rate for unemployed < 5 week              UEMPLT5(F)
                                                                                 /CLF160V(F)
        AHE     (1-L)ln   Average hourly earnings                                AHETPI (F)
   Real AHE     (1-L)ln   real average hourly earnings                           AHETPI (F)/
                                                                                 GDPCTPI (F)
Labor Share       ln      labor share                                            AHETPI (F)/
                                                                                 GDPCTPI (F)
 CPI-Median      level    Cleveland Fed median CPI inflation “Original” CPI-     FRB-Cleveland
                          Median through 2007:7; “Revised” CPI-Median after
                          2007:7)
   CPI-TrMn      level    Cleveland Fed trimmed mean CPI inflation (“Original”   FRB-Cleveland
                          CPI-Trimmed Mean through 2007:7; “Revised” CPI-
                          Trimmed Mean after 2007:7)
     ExRate      level    trade-weighted exchange rate                           TWEXMMTH (F)
      TB_sp      level    1 Year Treasury bond rate minus                        Fed Board of
                          3 Month Treasury bill rate (at annual rate)            Governors
       RPFE     (1−L)ln   Relative Price of Food and Energy                      PCECTPI (F)/
                                                                                 JCXFE (F)
      RPImp     (1−L)ln   Relative Price of Imports                              B021RG3(BEA)/
                                                                                 GDPCTPI(F)
Price Control    level    0.8 for 1971:III≤ t≤1972:II, 0 otherwise               Gordon (1982)
   Variable 1
Price Control    level    −0.4 for t = 1974:2 or 1975:I, −1.6 for                Gordon (1982)
   Variable 2             1974:III≤ t≤1974:IV, 0 otherwise.




                                                   40
                                    Table 1
 RMSEs for Inflation Forecasting Models by Sub-Period, Relative to UC-SV model:
                                    CPI-all

Forecast period                               1960Q1 –   1968Q1 –   1977Q1 -   1985Q1 –   1993Q1 –   2001Q1 –
                                               1967Q4     1976Q4     1984Q4     1992Q4     2000Q4     2007Q4
No. observations                                  32         36         32         32         32         25
Root MSE of UC-SV forecast                     0.82       1.99       2.35       1.39       0.68       1.05
Forecasting model and relative RMSEs
Univariate forecasts
                                    UC-SV     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
                              AR(AIC)_rec       .        1.09       1.05       1.12       1.03       1.39
                          AR(AIC)_iter_rec      .        1.06       1.00       1.12       1.02       1.43
                              AR(BIC)_rec       .        1.10       1.03       1.10       1.03       1.37
                                       AO     1.01       1.23       1.12       1.00       1.10       1.14
                                MA(1)_rec       .        1.07       1.01       1.07       1.03       1.37
                                 AR(4)_rec      .        1.12       1.02       1.13       1.02       1.42
                              AR(AIC)_roll      .        1.10       1.09       1.03       1.21       1.30
                          AR(AIC)_iter_roll     .        1.08       1.03       1.15       1.11       1.37
                              AR(BIC)_roll      .        1.09       1.08       1.02       1.14       1.32
                                 AR(4)_roll     .        1.19       1.06       1.07       1.17       1.29
                               AR(24)_iter      .          .          .        1.30       1.04       1.33
                        AR(24)_iter_nocon       .          .        1.18       1.25       1.00       1.32
                                 MA(1)_roll     .        1.04       1.02       1.07       1.05       1.13
                               MA(2) - NS     0.98       1.14       1.13       0.95       1.01       1.12
                              MA(1), θ=.25    1.12       1.01       1.00       1.11       1.06       1.52
                              MA(1), θ=.65    0.97       1.15       1.12       0.96       1.03       1.12
Single-predictor ADL forecasts
                        UR(Level)_AIC_rec       .        0.96       0.92       0.98       1.28       1.36
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.93       0.94       1.04       1.22       1.39
                      UR(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        0.96       0.95       1.00       1.22       1.38
                         GDP(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.88       0.93       1.00       1.09       1.36
                    GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .        1.03       0.90       1.00       1.08       1.34
                           IP(Dif)_AIC_rec      .        0.89       0.93       1.02       1.22       1.43
                       IP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec        .        0.95       0.93       1.01       1.17       1.40
                         Emp(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.93       0.86       1.01       1.06       1.53
                     Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        0.95       0.87       1.02       1.14       1.49
                     CapU(Level)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.03       1.39       1.56
                       CapU((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.03       1.30       1.45
                   CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        0.99       1.21       1.35
                   HPerm(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.79       1.12       1.14       1.75
                      HPerm((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        0.91       1.29       0.97       1.67
                  HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        0.90       1.02       1.08       1.37
                       CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.01       1.21       1.57
                  CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        0.98       1.18       1.42
                  UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.06       0.93       1.05       1.73       1.38
                     UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        0.94       0.91       1.07       1.34       1.40
                UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        0.97       0.90       1.06       1.34       1.31
                         AHE(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.10       1.19       1.03       1.48
                     AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.12       1.20       1.01       1.46
                    RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.10       1.19       1.03       1.48
               RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.12       1.20       1.01       1.46
              LaborShare(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.06       1.02       1.21       1.76       1.44
                 LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        1.08       1.03       1.12       1.06       1.36
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        1.10       1.01       1.09       1.30       1.36
                CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.34       1.39       1.54
                    CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.20       1.11       1.45
               CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.35       1.46       1.47
                   CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.10       1.07       1.45
                      ExRate(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.43       1.26       1.21
                 ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.82       1.04       1.28
                           tb_spr_AIC_rec       .        1.10       1.05       1.21       1.24       1.56
                        UR(Level)_AIC_roll      .        1.20       1.13       0.99       1.32       1.30
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_roll      .        1.07       1.00       1.04       1.23       1.28




                                                         41
         UR(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.17   1.07   1.03   1.28   1.30
            GDP(Dif)_AIC_roll     .   1.01   1.01   0.98   1.36   1.25
       GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.10   0.91   1.00   1.25   1.25
               IP(Dif)_AIC_roll   .   0.95   0.99   1.05   1.26   1.33
           IP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll     .   1.07   1.00   1.05   1.30   1.28
             Emp(Dif)_AIC_roll    .   1.06   0.97   0.99   1.23   1.24
        Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.19   0.91   1.02   1.26   1.31
        CapU(Level)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    0.98   1.38   1.33
          CapU((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.02   1.27   1.29
      CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    0.97   1.35   1.22
      HPerm(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .    0.75   1.27   1.23   1.41
         HPerm((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .    1.14   1.16   1.05   1.55
     HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    0.94   1.21   1.20   1.32
          CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    0.97   1.28   1.25
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    1.02   1.28   1.25
     UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_roll       .   1.19   0.93   1.18   1.60   1.34
        UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.03   0.97   1.03   1.41   1.27
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.08   0.85   1.06   1.45   1.31
             AHE(Dif)_AIC_roll    .     .    1.10   1.08   1.38   1.24
        AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .    1.12   1.07   1.33   1.19
       RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .    1.10   1.08   1.38   1.24
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    1.12   1.07   1.33   1.19
  LaborShare(Level)_AIC_roll      .   1.15   1.02   1.12   1.31   1.32
    LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.13   1.09   1.02   1.63   1.32
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.18   1.09   1.04   1.31   1.30
    CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.15   1.34   1.18
       CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.01   1.15   1.29
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.12   1.38   1.28
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.05   1.15   1.31
         ExRate(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.53   1.20   1.28
     ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.91   1.16   1.34
               tb_spr_AIC_roll    .   1.13   1.23   1.33   1.42   1.37
           UR(Level)_BIC_rec      .   0.92   0.91   0.98   1.28   1.36
              UR(Dif)_BIC_rec     .   0.88   0.94   1.06   1.16   1.35
         UR(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   0.91   0.93   0.96   1.17   1.35
            GDP(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   0.95   0.99   1.00   1.09   1.36
       GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   0.99   0.95   0.99   1.05   1.33
               IP(Dif)_BIC_rec    .   0.90   0.97   1.03   1.20   1.41
          IP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec       .   0.95   0.99   1.00   1.11   1.39
            Emp(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   0.90   0.92   0.98   1.05   1.51
        Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   0.93   0.93   0.99   1.09   1.45
        CapU(Level)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.02   1.29   1.56
          CapU((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.07   1.30   1.46
      CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    0.97   1.17   1.30
      HPerm(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .    0.82   1.06   1.14   1.75
         HPerm((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.05   1.32   0.97   1.65
     HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    0.93   1.02   1.08   1.37
          CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    0.92   1.18   1.44
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    0.95   1.18   1.42
     UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_rec        .   1.03   0.92   1.13   1.62   1.48
        UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   0.94   0.96   1.15   1.17   1.49
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   0.94   0.88   1.11   1.27   1.34
            AHE(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.08   1.19   1.10   1.42
        AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .    1.10   1.23   1.05   1.37
       RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .    1.08   1.19   1.10   1.42
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    1.10   1.23   1.05   1.37
  LaborShare(Level)_BIC_rec       .   1.02   0.99   1.20   1.61   1.44
    LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   1.08   1.03   1.13   1.07   1.36
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   1.07   0.97   1.13   1.30   1.40
    CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.22   1.44   1.53
       CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.21   1.14   1.51
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.23   1.43   1.49
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.10   1.07   1.49
         ExRate(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.53   1.19   1.32
     ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.87   1.09   1.28
               tb_spr_BIC_rec     .   1.09   1.09   1.17   1.06   1.40




                                      42
                         UR(Level)_BIC_roll     .   1.16   1.05   0.99   1.33   1.31
                            UR(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   0.99   0.99   0.99   1.19   1.35
                        UR(1sdBP)_BIC_roll      .   1.14   0.98   0.96   1.24   1.28
                          GDP(Dif)_BIC_roll     .   0.96   1.01   0.98   1.28   1.31
                     GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .   1.04   0.92   0.98   1.18   1.30
                             IP(Dif)_BIC_roll   .   0.99   1.01   1.05   1.24   1.29
                         IP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll     .   1.08   0.96   0.97   1.31   1.32
                           Emp(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   1.06   0.95   1.02   1.22   1.27
                      Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .   1.12   0.92   1.05   1.24   1.27
                      CapU(Level)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    0.97   1.30   1.30
                        CapU((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.01   1.26   1.27
                    CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    0.93   1.23   1.25
                    HPerm(Level)_BIC_roll       .     .    0.77   1.25   1.22   1.43
                       HPerm((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .    1.09   1.21   1.06   1.36
                   HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .    0.92   1.21   1.19   1.33
                        CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    0.96   1.26   1.32
                   CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.02   1.22   1.24
                   UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_roll       .   1.18   0.95   1.19   1.35   1.43
                      UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   0.96   0.99   1.10   1.19   1.35
                 UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .   1.04   0.93   1.09   1.32   1.37
                           AHE(Dif)_BIC_roll    .     .    1.09   1.03   1.19   1.38
                      AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .     .    1.10   1.16   1.12   1.23
                     RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .    1.09   1.03   1.19   1.38
                RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .     .    1.10   1.16   1.12   1.23
              LaborShare(Level)_BIC_roll        .   1.09   1.05   1.05   1.23   1.33
                  LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   1.12   1.10   1.11   1.17   1.38
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_roll          .   1.11   1.06   1.02   1.29   1.36
                 CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.07   1.28   1.24
                     CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.04   1.15   1.30
                CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.02   1.28   1.30
                    CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.07   1.14   1.36
                       ExRate(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.56   1.13   1.34
                  ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.95   1.11   1.36
                             tb_spr_BIC_roll    .   1.16   1.25   1.32   1.22   1.38
Triangle model forecasts
                  Triangle Constant NAIRU       .    .     0.94   1.11   1.14   1.11
                         Triangle TV NAIRU      .    .     0.95   1.15   1.07   1.16
          Triangle Constant NAIRU (no z)        .    .     1.02   1.19   1.34   1.34
                 Triangle TV NAIRU (no z)       .    .     1.12   1.23   1.10   1.52
Combination forecasts
                Activity Median Combining       .   0.96   0.88   0.96   1.13   1.30
                  Activity Mean Combining       .   0.97   0.86   0.96   1.11   1.30
              Activity Tr. Mean Combining       .   0.97   0.87   0.96   1.11   1.30
                Activity MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.86   0.97   1.12   1.31
                Activity MSE(B) Combining       .     .    0.86   0.96   1.12   1.31
                 Activity MSE(3 Combining       .     .    0.86   0.96   1.11   1.30
                Activity MSE(D) Combining       .     .    0.86   0.98   1.14   1.33
                Activity MSE(E) Combining       .     .    0.87   0.97   1.13   1.32
                Activity MSE(F) Combining       .     .    0.87   0.96   1.12   1.30
         Activity Rec. Best(4q) Combining       .   1.12   0.74   0.99   1.38   1.56
         Activity Rec. Best(8q) Combining       .   1.07   0.90   1.22   1.48   1.36
            OtherADL Median Combining           .   1.07   1.06   1.03   1.11   1.29
               OtherADL Mean Combining          .   1.08   1.01   1.06   1.09   1.30
           OtherADL Tr. Mean Combining          .   1.08   1.03   1.05   1.09   1.31
            OtherADL MSE(A) Combining           .     .    0.98   1.07   1.11   1.30
            OtherADL MSE(B) Combining           .     .    0.98   1.07   1.12   1.30
            OtherADL MSE(C) Combining           .     .    0.99   1.07   1.12   1.30
            OtherADL MSE(D) Combining           .     .    0.98   1.08   1.13   1.31
            OtherADL MSE(E) Combining           .     .    0.99   1.07   1.13   1.30
            OtherADL MSE(F) Combining           .     .    0.99   1.07   1.14   1.30
      OtherADL Rec. Best(4q) Combining          .   1.13   1.05   1.12   1.36   1.37
      OtherADL Rec. Best(8q) Combining          .   1.14   1.09   1.21   1.30   1.42
                      All Median Combining      .   0.98   0.92   0.98   1.10   1.31
                        All Mean Combining      .   0.99   0.89   0.98   1.07   1.29
                    All Tr. Mean Combining      .   0.99   0.90   0.98   1.08   1.30
                     All MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.87   0.99   1.10   1.30




                                                    43
               All MSE(B) Combining    .     .       0.87      0.98      1.10      1.30
               All MSE(C) Combining    .     .       0.87      0.98      1.09      1.29
               All MSE(D) Combining    .     .       0.87      1.00      1.12      1.31
               All MSE(E) Combining    .     .       0.88      0.99      1.12      1.30
               All MSE(F) Combining    .     .       0.88      0.98      1.10      1.29
         All Rec. Best(4q) Combining   .   1.12      0.74      1.11      1.47      1.63
         All Rec. Best(8q) Combining   .   1.08      0.92      1.19      1.51      1.43
     UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(4q)   .     .         .       1.02      1.05      1.01
                           Combining
     UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(8q)   .     .        .        1.06      1.05      1.11
                           Combining


Notes to Table 1: Entries are RMSEs, relative to the RMSE of the UC-SV model, over
the indicated sample period. Blanks indicate insufficient data to compute forecasts over
the indicated subsample. The abbreviations denote:
        _AIC: AIC lag selection, up to six lags (for ADL models, AIC over the two lag
                lengths separately)
        _BIC: BIC lag selection, up to six lags (for ADL models, AIC over the two lag
                lengths separately)
        _rec: recursive estimation
        _roll: rolling estimation
        Level: indicated predictor appears in levels
        Dif: indicated predictor appears in log differences
        1sdBP: indicated predictor appears in gap form, computed using 1-sided
                bandpass filter as discussed in the text
        Triangle: Triangle model or TV-triangle model, with or without supply shock
                (“z”) variables
        mean, median, trimmed mean: forecast combining methods, for the indicated
                group of forecasts
        MSE(A) – MSE(F): MSE-based combining as indicated in (15) - (20).
        Best (4q) and Best (8q): recently best forecast based on cumulative MSE over
                past 4 (or 8) quarters
        UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best (4q) and (8q) Combining: best of UC-SV and
                triangle models (constant NAIRU) based on cumulative MSE over past 4
                (or 8) quarters
        nocon: constant term is suppressed




                                           44
                                    Table 2
 RMSEs for Inflation Forecasting Models by Sub-Period, Relative to UC-SV model:
                                   CPI-core

Forecast period                               1960Q1 –   1968Q1 –   1977Q1 -   1985Q1 –   1993Q1 –   2001Q1 –
                                               1967Q4     1976Q4     1984Q4     1992Q4     2000Q4     2007Q4
No. observations                                  32         36         32         32         32         25
Root MSE of UC-SV forecast                     0.82       2.15       2.30       0.58       0.31       0.53
Forecasting model and relative RMSEs
Univariate forecasts
                                    UC-SV     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
                              AR(AIC)_rec       .          .        1.07       1.07       1.04       1.05
                          AR(AIC)_iter_rec      .          .        1.08       1.06       1.04       1.06
                              AR(BIC)_rec       .          .        1.07       1.01       1.06       1.05
                                       AO     1.03       1.14       1.01       1.08       1.04       1.06
                                MA(1)_rec       .        1.05       1.04       1.00       1.01       1.04
                                 AR(4)_rec      .          .        1.09       1.09       1.03       1.04
                              AR(AIC)_roll      .          .        1.12       1.05       1.12       1.09
                          AR(AIC)_iter_roll     .          .        1.21       1.15       1.15       1.11
                              AR(BIC)_roll      .          .        1.11       1.03       1.11       1.09
                                 AR(4)_roll     .          .        1.15       1.06       1.12       1.10
                               AR(24)_iter      .          .        1.24       1.57       1.51       0.93
                        AR(24)_iter_nocon       .          .        1.10       1.23       1.32       0.91
                                 MA(1)_roll     .        1.04       1.03       1.12       1.00       1.07
                               MA(2) - NS     1.04       1.04       1.01       1.04       1.07       0.98
                              MA(1), θ=.25    1.05       1.01       0.98       1.02       1.04       1.07
                              MA(1), θ=.65    1.03       1.06       1.00       1.03       1.04       1.00
Single-predictor ADL forecasts
                        UR(Level)_AIC_rec       .          .        0.89       0.83       1.92       1.11
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        0.95       0.91       1.43       1.01
                      UR(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.91       1.01       1.63       1.05
                         GDP(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.02       0.91       1.02       0.92
                    GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        0.95       1.00       1.17       1.09
                           IP(Dif)_AIC_rec      .          .        1.03       1.00       1.25       1.16
                       IP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec        .          .        0.97       0.85       1.54       1.39
                         Emp(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        0.92       0.90       1.18       1.32
                     Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.91       0.90       1.28       1.27
                     CapU(Level)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.24       2.00       2.19
                       CapU((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.12       1.21       1.25
                   CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.34       1.26       1.20
                   HPerm(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.91       1.29       1.46       1.91
                      HPerm((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.06       1.10       1.21       1.04
                  HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        0.99       1.07       1.48       0.98
                       CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.16       1.27       1.39
                  CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.17       1.29       1.37
                  UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.86       1.10       3.09       1.32
                     UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        0.91       1.19       1.91       1.08
                UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        0.90       1.22       2.32       1.06
                         AHE(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.12       1.08       1.03       1.06
                     AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.16       1.36       1.10       1.10
                    RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.12       1.08       1.03       1.06
               RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.16       1.36       1.10       1.10
              LaborShare(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.11       1.37       2.18       1.12
                 LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.14       1.05       1.27       1.06
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.14       1.15       1.58       1.07
                CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.30       2.06       1.10
                    CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.14       1.81       1.25
               CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.28       1.69       1.23
                   CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.11       1.38       1.20
                      ExRate(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        2.97       1.43       0.93
                 ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        3.14       1.25       1.24
                           tb_spr_AIC_rec       .          .        1.10       1.52       2.53       1.32
                        UR(Level)_AIC_roll      .          .        1.27       1.52       1.34       1.19
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_roll      .          .        1.02       1.26       1.07       1.07




                                                         45
         UR(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   0.87   1.40   1.12   1.21
            GDP(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .   1.12   1.37   1.12   1.10
       GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.00   1.52   1.02   1.10
               IP(Dif)_AIC_roll   .    .   1.08   1.48   1.15   1.26
           IP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll     .    .   0.89   1.70   1.14   1.39
             Emp(Dif)_AIC_roll    .    .   0.94   1.47   1.09   1.31
        Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   0.84   1.57   1.08   1.54
        CapU(Level)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.59   1.31   1.39
          CapU((Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    1.48   1.11   1.17
      CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .     .    1.48   1.26   1.26
      HPerm(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .   0.89   2.35   1.04   1.24
         HPerm((Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .   1.10   1.63   1.12   1.14
     HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.04   1.95   1.05   1.12
          CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    1.44   1.03   1.17
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .     .    1.50   0.92   1.25
     UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.05   2.12   1.28   1.13
        UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.09   1.44   1.08   1.10
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   0.85   1.32   1.33   1.12
             AHE(Dif)_AIC_roll    .    .   1.23   1.23   1.13   1.16
        AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.22   1.53   1.12   1.15
       RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.23   1.23   1.13   1.16
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.22   1.53   1.12   1.15
  LaborShare(Level)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.20   1.34   1.83   1.12
    LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.41   1.15   1.97   1.10
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.30   1.16   1.69   1.10
    CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    1.37   1.69   0.80
       CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.04   1.25   1.15
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    1.30   1.53   1.19
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.08   1.14   1.19
         ExRate(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    3.48   1.19   1.11
     ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    3.58   1.05   1.10
               tb_spr_AIC_roll    .    .   1.15   1.61   1.22   1.12
           UR(Level)_BIC_rec      .    .   0.97   0.83   1.92   1.11
              UR(Dif)_BIC_rec     .    .   1.00   0.91   1.43   1.01
         UR(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   0.88   1.01   1.62   1.05
            GDP(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.04   0.98   1.06   0.91
       GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   0.96   0.96   1.14   1.07
               IP(Dif)_BIC_rec    .    .   1.04   0.99   1.11   1.11
          IP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.00   0.90   1.41   1.34
            Emp(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   0.97   0.90   1.18   1.32
        Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   0.83   0.90   1.28   1.27
        CapU(Level)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.24   1.83   2.10
          CapU((Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.06   1.11   1.22
      CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .     .    1.22   1.23   1.27
      HPerm(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .   0.91   1.27   1.46   1.91
         HPerm((Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.05   1.16   1.21   1.04
     HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   0.99   1.07   1.48   0.98
          CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.10   1.27   1.29
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .     .    1.17   1.29   1.37
     UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .   0.93   1.09   2.88   1.42
        UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.01   1.19   1.94   1.15
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   0.87   1.24   2.23   1.05
            AHE(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.13   1.03   1.05   1.09
        AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.17   1.24   1.16   1.09
       RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.13   1.03   1.05   1.09
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   1.17   1.24   1.16   1.09
  LaborShare(Level)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.08   1.22   1.68   1.09
    LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.09   1.02   1.34   1.08
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.09   1.08   1.27   1.02
    CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    1.34   1.66   1.11
       CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.02   1.25   1.10
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    1.28   1.71   1.23
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.09   1.38   1.20
         ExRate(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.73   1.34   1.09
     ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    2.85   1.10   1.01
               tb_spr_BIC_rec     .    .   1.07   1.50   2.40   1.32




                                      46
                         UR(Level)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.16   1.49   1.26   1.16
                            UR(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.04   1.18   1.06   1.08
                        UR(1sdBP)_BIC_roll      .    .   0.88   1.33   1.15   1.10
                          GDP(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.01   1.30   1.11   1.04
                     GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .   0.95   1.47   1.10   1.11
                             IP(Dif)_BIC_roll   .    .   1.06   1.49   1.15   1.23
                         IP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll     .    .   0.86   1.67   1.13   1.31
                           Emp(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.00   1.45   1.15   1.16
                      Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .    .   0.84   1.56   1.15   1.50
                      CapU(Level)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.61   1.32   1.37
                        CapU((Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    1.48   1.11   1.15
                    CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.46   1.30   1.29
                    HPerm(Level)_BIC_roll       .    .   0.89   2.29   1.05   1.17
                       HPerm((Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.10   1.62   1.20   1.13
                   HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .   1.05   1.93   1.08   1.11
                        CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    1.47   1.03   1.13
                   CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.53   0.91   1.20
                   UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.08   1.96   1.19   1.12
                      UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.11   1.49   1.11   1.09
                 UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .    .   0.85   1.36   1.31   1.08
                           AHE(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.12   1.15   1.12   1.13
                      AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.16   1.32   1.13   1.16
                     RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.12   1.15   1.12   1.13
                RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .    .   1.16   1.32   1.13   1.16
              LaborShare(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .   1.10   1.35   1.61   1.11
                  LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.20   1.21   1.84   1.10
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_roll          .    .   1.13   1.12   1.56   1.10
                 CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.41   1.47   0.84
                     CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.05   1.22   1.18
                CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.23   1.47   1.19
                    CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.08   1.15   1.18
                       ExRate(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    3.03   1.10   1.14
                  ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    3.35   1.06   1.06
                             tb_spr_BIC_roll    .    .   1.14   1.45   1.28   1.11
Triangle model forecasts
                  Triangle Constant NAIRU       .    .   1.32   1.50   1.81   1.44
                         Triangle TV NAIRU      .    .   1.32   1.46   1.48   1.39
          Triangle Constant NAIRU (no z)        .    .   1.05   1.11   2.34   1.17
                 Triangle TV NAIRU (no z)       .    .   1.07   1.22   1.63   1.23
Combination forecasts
                Activity Median Combining       .    .   0.86   0.86   1.00   1.07
                  Activity Mean Combining       .    .   0.86   0.89   1.02   1.02
              Activity Tr. Mean Combining       .    .   0.86   0.88   1.01   1.04
                Activity MSE(A) Combining       .    .     .    0.87   1.05   1.05
                Activity MSE(B) Combining       .    .     .    0.88   1.06   1.04
                 Activity MSE(3 Combining       .    .     .    0.88   1.06   1.04
                Activity MSE(D) Combining       .    .     .    0.87   1.09   1.07
                Activity MSE(E) Combining       .    .     .    0.87   1.10   1.06
                Activity MSE(F) Combining       .    .     .    0.88   1.11   1.05
         Activity Rec. Best(4q) Combining       .    .   1.13   1.15   1.22   1.19
         Activity Rec. Best(8q) Combining       .    .   0.96   1.40   1.50   1.40
            OtherADL Median Combining           .    .   1.08   0.99   1.11   1.06
               OtherADL Mean Combining          .    .   1.05   1.04   1.15   1.02
           OtherADL Tr. Mean Combining          .    .   1.07   0.96   1.12   1.03
            OtherADL MSE(A) Combining           .    .     .    1.02   1.16   1.04
            OtherADL MSE(B) Combining           .    .     .    1.00   1.18   1.03
            OtherADL MSE(C) Combining           .    .     .    0.99   1.18   1.03
            OtherADL MSE(D) Combining           .    .     .    1.07   1.16   1.06
            OtherADL MSE(E) Combining           .    .     .    1.02   1.17   1.05
            OtherADL MSE(F) Combining           .    .     .    1.00   1.18   1.04
      OtherADL Rec. Best(4q) Combining          .    .   1.08   2.06   1.18   1.06
      OtherADL Rec. Best(8q) Combining          .    .   1.07   1.54   1.10   1.38
                      All Median Combining      .    .   0.94   0.83   1.01   1.04
                        All Mean Combining      .    .   0.91   0.85   1.00   0.98
                    All Tr. Mean Combining      .    .   0.92   0.82   1.00   1.00
                     All MSE(A) Combining       .    .     .    0.86   1.03   1.02




                                                    47
          All MSE(B) Combining    .    .     .    0.84   1.03   1.01
          All MSE(C) Combining    .    .     .    0.84   1.02   1.01
          All MSE(D) Combining    .    .     .    0.88   1.05   1.04
          All MSE(E) Combining    .    .     .    0.85   1.05   1.03
          All MSE(F) Combining    .    .     .    0.84   1.04   1.02
    All Rec. Best(4q) Combining   .    .   1.19   1.53   1.17   1.08
    All Rec. Best(8q) Combining   .    .   0.96   1.67   1.45   1.50
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(4q)   .    .     .    1.37   1.06   1.00
                      Combining
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(8q)   .    .    .     1.02   1.16   1.09
                      Combining




                                      48
                                    Table 3
 RMSEs for Inflation Forecasting Models by Sub-Period, Relative to UC-SV model:
                                   PCE-all

Forecast period                               1960Q1 –   1968Q1 –   1977Q1 -   1985Q1 –   1993Q1 –   2001Q1 –
                                               1967Q4     1976Q4     1984Q4     1992Q4     2000Q4     2007Q4
No. observations                                  32         36         32         32         32         25
Root MSE of UC-SV forecast                     0.73       1.83       1.41       0.88       0.59       0.72
Forecasting model and relative RMSEs
Univariate forecasts
                                    UC-SV     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
                              AR(AIC)_rec       .        1.14       1.02       1.15       1.06       1.45
                          AR(AIC)_iter_rec      .        1.04       1.01       1.14       1.04       1.50
                              AR(BIC)_rec       .        1.12       1.02       1.15       1.07       1.58
                                       AO     1.02       1.20       1.18       1.01       1.10       1.09
                                MA(1)_rec       .        1.08       1.00       1.08       1.04       1.42
                                 AR(4)_rec      .        1.16       1.03       1.13       1.07       1.46
                              AR(AIC)_roll      .        1.13       1.06       1.09       1.25       1.28
                          AR(AIC)_iter_roll     .        1.26       1.06       1.20       1.31       1.35
                              AR(BIC)_roll      .        1.11       1.07       1.09       1.24       1.33
                                 AR(4)_roll     .        1.23       1.06       1.15       1.22       1.26
                               AR(24)_iter      .          .        1.23       1.53       1.15       1.34
                        AR(24)_iter_nocon       .          .        1.10       1.42       1.12       1.33
                                 MA(1)_roll     .        1.04       0.99       1.09       1.03       1.10
                               MA(2) - NS     1.01       1.09       1.20       1.00       1.01       1.15
                              MA(1), θ=.25    1.10       1.01       0.99       1.12       1.07       1.59
                              MA(1), θ=.65    0.99       1.12       1.18       0.99       1.02       1.14
Single-predictor ADL forecasts
                        UR(Level)_AIC_rec       .        1.06       0.98       0.99       1.22       1.43
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        1.02       1.04       1.10       1.15       1.47
                      UR(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        1.07       1.09       0.99       1.14       1.42
                         GDP(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        1.02       0.98       1.04       1.15       1.47
                    GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .        1.08       1.02       1.00       1.11       1.43
                           IP(Dif)_AIC_rec      .        1.01       1.00       1.04       1.24       1.51
                       IP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec        .        1.06       1.06       1.01       1.21       1.46
                         Emp(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        1.03       0.96       1.04       1.12       1.66
                     Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        1.04       1.03       1.01       1.13       1.54
                     CapU(Level)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.13       1.31       1.75
                       CapU((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.21       1.31       1.70
                   CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.13       1.22       1.50
                   HPerm(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.96       1.05       1.07       1.74
                      HPerm((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.11       1.16       1.07       1.61
                  HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        0.99       1.03       1.07       1.43
                       CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.15       1.18       1.76
                  CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.12       1.19       1.64
                  UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.19       0.95       1.13       1.47       1.44
                     UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        1.07       1.02       1.14       1.19       1.45
                UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        1.09       0.98       1.12       1.19       1.38
                         AHE(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.10       1.27       1.08       1.59
                     AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.15       1.26       1.07       1.56
                    RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.10       1.27       1.08       1.59
               RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.15       1.26       1.07       1.56
              LaborShare(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.15       0.96       1.28       1.65       1.45
                 LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        1.15       1.01       1.14       1.09       1.40
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        1.18       0.96       1.13       1.32       1.40
                CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.33       1.34       1.56
                    CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.22       1.13       1.64
               CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.28       1.34       1.50
                   CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.15       1.10       1.64
                      ExRate(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.28       1.33       1.31
                 ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.60       1.15       1.32
                           tb_spr_AIC_rec       .        1.18       1.31       1.25       1.01       1.51
                        UR(Level)_AIC_roll      .        1.24       1.53       1.04       1.32       1.25
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_roll      .        1.10       1.12       1.11       1.26       1.21




                                                         49
         UR(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.29   1.30   1.06   1.29   1.25
            GDP(Dif)_AIC_roll     .   1.07   1.14   1.16   1.33   1.19
       GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.24   1.12   1.02   1.33   1.21
               IP(Dif)_AIC_roll   .   1.08   0.99   1.19   1.39   1.25
           IP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll     .   1.20   1.18   1.14   1.43   1.37
             Emp(Dif)_AIC_roll    .   1.10   1.20   1.12   1.34   1.22
        Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.24   1.12   1.15   1.34   1.32
        CapU(Level)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.10   1.44   1.29
          CapU((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.17   1.37   1.30
      CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    1.01   1.43   1.30
      HPerm(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .    1.00   1.14   1.25   1.33
         HPerm((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .    1.19   1.08   1.11   1.88
     HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    1.07   1.15   1.28   1.24
          CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.14   1.38   1.21
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    1.10   1.37   1.28
     UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_roll       .   1.32   1.25   1.16   1.43   1.26
        UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.12   1.06   1.17   1.34   1.28
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.20   1.10   1.03   1.43   1.27
             AHE(Dif)_AIC_roll    .     .    1.10   1.35   1.33   1.24
        AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .    1.15   1.06   1.34   1.14
       RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .    1.10   1.35   1.33   1.24
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    1.15   1.06   1.34   1.14
  LaborShare(Level)_AIC_roll      .   1.26   1.01   1.21   1.45   1.27
    LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.16   1.04   1.11   1.32   1.48
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.22   1.03   1.09   1.35   1.23
    CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.16   1.27   1.20
       CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.04   1.25   1.32
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.23   1.31   1.13
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.07   1.29   1.28
         ExRate(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.33   1.25   1.24
     ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.64   1.25   1.22
               tb_spr_AIC_roll    .   1.18   1.79   1.39   1.38   1.35
           UR(Level)_BIC_rec      .   1.05   0.98   1.06   1.22   1.42
              UR(Dif)_BIC_rec     .   1.00   1.08   1.11   1.15   1.48
         UR(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   1.05   1.07   1.06   1.14   1.42
            GDP(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   1.03   1.09   1.10   1.15   1.47
       GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   1.09   0.99   1.07   1.07   1.44
               IP(Dif)_BIC_rec    .   1.04   1.03   1.10   1.23   1.50
          IP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec       .   1.07   1.02   1.09   1.16   1.47
            Emp(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   1.02   0.97   1.02   1.11   1.59
        Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   1.06   0.98   1.06   1.13   1.54
        CapU(Level)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.16   1.28   1.75
          CapU((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.22   1.31   1.79
      CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    1.10   1.20   1.47
      HPerm(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .    0.95   1.12   1.07   1.74
         HPerm((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.07   1.21   1.07   1.61
     HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    0.97   1.09   1.07   1.43
          CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.16   1.17   1.81
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    1.09   1.18   1.54
     UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_rec        .   1.16   0.94   1.15   1.43   1.57
        UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   1.02   1.02   1.15   1.12   1.54
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   1.08   0.97   1.13   1.20   1.43
            AHE(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.07   1.29   1.11   1.62
        AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .    1.15   1.31   1.08   1.57
       RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .    1.07   1.29   1.11   1.62
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    1.15   1.31   1.08   1.57
  LaborShare(Level)_BIC_rec       .   1.15   0.98   1.30   1.51   1.65
    LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   1.11   1.01   1.14   1.10   1.54
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   1.18   0.99   1.14   1.32   1.64
    CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.37   1.26   1.63
       CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.27   1.13   1.64
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.35   1.25   1.61
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.27   1.10   1.64
         ExRate(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.38   1.25   1.41
     ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.53   1.16   1.46
               tb_spr_BIC_rec     .   1.14   1.13   1.16   1.04   1.59




                                      50
                         UR(Level)_BIC_roll     .   1.23   1.29   1.10   1.32   1.31
                            UR(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   1.06   1.13   1.08   1.33   1.30
                        UR(1sdBP)_BIC_roll      .   1.22   1.29   1.10   1.32   1.31
                          GDP(Dif)_BIC_roll     .   1.05   1.12   1.09   1.33   1.32
                     GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .   1.23   1.09   1.12   1.28   1.30
                             IP(Dif)_BIC_roll   .   1.05   1.01   1.18   1.43   1.27
                         IP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll     .   1.23   1.17   1.15   1.46   1.39
                           Emp(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   1.09   1.12   1.14   1.36   1.30
                      Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .   1.18   1.22   1.18   1.39   1.29
                      CapU(Level)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.15   1.48   1.34
                        CapU((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.16   1.40   1.32
                    CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.09   1.46   1.36
                    HPerm(Level)_BIC_roll       .     .    1.00   1.10   1.27   1.39
                       HPerm((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .    1.09   1.07   1.10   1.33
                   HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .    1.00   1.09   1.27   1.33
                        CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.13   1.41   1.27
                   CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.06   1.39   1.28
                   UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_roll       .   1.26   1.24   1.19   1.42   1.33
                      UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   1.04   1.07   1.12   1.32   1.30
                 UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .   1.17   1.10   1.06   1.42   1.27
                           AHE(Dif)_BIC_roll    .     .    1.08   1.09   1.27   1.30
                      AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .     .    1.15   1.13   1.33   1.26
                     RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .    1.08   1.09   1.27   1.30
                RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .     .    1.15   1.13   1.33   1.26
              LaborShare(Level)_BIC_roll        .   1.19   0.97   1.20   1.38   1.31
                  LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   1.13   1.04   1.24   1.34   1.44
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_roll          .   1.17   0.96   1.11   1.35   1.32
                 CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.12   1.29   1.19
                     CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.09   1.27   1.29
                CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.15   1.27   1.16
                    CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.08   1.28   1.34
                       ExRate(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.28   1.25   1.40
                  ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.48   1.26   1.40
                             tb_spr_BIC_roll    .   1.15   1.76   1.15   1.33   1.37
Triangle model forecasts
                  Triangle Constant NAIRU       .    .     1.14   1.18   1.25   1.20
                         Triangle TV NAIRU      .    .     1.07   1.20   1.04   1.30
          Triangle Constant NAIRU (no z)        .    .     0.98   1.33   1.38   1.27
                 Triangle TV NAIRU (no z)       .    .     0.97   1.48   1.16   1.58
Combination forecasts
                Activity Median Combining       .   1.07   0.97   1.05   1.16   1.32
                  Activity Mean Combining       .   1.07   0.94   1.05   1.14   1.35
              Activity Tr. Mean Combining       .   1.07   0.95   1.05   1.16   1.34
                Activity MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.95   1.04   1.15   1.35
                Activity MSE(B) Combining       .     .    0.95   1.04   1.15   1.35
                 Activity MSE(3 Combining       .     .    0.95   1.04   1.14   1.35
                Activity MSE(D) Combining       .     .    0.95   1.05   1.16   1.35
                Activity MSE(E) Combining       .     .    0.95   1.04   1.16   1.35
                Activity MSE(F) Combining       .     .    0.94   1.04   1.15   1.35
         Activity Rec. Best(4q) Combining       .   1.20   1.10   1.25   1.44   1.42
         Activity Rec. Best(8q) Combining       .   1.21   0.99   1.19   1.46   1.61
            OtherADL Median Combining           .   1.14   1.04   1.15   1.17   1.33
               OtherADL Mean Combining          .   1.14   1.02   1.12   1.14   1.35
           OtherADL Tr. Mean Combining          .   1.14   1.03   1.13   1.14   1.35
            OtherADL MSE(A) Combining           .     .    0.93   1.14   1.15   1.34
            OtherADL MSE(B) Combining           .     .    0.93   1.14   1.15   1.34
            OtherADL MSE(C) Combining           .     .    0.94   1.14   1.16   1.35
            OtherADL MSE(D) Combining           .     .    0.94   1.14   1.16   1.32
            OtherADL MSE(E) Combining           .     .    0.93   1.13   1.17   1.34
            OtherADL MSE(F) Combining           .     .    0.94   1.13   1.17   1.36
      OtherADL Rec. Best(4q) Combining          .   1.29   1.13   1.18   1.32   1.11
      OtherADL Rec. Best(8q) Combining          .   1.32   0.98   1.32   1.33   1.26
                      All Median Combining      .   1.07   0.94   1.07   1.15   1.31
                        All Mean Combining      .   1.08   0.93   1.06   1.12   1.34
                    All Tr. Mean Combining      .   1.08   0.93   1.07   1.14   1.33
                     All MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.92   1.06   1.14   1.34




                                                    51
          All MSE(B) Combining    .     .    0.92   1.06   1.14   1.34
          All MSE(C) Combining    .     .    0.92   1.06   1.13   1.34
          All MSE(D) Combining    .     .    0.93   1.07   1.16   1.33
          All MSE(E) Combining    .     .    0.92   1.06   1.15   1.34
          All MSE(F) Combining    .     .    0.92   1.06   1.14   1.34
    All Rec. Best(4q) Combining   .   1.25   1.18   1.34   1.44   1.32
    All Rec. Best(8q) Combining   .   1.22   1.01   1.30   1.52   1.44
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(4q)   .     .      .    1.07   1.18   1.07
                      Combining
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(8q)   .    .      .     1.15   1.16   1.07
                      Combining




                                      52
                                    Table 4
 RMSEs for Inflation Forecasting Models by Sub-Period, Relative to UC-SV model:
                                   PCE-core

Forecast period                               1960Q1 –   1968Q1 –   1977Q1 -   1985Q1 –   1993Q1 –   2001Q1 –
                                               1967Q4     1976Q4     1984Q4     1992Q4     2000Q4     2007Q4
No. observations                                  32         36         32         32         32         25
Root MSE of UC-SV forecast                     0.68       1.56       1.08       0.55       0.36       0.33
Forecasting model and relative RMSEs
Univariate forecasts
                                    UC-SV     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
                              AR(AIC)_rec       .          .        1.15       1.15       1.21       1.34
                          AR(AIC)_iter_rec      .          .        1.09       1.17       1.24       1.37
                              AR(BIC)_rec       .          .        1.13       1.22       1.21       1.34
                                       AO     1.08       1.16       1.12       1.00       0.94       1.18
                                MA(1)_rec       .        1.03       1.03       1.09       1.16       1.27
                                 AR(4)_rec      .          .        1.15       1.15       1.18       1.29
                              AR(AIC)_roll      .          .        1.15       1.24       1.18       1.30
                          AR(AIC)_iter_roll     .          .        1.15       1.31       1.21       1.27
                              AR(BIC)_roll      .          .        1.15       1.06       1.24       1.28
                                 AR(4)_roll     .          .        1.19       1.25       1.16       1.27
                               AR(24)_iter      .          .          .        1.85       1.37       1.26
                        AR(24)_iter_nocon       .          .        1.14       1.32       1.26       1.24
                                 MA(1)_roll     .        1.02       1.03       1.08       1.14       1.06
                               MA(2) - NS     1.09       1.05       1.14       0.99       1.07       1.06
                              MA(1), θ=.25    1.01       1.01       0.99       1.11       1.19       1.33
                              MA(1), θ=.65    1.08       1.07       1.12       0.98       1.03       1.07
Single-predictor ADL forecasts
                        UR(Level)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.08       1.01       1.48       1.51
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.14       1.16       1.42       1.30
                      UR(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.19       1.08       1.30       1.41
                         GDP(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.03       1.17       1.38       1.45
                    GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        0.95       1.01       1.06       1.50
                           IP(Dif)_AIC_rec      .          .        1.01       1.15       1.39       1.29
                       IP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec        .          .        0.96       1.01       1.25       1.80
                         Emp(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.00       1.14       1.26       2.10
                     Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.14       1.06       1.28       1.70
                     CapU(Level)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.23       1.53       2.81
                       CapU((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.23       1.39       1.27
                   CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.19       1.17       1.52
                   HPerm(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.13       1.17       1.30       2.11
                      HPerm((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.25       1.17       1.22       1.34
                  HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        1.15       1.04       1.38       1.32
                       CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.15       1.25       1.68
                  CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.00       1.12       1.63
                  UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.96       1.18       1.99       1.73
                     UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.14       1.21       1.44       1.21
                UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.06       1.22       1.57       1.24
                         AHE(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.18       1.24       1.22       1.34
                     AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.39       1.29       1.27       1.34
                    RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.18       1.24       1.22       1.34
               RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.39       1.29       1.27       1.34
              LaborShare(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        0.99       1.39       1.91       1.57
                 LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.09       1.18       1.40       1.50
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.05       1.25       1.55       1.59
                CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.20       1.33       1.37
                    CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.12       1.17       1.49
               CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.20       1.19       1.32
                   CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.09       1.05       1.28
                      ExRate(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.29       1.35       1.27
                 ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.45       1.26       1.28
                           tb_spr_AIC_rec       .          .        1.40       1.33       1.22       1.49
                        UR(Level)_AIC_roll      .          .        1.44       1.20       1.03       1.49
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_roll      .          .        1.22       1.20       1.20       1.31




                                                         53
         UR(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.20   0.93   1.01   1.60
            GDP(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .   1.17   1.24   1.23   1.33
       GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.00   0.98   1.01   1.55
               IP(Dif)_AIC_roll   .    .   1.10   1.35   1.29   1.44
           IP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll     .    .   0.98   1.11   1.20   1.73
             Emp(Dif)_AIC_roll    .    .   1.08   1.14   1.18   1.58
        Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.23   1.17   1.12   2.07
        CapU(Level)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.21   1.33   1.73
          CapU((Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    1.34   1.27   1.44
      CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .     .    1.00   1.26   1.60
      HPerm(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.27   1.17   1.03   1.51
         HPerm((Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .   1.37   1.17   1.26   1.23
     HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.44   1.11   1.15   1.32
          CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    1.14   1.20   1.49
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .     .    0.96   1.09   1.73
     UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.14   1.44   1.04   1.44
        UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.17   1.06   1.16   1.28
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.13   1.00   1.26   1.33
             AHE(Dif)_AIC_roll    .    .   1.18   1.25   1.21   1.32
        AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.36   1.36   1.21   1.61
       RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.18   1.25   1.21   1.32
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .    .   1.36   1.36   1.21   1.61
  LaborShare(Level)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.20   1.35   1.56   1.58
    LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .   1.32   1.12   1.16   1.63
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .   1.27   1.23   1.46   1.55
    CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    1.37   1.31   1.14
       CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.20   1.21   1.31
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    1.34   1.28   1.33
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_roll      .    .     .    1.15   1.19   1.33
         ExRate(Dif)_AIC_roll     .    .     .    1.39   1.21   1.44
     ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .    .     .    1.43   1.12   1.46
               tb_spr_AIC_roll    .    .   1.64   1.26   1.24   1.30
           UR(Level)_BIC_rec      .    .   0.96   1.06   1.48   1.58
              UR(Dif)_BIC_rec     .    .   1.17   1.16   1.42   1.34
         UR(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.10   1.12   1.35   1.39
            GDP(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.10   1.17   1.38   1.47
       GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   0.95   1.07   1.14   1.46
               IP(Dif)_BIC_rec    .    .   1.14   1.15   1.40   1.33
          IP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec       .    .   0.97   1.03   1.23   1.67
            Emp(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.01   1.15   1.30   2.09
        Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.06   1.10   1.27   1.66
        CapU(Level)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.25   1.45   2.53
          CapU((Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.23   1.39   1.27
      CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .     .    1.20   1.18   1.48
      HPerm(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.10   1.13   1.20   1.74
         HPerm((Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.15   1.23   1.22   1.34
     HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   1.11   1.11   1.38   1.38
          CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.16   1.30   1.68
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .     .    1.09   1.16   1.63
     UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.03   1.18   1.98   1.76
        UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.14   1.20   1.21   1.25
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   1.04   1.23   1.58   1.31
            AHE(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .   1.19   1.26   1.22   1.34
        AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.31   1.37   1.31   1.28
       RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.19   1.26   1.22   1.34
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .    .   1.31   1.37   1.31   1.28
  LaborShare(Level)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.07   1.32   1.73   1.40
    LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .   1.06   1.14   1.46   1.36
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .   1.08   1.22   1.66   1.46
    CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    1.29   1.36   1.46
       CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.19   1.24   1.48
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    1.21   1.28   1.38
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_rec       .    .     .    1.14   1.19   1.33
         ExRate(Dif)_BIC_rec      .    .     .    1.15   1.38   1.31
     ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .    .     .    1.19   1.26   1.32
               tb_spr_BIC_rec     .    .   1.26   1.22   1.12   1.50




                                      54
                         UR(Level)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.40   1.18   1.01   1.50
                            UR(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.25   1.02   1.21   1.30
                        UR(1sdBP)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.27   0.97   1.00   1.57
                          GDP(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.17   1.10   1.23   1.30
                     GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .   1.02   1.02   1.00   1.53
                             IP(Dif)_BIC_roll   .    .   1.24   1.11   1.31   1.34
                         IP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.05   1.12   1.18   1.65
                           Emp(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.14   1.11   1.24   1.47
                      Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.17   1.06   1.12   2.04
                      CapU(Level)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.21   1.33   1.44
                        CapU((Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    1.07   1.28   1.39
                    CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.07   1.24   1.37
                    HPerm(Level)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.15   1.15   1.00   1.54
                       HPerm((Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .   1.19   1.08   1.26   1.21
                   HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .   1.20   1.12   1.11   1.31
                        CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    1.08   1.24   1.37
                   CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    0.99   1.09   1.74
                   UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.14   1.42   1.05   1.45
                      UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.20   1.05   1.18   1.28
                 UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .    .   1.16   1.01   1.27   1.27
                           AHE(Dif)_BIC_roll    .    .   1.16   1.11   1.24   1.34
                      AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .    .   1.31   1.17   1.22   1.49
                     RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.16   1.11   1.24   1.34
                RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .    .   1.31   1.17   1.22   1.49
              LaborShare(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .   1.14   1.22   1.41   1.45
                  LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .   1.12   1.09   1.26   1.58
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_roll          .    .   1.24   1.15   1.45   1.46
                 CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.24   1.29   1.14
                     CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.05   1.22   1.27
                CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.23   1.29   1.30
                    CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_roll      .    .     .    1.07   1.25   1.31
                       ExRate(Dif)_BIC_roll     .    .     .    1.14   1.29   1.43
                  ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .    .     .    1.07   1.08   1.41
                             tb_spr_BIC_roll    .    .   1.62   1.10   1.25   1.27
Triangle model forecasts
                  Triangle Constant NAIRU       .    .   1.69   1.06   1.80   1.55
                         Triangle TV NAIRU      .    .   1.94   0.99   1.37   1.44
          Triangle Constant NAIRU (no z)        .    .   1.17   1.64   2.20   1.58
                 Triangle TV NAIRU (no z)       .    .   1.28   1.58   1.48   2.13
Combination forecasts
                Activity Median Combining       .    .   0.95   1.01   1.07   1.27
                  Activity Mean Combining       .    .   0.93   1.00   1.07   1.28
              Activity Tr. Mean Combining       .    .   0.95   1.01   1.08   1.27
                Activity MSE(A) Combining       .    .     .    0.99   1.08   1.31
                Activity MSE(B) Combining       .    .     .    0.98   1.08   1.30
                 Activity MSE(3 Combining       .    .     .    0.98   1.07   1.30
                Activity MSE(D) Combining       .    .     .    0.97   1.10   1.34
                Activity MSE(E) Combining       .    .     .    0.95   1.08   1.33
                Activity MSE(F) Combining       .    .     .    0.95   1.07   1.33
         Activity Rec. Best(4q) Combining       .    .   1.01   1.39   1.37   1.95
         Activity Rec. Best(8q) Combining       .    .   0.78   1.35   1.29   1.57
            OtherADL Median Combining           .    .   1.10   1.11   1.16   1.24
               OtherADL Mean Combining          .    .   1.08   1.12   1.14   1.23
           OtherADL Tr. Mean Combining          .    .   1.10   1.11   1.14   1.22
            OtherADL MSE(A) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.16   1.26
            OtherADL MSE(B) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.16   1.25
            OtherADL MSE(C) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.16   1.24
            OtherADL MSE(D) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.18   1.29
            OtherADL MSE(E) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.17   1.26
            OtherADL MSE(F) Combining           .    .     .    1.13   1.17   1.25
      OtherADL Rec. Best(4q) Combining          .    .   1.30   1.37   1.51   1.42
      OtherADL Rec. Best(8q) Combining          .    .   1.40   1.32   1.49   1.72
                      All Median Combining      .    .   1.01   1.03   1.09   1.26
                        All Mean Combining      .    .   0.96   1.03   1.08   1.24
                    All Tr. Mean Combining      .    .   0.98   1.04   1.09   1.24
                     All MSE(A) Combining       .    .     .    1.01   1.10   1.27




                                                    55
          All MSE(B) Combining    .    .     .    1.01   1.09   1.26
          All MSE(C) Combining    .    .     .    1.00   1.08   1.26
          All MSE(D) Combining    .    .     .    1.00   1.12   1.30
          All MSE(E) Combining    .    .     .    0.98   1.10   1.29
          All MSE(F) Combining    .    .     .    0.97   1.08   1.28
    All Rec. Best(4q) Combining   .    .   1.20   1.44   1.43   1.93
    All Rec. Best(8q) Combining   .    .   0.78   1.35   1.43   1.61
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(4q)   .    .     .    1.04   1.13   1.03
                      Combining
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(8q)   .    .    .     1.04   1.26   1.13
                      Combining




                                      56
                                    Table 5
 RMSEs for Inflation Forecasting Models by Sub-Period, Relative to UC-SV model:
                                  GDP deflator

Forecast period                               1960Q1 –   1968Q1 –   1977Q1 -   1985Q1 –   1993Q1 –   2001Q1 –
                                               1967Q4     1976Q4     1984Q4     1992Q4     2000Q4     2007Q4
No. observations                                  32         36         32         32         32         25
Root MSE of UC-SV forecast                     0.72       1.76       1.28       0.70       0.41       0.57
Forecasting model and relative RMSEs
Univariate forecasts
                                    UC-SV     1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00       1.00
                              AR(AIC)_rec       .        1.03       1.06       1.06       1.02       1.16
                          AR(AIC)_iter_rec      .        1.11       1.08       1.04       0.99       1.19
                              AR(BIC)_rec       .        1.03       1.04       1.08       1.07       1.24
                                       AO     0.97       1.10       1.17       1.04       0.95       1.02
                                MA(1)_rec       .        1.02       1.00       1.04       1.02       1.16
                                 AR(4)_rec      .        1.07       1.07       1.04       0.99       1.17
                              AR(AIC)_roll      .        1.11       1.05       1.15       1.19       1.16
                          AR(AIC)_iter_roll     .        1.10       1.06       1.02       1.12       1.11
                              AR(BIC)_roll      .        1.08       1.05       1.21       1.17       1.11
                                 AR(4)_roll     .        1.15       1.08       1.08       1.14       1.15
                               AR(24)_iter      .          .        1.42       1.10       1.02       0.99
                        AR(24)_iter_nocon       .          .        1.34       1.02       0.99       0.99
                                 MA(1)_roll     .        1.03       0.99       1.05       0.98       1.02
                               MA(2) - NS     0.97       1.02       1.19       1.03       1.02       1.02
                              MA(1), θ=.25    1.03       1.00       1.00       1.07       1.08       1.25
                              MA(1), θ=.65    0.96       1.03       1.17       1.02       0.99       1.01
Single-predictor ADL forecasts
                        UR(Level)_AIC_rec       .        0.93       0.99       0.91       1.23       1.30
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.93       1.11       0.96       1.25       1.22
                      UR(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        0.94       1.12       0.91       1.14       1.19
                         GDP(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.94       1.04       0.91       1.06       1.09
                    GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .        0.98       1.01       0.89       0.96       1.15
                           IP(Dif)_AIC_rec      .        0.90       1.05       0.89       1.25       1.15
                       IP(1sdBP)_AIC_rec        .        0.93       1.04       0.86       1.18       1.23
                         Emp(Dif)_AIC_rec       .        0.93       1.03       0.93       1.11       1.42
                     Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .        0.94       1.05       0.94       1.19       1.35
                     CapU(Level)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.03       1.54       1.87
                       CapU((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        0.96       1.39       1.22
                   CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        0.91       1.23       1.23
                   HPerm(Level)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.07       1.05       0.89       1.60
                      HPerm((Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.17       1.09       1.01       1.13
                  HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .        1.18       1.04       1.10       1.09
                       CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.00       1.16       1.54
                  CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        0.89       1.12       1.46
                  UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.08       1.01       0.92       1.83       1.32
                     UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        0.99       1.07       0.93       1.32       1.11
                UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        0.99       1.04       0.95       1.30       1.14
                         AHE(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .        1.09       1.09       1.05       1.16
                     AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec         .          .        1.21       1.19       1.07       1.13
                    RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .        1.09       1.09       1.05       1.16
               RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .          .        1.21       1.19       1.07       1.13
              LaborShare(Level)_AIC_rec         .        1.10       0.99       1.18       1.85       1.27
                 LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_rec        .        1.09       1.06       1.07       1.12       1.14
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_rec           .        1.10       1.01       1.08       1.47       1.13
                CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.09       1.38       1.29
                    CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.02       1.15       1.34
               CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.12       1.17       1.21
                   CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_rec        .          .          .        1.02       0.96       1.19
                      ExRate(Dif)_AIC_rec       .          .          .        1.23       1.44       1.06
                 ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_rec          .          .          .        1.66       1.25       0.91
                           tb_spr_AIC_rec       .        1.08       1.23       1.19       0.95       1.27
                        UR(Level)_AIC_roll      .        1.09       1.43       1.06       1.16       1.11
                          UR(Dif)_AIC_roll      .        0.97       1.35       1.12       1.25       1.06




                                                         57
         UR(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.03   1.33   1.04   1.25   1.13
            GDP(Dif)_AIC_roll     .   1.13   1.21   1.08   1.26   1.05
       GDP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.15   0.96   1.05   1.21   1.07
               IP(Dif)_AIC_roll   .   1.01   1.22   1.10   1.42   1.10
           IP(1sdBP)_AIC_roll     .   1.05   1.10   1.12   1.48   1.20
             Emp(Dif)_AIC_roll    .   1.04   1.24   1.15   1.23   1.08
        Emp(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.06   1.23   1.17   1.27   1.23
        CapU(Level)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.12   1.39   1.12
          CapU((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.11   1.34   1.10
      CapU(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    1.05   1.33   1.06
      HPerm(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .    1.18   1.36   0.92   1.35
         HPerm((Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .    1.20   1.21   1.12   1.08
     HPerm(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    1.36   1.33   1.07   1.10
          CFNAI(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.12   1.29   1.11
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .      .    1.10   1.31   1.16
     UR_5wk(Level)_AIC_roll       .   1.28   1.18   1.21   1.86   1.20
        UR_5wk(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.09   1.11   1.17   1.45   1.14
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .   1.08   1.09   0.94   1.38   1.15
             AHE(Dif)_AIC_roll    .     .    1.07   1.06   1.18   1.14
        AHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .    1.19   1.11   1.22   1.06
       RealAHE(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .    1.07   1.06   1.18   1.14
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_AIC_roll        .     .    1.19   1.11   1.22   1.06
  LaborShare(Level)_AIC_roll      .   1.22   1.39   1.18   1.25   1.14
    LaborShare(Dif)_AIC_roll      .   1.11   1.53   1.11   1.60   1.26
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .   1.15   1.44   1.13   1.30   1.15
    CPI_Med(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.14   1.31   0.87
       CPI_Med(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.06   1.20   1.14
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.16   1.21   0.72
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_AIC_roll      .     .      .    1.07   1.16   1.13
         ExRate(Dif)_AIC_roll     .     .      .    1.42   1.15   1.19
     ExRate(1sdBP)_AIC_roll       .     .      .    1.67   1.21   1.13
               tb_spr_AIC_roll    .   1.09   1.60   1.29   1.16   1.21
           UR(Level)_BIC_rec      .   0.94   0.96   0.92   1.21   1.28
              UR(Dif)_BIC_rec     .   0.94   1.08   0.97   1.20   1.20
         UR(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   0.93   1.06   0.94   1.14   1.19
            GDP(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   1.00   1.09   0.94   1.08   1.11
       GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   0.99   1.00   0.93   0.87   1.17
               IP(Dif)_BIC_rec    .   0.96   1.06   0.89   1.22   1.11
          IP(1sdBP)_BIC_rec       .   0.96   0.99   0.89   1.12   1.22
            Emp(Dif)_BIC_rec      .   0.90   0.99   0.90   1.12   1.30
        Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   0.97   0.99   0.90   1.14   1.31
        CapU(Level)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.06   1.47   1.83
          CapU((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.02   1.39   1.22
      CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    0.94   1.19   1.21
      HPerm(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .    0.99   1.05   0.89   1.60
         HPerm((Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.09   1.08   1.05   1.22
     HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    1.08   0.99   1.09   1.05
          CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.00   1.16   1.51
     CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .      .    0.86   1.08   1.32
     UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_rec        .   1.08   1.00   1.01   1.73   1.43
        UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   0.98   1.08   1.03   1.17   1.20
    UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .   1.00   1.03   0.98   1.28   1.18
            AHE(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .    1.07   1.17   1.07   1.24
        AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .    1.21   1.31   1.11   1.20
       RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .    1.07   1.17   1.07   1.24
   RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_rec         .     .    1.21   1.31   1.11   1.20
  LaborShare(Level)_BIC_rec       .   1.09   1.03   1.22   1.68   1.34
    LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_rec       .   1.06   1.04   1.06   1.15   1.22
ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .   1.11   1.03   1.09   1.49   1.23
    CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.14   1.38   1.29
       CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.08   1.18   1.27
   CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.16   1.17   1.21
      CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_rec       .     .      .    1.08   0.99   1.22
         ExRate(Dif)_BIC_rec      .     .      .    1.12   1.48   1.09
     ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_rec        .     .      .    1.28   1.33   1.11
               tb_spr_BIC_rec     .   1.03   1.09   1.11   0.99   1.33




                                      58
                         UR(Level)_BIC_roll     .   1.14   1.49   1.04   1.21   1.15
                            UR(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   1.03   1.33   1.14   1.21   1.10
                        UR(1sdBP)_BIC_roll      .   0.98   1.36   1.02   1.20   1.17
                          GDP(Dif)_BIC_roll     .   1.15   1.15   1.17   1.28   1.00
                     GDP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .   1.15   0.98   1.06   1.20   1.10
                             IP(Dif)_BIC_roll   .   1.05   1.16   1.10   1.34   1.08
                         IP(1sdBP)_BIC_roll     .   1.09   1.13   1.18   1.43   1.24
                           Emp(Dif)_BIC_roll    .   1.03   1.21   1.15   1.25   1.11
                      Emp(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .   1.04   1.24   1.24   1.27   1.24
                      CapU(Level)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.01   1.37   1.14
                        CapU((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.10   1.27   1.05
                    CapU(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    0.96   1.29   1.12
                    HPerm(Level)_BIC_roll       .     .    1.08   1.25   0.94   1.37
                       HPerm((Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .    1.08   1.25   1.14   1.07
                   HPerm(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .    1.22   1.20   1.08   1.08
                        CFNAI(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.12   1.28   1.10
                   CFNAI(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.14   1.25   1.13
                   UR_5wk(Level)_BIC_roll       .   1.28   1.07   1.17   1.55   1.22
                      UR_5wk(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   1.07   1.08   1.14   1.27   1.08
                 UR_5wk(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .   1.06   1.09   0.93   1.32   1.11
                           AHE(Dif)_BIC_roll    .     .    1.07   1.19   1.17   1.10
                      AHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll       .     .    1.19   1.32   1.17   1.09
                     RealAHE(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .    1.07   1.19   1.17   1.10
                RealAHE(1sdBP)_BIC_roll         .     .    1.19   1.32   1.17   1.09
              LaborShare(Level)_BIC_roll        .   1.21   1.24   1.22   1.24   1.06
                  LaborShare(Dif)_BIC_roll      .   1.06   1.32   1.23   1.31   1.16
           ULaborShare(1sdBP)_BIC_roll          .   1.17   1.32   1.23   1.29   1.09
                 CPI_Med(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.36   1.34   0.92
                     CPI_Med(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.13   1.18   1.26
                CPI_TrMn(Level)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.26   1.14   0.73
                    CPI_TrMn(Dif)_BIC_roll      .     .      .    1.16   1.16   1.11
                       ExRate(Dif)_BIC_roll     .     .      .    1.26   1.22   1.16
                  ExRate(1sdBP)_BIC_roll        .     .      .    1.49   1.20   1.15
                             tb_spr_BIC_roll    .   1.13   1.50   1.21   1.14   1.17
Triangle model forecasts
                  Triangle Constant NAIRU       .    .     1.08   0.78   1.22   1.20
                         Triangle TV NAIRU      .    .     0.98   0.81   1.07   1.23
          Triangle Constant NAIRU (no z)        .    .     1.22   0.95   1.64   1.22
                 Triangle TV NAIRU (no z)       .    .     1.17   1.21   1.33   1.61
Combination forecasts
                Activity Median Combining       .   0.98   0.99   0.93   1.10   1.09
                  Activity Mean Combining       .   1.00   0.97   0.91   1.07   1.10
              Activity Tr. Mean Combining       .   1.00   0.98   0.93   1.09   1.10
                Activity MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.98   0.91   1.09   1.11
                Activity MSE(B) Combining       .     .    0.98   0.91   1.09   1.11
                 Activity MSE(3 Combining       .     .    0.98   0.91   1.08   1.10
                Activity MSE(D) Combining       .     .    0.98   0.89   1.10   1.11
                Activity MSE(E) Combining       .     .    0.98   0.89   1.09   1.11
                Activity MSE(F) Combining       .     .    0.98   0.89   1.08   1.11
         Activity Rec. Best(4q) Combining       .   1.09   1.24   1.02   1.33   1.07
         Activity Rec. Best(8q) Combining       .   1.11   1.29   1.02   1.30   1.39
            OtherADL Median Combining           .   1.09   1.02   1.06   1.12   1.08
               OtherADL Mean Combining          .   1.10   0.99   1.02   1.09   1.07
           OtherADL Tr. Mean Combining          .   1.09   0.98   1.05   1.09   1.07
            OtherADL MSE(A) Combining           .     .    1.09   1.08   1.10   1.06
            OtherADL MSE(B) Combining           .     .    1.07   1.08   1.11   1.06
            OtherADL MSE(C) Combining           .     .    1.06   1.08   1.11   1.06
            OtherADL MSE(D) Combining           .     .    1.11   1.08   1.10   1.04
            OtherADL MSE(E) Combining           .     .    1.09   1.08   1.11   1.04
            OtherADL MSE(F) Combining           .     .    1.07   1.08   1.12   1.06
      OtherADL Rec. Best(4q) Combining          .   1.07   1.18   1.42   1.12   0.83
      OtherADL Rec. Best(8q) Combining          .   1.15   1.32   1.22   1.05   0.91
                      All Median Combining      .   1.01   0.97   0.98   1.10   1.07
                        All Mean Combining      .   1.02   0.94   0.94   1.05   1.08
                    All Tr. Mean Combining      .   1.02   0.94   0.97   1.06   1.07
                     All MSE(A) Combining       .     .    0.97   0.95   1.07   1.07




                                                    59
          All MSE(B) Combining    .     .    0.96   0.95   1.07   1.07
          All MSE(C) Combining    .     .    0.96   0.95   1.07   1.07
          All MSE(D) Combining    .     .    0.98   0.94   1.09   1.07
          All MSE(E) Combining    .     .    0.98   0.93   1.09   1.07
          All MSE(F) Combining    .     .    0.97   0.93   1.07   1.07
    All Rec. Best(4q) Combining   .   1.07   1.35   1.20   1.32   0.90
    All Rec. Best(8q) Combining   .   1.12   1.37   1.03   1.16   1.03
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(4q)   .     .      .    0.91   1.14   1.17
                      Combining
UCSV and Triangle Rec. Best(8q)   .    .      .     0.89   1.13   1.21
                      Combining




                                      60
Figure 1. Quarterly rate of U.S. price inflation as measured by the GDP deflator, PCE-
                   all, and CPI-all, and the rate of unemployment.




                                         61
Figure 2. Rolling RMSEs for CPI-all inflation forecasts: AR(AIC), triangle model
                    (constant NAIRU), and ADL-u model




                                      62
                         (a) AR(AIC)




                      (b) triangle model




                      (c) ADL-u model

Figure 3. CPI-all inflation and psuedo out-of-sample forecasts.




                              63
Figure 4. Rolling RMSEs for univariate CPI-all inflation forecasts: AR(AIC), Atkeson-
   Ohanian (AO), and unobserved components-stochastic volatility (UC-SV) models




                                         64
Figure 5. Rolling RMSEs for CPI-all inflation forecasts: AR(AIC), Atkeson-Ohanian
                          (AO), and term spread model




                                       65
Figure 6. Rolling RMSEs for inflation forecasts, UC-SV model, for all five inflation
                                      series




                                        66
                       Figure 7
(a) Relative rolling RMSE of prototype models: CPI-all
(b) Relative rolling RMSE of univariate models: CPI-all




                          67
                         Figure 7
(c) Relative rolling RMSE of Phillips curve forecasts: CPI-all
 (d) Relative rolling RMSE of combination forecasts: CPI-all




                             68
                        Figure 8
(a) Relative rolling RMSE of prototype models: CPI-core
(b) Relative rolling RMSE of univariate models: CPI-core




                          69
                          Figure 8
(c) Relative rolling RMSE of Phillips curve forecasts: CPI-core
 (d) Relative rolling RMSE of combination forecasts: CPI-core




                              70
                       Figure 9
(a) Relative rolling RMSE of prototype models: PCE-all
(b) Relative rolling RMSE of univariate models: PCE-all




                          71
                          Figure 9
(c) Relative rolling RMSE of Phillips curve forecasts: PCE-all
 (d) Relative rolling RMSE of combination forecasts: PCE-all




                             72
                       Figure 10
(a) Relative rolling RMSE of prototype models: PCE-core
(b) Relative rolling RMSE of univariate models: PCE-core




                          73
                          Figure 10
(c) Relative rolling RMSE of Phillips curve forecasts: PCE-core
 (d) Relative rolling RMSE of combination forecasts: PCE-core




                              74
                            Figure 11
(a) Relative rolling RMSE of Phillips curve forecasts: GDP deflator
 (b) Relative rolling RMSE of combination forecasts: GDP deflator




                                75
                         Figure 11
(c) Relative rolling RMSE of prototype models: GDP deflator
(d) Relative rolling RMSE of univariate models: GDP deflator




                            76
Figure 12. RMSEs of headline inflation forecasts, relative to UC-SV, for (a) triangle
       model and (b) ADL-u model. The unemployment rate is plotted in (c).




                                         77
                                         Figure 13
    Scatterplot of RMSE of headline inflation forecasts, relative to UC-SV, vs. the
unemployment gap (two-sided bandpass); mean is kernel regression estimate using data
                  for all three series. Each point represents a quarter.
                           (a) triangle model; (b) ADL-u model




                                        78
                                         Figure 14
  Scatterplot of RMSE of headline inflation forecasts, relative to UC-SV, vs. the four-
quarter change in the unemployment gap (two-sided bandpass); mean is kernel regression
         estimate using data for all three series. Each point represents a quarter.
                          (a) triangle model; (b) ADL-u model



                                          79
                                        Figure 15
Scatterplot of RMSEs of CPI-all inflation forecasts from (a) triangle model and (b) ADL-
 u model, relative to UC-SV, vs. the four-quarter change in four-quarter inflation. Each
                              point represents a quarter.




                                          80
                                     Figure 16
 Scatterplot of RMSEs of PCE-all inflation forecasts from (a) triangle model and (b)
ADL-u model, relative to UC-SV, vs. the four-quarter change in four-quarter inflation.
                          Each point represents a quarter.




                                         81
                                      Figure 17
Scatterplot of RMSEs of GDP inflation forecasts from (a) triangle model and (b) ADL-u
 model, relative to UC-SV, vs. the four-quarter change in four-quarter inflation. Each
                              point represents a quarter.




                                         82
