                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      STRATEGIC INTERACTION AMONG HETEROGENEOUS PRICE-SETTERS IN
                       AN ESTIMATED DSGE MODEL

                                          Olivier Coibion
                                        Yuriy Gorodnichenko

                                        Working Paper 14323
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14323


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




The authors thank Bob Barsky, Angus Chu, Bill Dupor, Chris House, Ed Knotek, Peter Morrow, Serena
Ng, Phacharapot Nuntramas, Oleg Korenok, Matthew Shapiro, Eric Sims, Mark Watson, an anonymous
referee, and seminar participants at the University of Michigan and North American Econometric Society
Meeting for helpful comments. The authors also wish to thank the Robert V. Roosa Fellowship and
Rackham Dissertation Fellowship for financial support, the SciClone Computational Cluster (College
of William and Mary) and Center for Advanced Computing (University of Michigan) for computational
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Strategic Interaction Among Heterogeneous Price-Setters In An Estimated DSGE Model
Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko
NBER Working Paper No. 14323
September 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. E3,E5

                                               ABSTRACT

We consider a DSGE model in which firms follow one of four price-setting regimes: sticky prices,
sticky-information, rule-of-thumb, or full-information flexible prices. The parameters of the model,
including the fractions of each type of firm, are estimated by matching the moments of the observed
variables of the model to those found in the data. We find that sticky-price firms and sticky-information
firms jointly account for over 80% of firms in the model, with the rest largely accounted for by rule-of-thumb
firms. We compare the performance of our hybrid model to pure sticky-price and sticky-information
models along various dimensions, including monetary policy implications.


Olivier Coibion
Department of Economics
College of William and Mary
115 Morton Hall
Williamsburg, VA 23188
ocoibion@wm.edu

Yuriy Gorodnichenko
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
ygorodni@econ.berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
The nature of price-setting decisions made by firms has long played a pivotal role underlying
controversies in macroeconomics. Whereas real business cycle (RBC) models assume that firms
with full information are free to set prices optimally at all times, New Keynesian models are
typically defined by departures from the assumption of flexible prices.1 Recent work has also
emphasized the implications of deviating from the assumption of full-information in price setting.2
This paper is motivated by the idea that a single assumption about firms’ price-setting decision
process may be insufficient to adequately capture macroeconomic dynamics by missing potentially
important interactions among heterogeneous firms. Indeed, firm-level evidence indicates striking
heterogeneity in price setting as well as significant information costs.3 We develop and estimate a
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model that allows for four commonly assumed price-setting
sectors to coexist and interact via their price-setting decisions. Our results indicate that 1) the hybrid
model fits the data substantially better than any of the models consisting solely of one type of firm;
2) sticky-price and sticky-information firms account for more than 80% of all firms in the hybrid
model; 3) neither rule-of-thumb nor flexible-price full-information firms are important to match the
moments of the data; 4) strategic interaction of different price setting practices is qualitatively and
quantitatively important.
         To assess the relative importance of heterogeneity in the price-setting behavior of firms, we
consider a continuum of monopolistic producers of intermediate goods, divided into four segments,
each of which uses a different price-setting approach.                     These include sticky-prices, sticky-
information, rule-of-thumb, and full-information flexible-price firms.4 This setup is nested in an
otherwise standard New Keynesian model with a representative consumer and a central bank. The




1
  See Kydland and Prescott (1982) for the seminal presentation of a classical RBC model and Woodford (2003) for an in-
depth presentation of New Keynesian models.
2
  Sims’ (2003) rational inattention model, Woodford’s (2001) imperfect common knowledge, and Mankiw and Reis’
(2002) sticky-information models are prime examples.
3
  Empirical work typically finds a large amount of heterogeneity in the frequency of price changes by firms, as well as in
the source of costs to changing prices (information vs menu costs). Bils and Klenow (2004) and Dhyne et al (2005), for
example, find that there are large differences in durations between price changes across sectors. Taylor (1999) cites the
example of frozen orange juice prices changing every two weeks while magazine prices change every three years.
Zbaracki et al (2004) and Fabiani et al (2005) report significant information costs.
4
  Sticky-price firms are modeled a la Calvo (1983), sticky-information firms are as in Mankiw and Reis (2002), and rule-
of-thumb firms always update prices by last period’s inflation rate, as in Barsky and Kilian (2001).


                                                            2
model also allows for a stochastic trend in technology and non-zero trend inflation.5 The parameters
of the model, including the share of each type of firm, are estimated jointly using a method of
moments approach. This delivers a set of predicted moments for the observable variables that can be
directly compared to those of the data.
         Because we allow for these four types of firms to coexist, our model nests many price-setting
models considered in the literature. For example, sticky-price models are frequently augmented with
rule-of-thumb firms to better match the inflation inertia observed in the data, but the relative
importance of forward-looking versus backward-looking behavior has been much debated.6 Our
result that sticky-price firms account for approximately sixty percent of firms is consistent with the
findings of much of this literature, but the fact that rule-of-thumb firms are ruled out in favor of
sticky-information firms implies that the role previously assigned to rule-of-thumb firms in
explaining backward-looking behavior in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve (NKPC) is instead
likely due to the presence of sticky-information firms.
         Flexible-price full-information firms are included to capture the potential importance of
heterogeneity in rates at which prices and information are updated. Bouakez et al (2006), Carvalho
(2006) and Aoki (2001) demonstrate that heterogeneity in price stickiness across sectors affects the
dynamics and optimal monetary policy of a sticky price model respectively. By including flexible
price firms, our model nests a simple case of such heterogeneity. The fact that these types of firms
receive an estimated share of only 8% indicates that heterogeneity of this sort is relatively
unimportant to match the moments of the data.
         The presence of sticky-price, sticky-information, and rule-of-thumb firms also nests
empirical work to assess the empirical support for the NKPC versus the Sticky Information Phillips
Curve (SIPC). While results have been either ambiguous or favored the NKPC (Korenok (2008),
Kiley (2007) and Coibion (forthcoming)), most of this literature has assumed that either the NKPC
or SIPC (or their weighted average) form the true models without allowing for coexistence of
different price setting mechanisms.7 We build on this approach by allowing for both sticky-price
and sticky-information firms to coexist and interact via strategic complementarities in price-setting.

5
  We allow for trend inflation because it has non-trivial effects on the dynamics of the sticky price model (Ascari 2004,
Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2008). In addition, we show in section 2.5 that trend inflation has interesting steady state
effects on the relative price levels of different price setting sectors and therefore plays an important role in our model.
6
  Gali and Gertler (1999), Linde (2005), and Rudd and Whelan (2006) are examples.
7
  Andres et al (2005) is an exception by finding that the sticky-information model is statistically preferred to a sticky-
price model.


                                                            3
Our finding that both types of firms are required to best match the data thus calls into question much
of this previous work focused only on one model or the other.
        By considering a hybrid model with sticky-prices and sticky-information, this paper is most
closely related to recent work by Dupor et al (forthcoming), Knotek (2008), and Klenow and Willis
(2007), each of which superimpose delayed information updating as in Mankiw and Reis (2002)
upon firms already facing nominal rigidities: menu costs in Knotek (2008) and Klenow and Willis
(2007) and time-dependent updating in Dupor et al (forthcoming).8 Each finds empirical evidence
for sticky-prices and sticky-information. Thus, our results complement their findings. However, our
approach differs from theirs in three important aspects. First, whereas each of these papers considers
models in which all firms are subject to both sticky prices and sticky information, our model allows
for sticky-price and sticky-information firms to coexist and interact via strategic complementarities
in price-setting, but does not allow for any firm to have both sticky-prices and sticky-information.
While we view our approach as a better approximation to the fact that the relative importance of
pricing and informational rigidities varies across firms, and thus are likely to be best modeled via
different pricing assumptions, whether sticky-prices and sticky-information are best integrated
vertically (as in Klenow and Willis (2007), Knotek (2008) and Dupor et al (forthcoming)) or
horizontally is an as-of-yet unexplored empirical question. Second, our model is more general since
it nests sticky-price, sticky-information, and rule-of-thumb firms as well as flexible-price full-
information firms, whereas Klenow and Willis (2007), Knotek (2008) and Dupor et al (forthcoming)
exclude either rule-of-thumb or flexible-price full-information or both types of firms. Third, neither
Knotek (2008) nor Dupor et al (forthcoming) use fully-specified DSGE models for their empirical
results and thus are not able to explore the implications of heterogeneous price-setting for sources of
business cycles, optimal policy and so on.
        To estimate our DSGE model, we make use of the dynamic auto- and cross-covariances of
observable variables. These moments provide important insights about the lead-lag structure of
economic relationships. By comparing the ability of the estimated hybrid model and estimated pure
models to match these moments of the data, one contribution of the paper is being able to assess why
the data prefer our hybrid model over pure sticky-price or sticky-information models. For example,
the moments of the data indicate that inflation leads output growth and interest rates. This stylized


8
 In Knotek (2008), information updates follow a Poisson process as in Mankiw and Reis (2002), but subject to a
maximum number of periods after which information is automatically updated.


                                                      4
fact is the primary reason why sticky-firms account for such a large fraction of firms since sticky-
prices induce more-forward looking behavior than alternative price-setting setups.
        We also consider the implications of our results for optimal monetary policy. While much
work has been devoted to studying optimal monetary policy for sticky-price models, and some work
has extended this type of analysis to sticky-information, Kitamura (2008) is the only other paper
which considers optimal monetary policy in a hybrid sticky-price and sticky-information model and
does so using the vertically integrated hybrid model of Dupor et al (forthcoming).9 Based on our
estimated DSGE model, we find that there could be significant gains in welfare if the central bank
used policy rules different from the estimated Taylor rule. In particular, our simulations indicate
dramatic improvements when the central banker has a more aggressive response to inflation or
incorporates an element of price level targeting in his or her reaction function. We show that using
pure sticky-price or sticky-information models can greatly mislead the central banker about potential
gains from using alternative policy rules in the presence of heterogeneous price setting. The fact that
Kitamura (2008) reaches a similar conclusion using an alternative integration of price and
informational rigidities supports the notion that accounting for both types of rigidities has important
monetary policy implications which are not adequately addressed in either pure sticky-price or pure
sticky-information models. Finally, we find that there is little penalty from using a policy with a
response to inflation that is uniform across sectors relative to policy rules with differential responses.
        The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2, we present the model. Section 3
discusses the empirical methodology. Our benchmark estimates, discussion, and robustness analysis
are in section 4. Section 5 considers the implications of our results for optimal monetary policy
while section 6 concludes.


2    Model
The model has three principal types of agents: consumers, firms, and the central bank.                         The
consumer’s problem is modeled as a representative agent with internal habit formation.10 Production
is broken into final goods and intermediate goods. Production of the final goods is perfectly
competitive whereas the intermediate goods are produced by a continuum of monopolistic


9
   See Woodford (2003) for optimal monetary policy based on sticky-prices and Ball et al (2005) for the sticky-
information model.
10
   Ravina (2004) and Grishchenko (2005) provide empirical evidence supporting internal habit formation over external
habit formation.


                                                         5
producers. The latter follow different price-setting rules. Finally, the central bank sets interest rates
according to a Taylor (1993) rule.


2.1 Consumer’s Problem
The representative agent seeks to maximize the present discounted value of current and future utility
levels
                                                           gt  j                               1
                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                           
                                                 t                                                  Nt11/j  (i )di  ,
                                                         j
                 max                            E           e      ln(Ct j   hCt  j 1 )
                                          
         {Ct  j , Nt  j ( i ), H t  j } j 0
                                                  j 0                                       1  1/  0                   
where Ct is consumption at time t, Nt(i) is labor supplied to intermediate goods firm i, h is the degree
of internal habit formation,  is the Frisch labor supply elasticity,  is the discount factor, and gt is a
shock to the marginal utility of consumption. We allow for labor to be supplied individually to
specific firms to generate stronger strategic complementarity in price setting.11                                                Because
consumption and labor are separable in the utility function, we impose that consumption enters in a
logarithmic form to be consistent with a balanced growth path. Each period, the consumer faces the
following budget constraint
                    Ht j         1              Wt  j (i )          H t  j 1
         Ct  j                N t  j (i )                 di                 Rt  j 1  Tt  j ,
                     Pt  j       0                Pt  j               Pt  j

where Ht is the stock of risk-free bonds held at time t and Rt is the gross nominal interest rate earned
on bonds in the subsequent period. Wt(i) is the nominal wage earned from labor supplied to
intermediate goods firm i and Tt consists of profits returned to the consumer. Finally, Pt is the price
of the consumption good at time t.
         Defining t to be the shadow value of wealth, the first-order conditions with respect to each
control variable are
                                                                         e gt                 e gt1
         Consumption                                           t                  hEt             ,                            (1)
                                                                      Ct  hCt 1         Ct 1  hCt

         Labor Supply                                          Nt1/ (i)  t (Wt (i) / Pt ) ,                                     (2)

         Bonds                                                  t   Et   t 1 Rt ( Pt / Pt 1 )  .                           (3)




11
  See Woodford (2003, Chapter 3) for a discussion of why strategic complementarity is needed in New Keynesian
models.


                                                                                    6
2.2 Production
The final good is produced by a perfectly competitive industry using a continuum of intermediate
goods through a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator
                                        /( 1)
             1                      
        Yt    Yt ( j )( 1)/ dj              .
             0                      
This yields the following price level
                                  1/(1 )
             1                 
        Pt    Pj ( j )1 dj             .
             0                 
The demand facing an intermediate producer j is then given by

        Yt ( j )   Pt ( j ) / Pt  Yt .
                                  



        We assume that intermediate goods producers have a production function that is linear in
labor Yt ( j )  At N t ( j ) .12 Despite the presence of firm-specific labor supply, we assume that firms

treat wages as exogenously determined.                          The optimal frictionless price ( Pt # ) is a markup

   /(  1) over firm-specific nominal marginal costs, where the latter are given by
MCt ( j )  Wt ( j ) / At . Eliminating the firm-specific elements of marginal cost by substituting in the

labor supply condition and the firm-level demand yields the following relationship between real
firm-specific marginal costs and aggregate marginal costs

        MCt ( j )  Pt ( j ) / Pt 
                                          
                                                 MCt
                                                    ,
         Pt                Dt                     Pt

                                          (Yt / At )         1                                      1
                                                                                                      Pt (i ) / Pt  di is a measure
                                                                                                                     
where    1 , MCt / Pt 
                                        t At (1   N ,t ) 0
                                                                  Pt (i ) / Pt       di , and Dt  0


of the dispersion of prices across firms. We can then write a firm’s instantaneous optimal desired
relative price as
                1
         Pt #            MCt
                             ,                                                                                             (4)
         Pt            Dt  Pt
Since there is no capital in the model, the goods market clearing condition is simply Yt = Ct.



12
   We omit capital from the model for tractability. Woodford (2003, p. 372-378) argues that the dynamics of the
standard pricing model without capital is very similar to the dynamics of the model with capital.


                                                                    7
2.3 Price-Setting Behavior
Intermediate good producing firms are assumed to be in one of four price-setting sectors: sticky
prices, sticky-information, rule-of-thumb, or flexible prices. We assume, without loss of generality,
that firms of the same pricing sector are grouped into segments so that the price level can be written
as
                                                                                                                     1/(1 )
                 s1 sp 1      s2  s1         s3  s2  s1              1            
           Pt    Pt ( j ) dj   Pt ( j ) dj   Pt ( j ) dj   Pt flex ( j )1 dj 
                                         si 1               rot 1
                                                                                                                                ,
                 0               s1              s2  s1            s3  s2  s1      
where sp, si, rot, and flex are indices for sticky-price, sticky-information, rule-of-thumb, and flexible
price firms respectively. Importantly, firms are otherwise identical in the sense that a firm in a given
sector is the same competitor to all other firms symmetrically irrespective of whether they are in the
same sector or not. The weighting parameters s1, s2, and s3 are the fractions of firms that belong to
the sticky-price, sticky-information, and rule-of-thumb sectors respectively. Flexible-price firms are
assigned the remaining mass of s4=1-s1-s2-s3. Firms cannot switch sectors. Defining the price level
                                                                               1/(1 )
specific to sector k as Pt k   sk1                   P ( j )1 dj 
                                        sk  sk 1 ...
                                                                                          , we can rewrite the aggregate price level as
                                     sk 1  sk 2 ... t            
                              1        1            1          1
           Pt  [ s1 Pt sp  s2 Pt si  s3 Pt rot  s4 Pt flex ]1/(1 ) .                                                          (5)


Sticky price firms: These firms face a constant probability 1   sp of being able to change their price

each period. A firm with the ability to change its price at time t will choose a reset price Bt to
maximize the expected present discounted value of future profits
                                               

                                                        
           Bt ( j )  arg max Bt ( j )   spj Et Qt ,t  j  Bt ( j )  MCt  j ( j )  Yt  j ( j )
                                               j 0
                                                                                                     
where Qt,t+j is the nominal stochastic discount factor between times t and t+j and firm-specific
marginal costs and output are as before. Taking the first-order condition and replacing firm-specific
marginal costs and output with their corresponding aggregate terms yields the optimality condition

                                                                                         
            

           
           j 0
                   j
                  sp   Et Qt ,t  jYt  j Pt j  Bt1   MCt  j Pt           
                                                                          j / Dt  j   0                                         (6)

so that all firms with the opportunity to reset prices choose the same value of Bt. The price level for
sticky price firms obeys
                                                      1
           Pt sp  [(1   sp ) Bt1   sp Pt sp1 ]1/(1 ) .                                                                    (7)



                                                                           8
Sticky-Information Firms: These firms face a Poisson process for updating their information sets,
with the probability of getting new information in each period given by 1   si . In every period,

firms set prices freely given their information set. The profit-maximization problem at time t for
firm j which last updated its information set at time t-k is then
         Pt|sit k ( j )  arg max P Et k [( P  MCt ( j ))Yt ( j )]

where firm-specific marginal costs and demand are determined as before. This yields the solution
that a firm j that last updated its information k periods ago sets its time-t price equal to
Pt sit  k ( j )  Et  k Pt # . Hence, the price level for sticky information firms is

         Pt si  [(1   si ) j 0  sij ( Et  j Pt # )1 ]1/(1 ) .
                                     
                                                                                                                      (8)


Rule-of-Thumb Firms: These firms always change their prices by the previous period’s inflation
rate.13 Hence, the price level for the rule-of-thumb sector follows
         Pt rot  Pt rot1 ( Pt 1 / Pt  2 ) .                                                                       (9)


Flexible Price/Information Firms: These firms are always free to change prices and have complete
information. They thus always set prices equal to the instantaneously optimal price. The price level
for flexible price firms is then just Pt flex  Pt # .


2.4 Shocks
We assume the following shock processes. First, technology shocks follow a random walk with drift
         log At  log a  log At 1   a ,t ,

where a,t are independently distributed with mean zero and variance  a2 . Preference shocks follow

a stationary AR(1) process
         gt   g gt 1   g ,t ,



13
  Technically this implies that the relative price level of rule-of-thumb firms is indeterminate in a stationary steady-state.
This can be avoided by assuming a Poisson probability 1-rot that each firm is allowed to set its price equal to Pt#.
Taking the limit as rot goes to one leads to a well-defined relative price level equal to P#/P. We omit this in the text for
simplicity but assume it implicitly later when we characterize the steady-state.


                                                                           9
where g,t are independently distributed shocks with mean zero and variance  g2 .


2.5 Log-Linearizing around the Balanced-Growth Path
Because technology follows a random walk with drift, output and consumption will inherit the unit
root component of technology.                      To ensure stationarity, we log-linearize the model around the
balanced growth path in which Y/A is stationary. Note that equation (1) ensures that tAt is also
stationary. Defining yt and t to be the log-deviations of Yt/At and tAt from their balanced growth
paths respectively, we can rewrite (1) in log-linearized form as
            (1  ah )(1   ha )t  (1  ha )(1   g  ah ) gt  ah (  Et yt 1  yt 1   a ,t )  (1   ( ah ) 2 ) yt   (10)

and the Euler equation as
            t  Et t 1  ( rt  Et t 1 ) ,                                                                                (11)

where  t  log( Pt / Pt 1 )  log( ) and   Pt / Pt 1 along the balanced growth path. The log-deviation

of the interest rate rt is defined as rt  log( Rt / R ) .
            We allow the log of steady-state inflation to differ from zero, as in Cogley and Sbordone
(2008). The log-deviation of inflation from its steady-state value is a weighted average of sector
specific inflation rates
                               1
             t   j s j p j  t j = j sCPI
                                          j  t for j  {sp, si, rot , flex} ,
                                               j
                                                                                                                               (12)

where  tj  log( Pt j / Pt j1 )  log( ) , p j  P j / P is the steady-state relative price level of sector j, and
                 1
s CPI
  j    sj p j         is the effective share of sector j in the aggregate price index.14

            Because inflation is not zero on average, sticky-price firms have to take into account the fact
that prices will tend to rise on average. Hence, the reset price will generally be greater than the
average price level to offset the tendency of prices to rise. From equation (6), we can find the
steady-state relative reset price to be

            ( B / P)  [(1   1 ) / (1   2 )]1/(1 ) ( P # / P)  ( P # / P) ,

where  1   sp aR 1  and  2   sp aR 1 1 (1 ) . But the non-zero rate of inflation also affects the

steady-state level of the optimal relative price. Specifically, one can show that


14
     Note that equation (12) uses the fact that the weighted sum of the log-linearized relative price levels is zero.


                                                                        10
                                            (1 )                     1/( 1)
                                                              
           P    1   sp   1   1  (1 )
               #

              s1        1                1  s1                    .
                                  
           P    1   sp   1   2                     
                                                              
To the extent that the extra weight attached to s1 will in general not be equal to one, the optimal
relative price will also then differ from one. We can show the following result:


Proposition 1: When trend inflation is greater than zero, there exists a unique  * ( ,  ,  sp ,  ) such
that if  > *, the steady state average relative price level of sticky price firms is greater than one
while the optimal relative price is less than one (and vice versa for  < *).
Proof: See Appendix 1.


When trend inflation is positive, the relative reset price chosen by sticky-price firms declines over
time as the aggregate price level rises. If firms care enough about future profits, then they must
choose a high reset price today to avoid the relative reset price being too low in the distant future.
This will cause the average relative price level of sticky-price firms to be greater than one.
However, if firms care primarily about near-term profits ( is small), then firms will choose a reset
price that is close to optimal over a short time period. As this relative price declines over time with
inflation, the average price level for sticky-price firms will be less than one.
         If the steady-state average relative price level of a sector k is greater than one, then its share
in the final good will be lower than implied by its mass in the output index. The final goods price
index will therefore place a smaller weight on the price of the good of this sector k, that is, skCPI  sk .
This implies that, upon log-linearizing around steady-state values, price changes in this sector will
have a smaller effect on aggregate inflation than would be the case if it had a steady-state relative
price of one, as can be seen in equation (12). Because    * in all of our estimates, we have

s1CPI  s1 .
         From (4) and the definition of the real marginal cost, the log-linearized deviation of the
instantaneously optimal relative price is given by

          pt#  log( Pt # / Pt )  log( P # / P)  (1   ) 1 ( yt  t ) .                        (13)
         To log-linearize the reset price of sticky-price firms, we first rewrite equation (6) in terms of
stationary variables



                                                               11
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                              
                                        Yt  s  Pt  s    Bt 
                                                                      1                                            1
                                j                                                Pt # j                P 
                                                                                                        j
                                                                                                                                 0 .
               Et Qt ,t  j   
                 j
                sp
                               s 1  Y
                                                 
                                                    P
                                                                
                                                                  P
                                                                                  
                                                                                                       t s 
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                 (14)
                                                                                    Pt  j
                                                                                                        s 1 P
          j 0
                                    t  s 1  t  s 1    t                                      t  s 1        
Defining bt as the log deviation of Bt / Pt from its stationary steady-state value and log-linearizing
(14) around the balanced growth path leads to the following expression for the reset price15
                                                                             
                                       1                                    1
bt  (1   2 )  2j Et pt# j            2 1 t t  j t  j1 1   
                                                ( j
                                                       j
                                                           ) E [ gy  r ]         [ 2j (1   (1   ))   1j ]Et t  j ,
                j 0                1   j 1                               j 1


where gyt  log(Yt / Yt 1 )  log a is the (stationary) log-deviation of the growth rate of output from its
mean.
         Denoting the log-deviation of the relative price level in sector k from its steady state value as

 ptk  log( Pt k / Pt )  log( Pt k / Pt ) , the log-linearized relative price level of sticky price firms follows
                                         1
          ptsp  (1   sp )(b / p sp ) bt   sp  1 ( ptsp1   t ) ,

where the steady-state ratio of reset prices to the sticky-price level is given by16

          (b / p sp )  [(1   sp ) / (1   sp  1 )]1/( 1) .

The stationary relative price level for sticky-information firms is given by
                                                           1/(1 )                                                  1      1/(1 )
          Pt si                   E       P  # 1 
                                                                                          E       ( P  #
                                                                                                             / P  )     
                (1   si )  sij   t  j   t
                                                                      (1   si )  sij    t  j    t      t
                                                                                                                        
                                     P  
                                                                                                                                         ,
           Pt                                                                              ( Et  j Pt ) / Pt  
                           j 0           t                         
                                                                                    j 0                            

which yields the following log-linearized expression
                              
          ptsi  (1   si )  sij [ Et  j pt#  CIFE j ,t ] ,                                                                                 (15)
                             j 0


where the cumulative inflation forecast error is CIFE j ,t  s1 ( t  j  s  Et  j t  j  s ) .
                                                                                                    j
                                                                                                                                             The latter

appears because the relative price of sticky information firms depends not only on how firms set
prices relative to the expected price level but also on how the expected price level differs from the



15
   For these sums to be well-defined in the steady-state requires that 2 < 1. Note that we express the reset price in terms
of optimal prices rather than real marginal costs. The reason is that real marginal costs are also a function of the price
dispersion Dt. With non-zero trend inflation, this dispersion term has first order effects. By expressing price setting
decisions in terms of desired optimal prices, we reduce the state space of the model by eliminating the need to keep track
of the dynamics of price dispersion.
16
   For the relative reset price to be well-defined in equilibrium requires the additional condition that  sp 1  1 .



                                                                          12
actual price level. To condense the set of expectations we need to keep track of, expression (15) can
be rewritten as
                                                                  
          ptsi   si ptsi1  (1   si ) pt#  (1   si ) si   sij  ( Et 1 j t   t )  Et 1 j pt#  .   (16)
                                                                 j 0


Since the inflation rate for rule-of-thumb firms is
          trot   t 1 ,                                                                                               (17)
the log-linearized relative price level of rule-of-thumb firms follows

                    1   t 1   t  pt 1   t .
         ptrot  ptrot                   rot
                                                                                                                         (18)
Inflation of flexible-price firms is
          t flex  pt#  pt#1   t .                                                                                  (19)


2.6 Central Bank
To close the model, we need to describe the central bank’s behavior. We follow the literature and
assume that the central bank sets interest rates according to a Taylor (1993) type rule with interest
smoothing such that
         rt  (1  1   2 )[  t  gy gyt ]  1rt 1   2 rt 2   r ,t ,                                        (20)

which allows the central bank to respond to inflation and the growth rate of output.17 The lagged
interest rate terms capture the central bank’s desire to smooth interest changes. We include two lags
of the interest rate in the right-hand side of (20) because in our previous work we document (e.g.,
Gorodnichenko and Shapiro 2007, Coibion and Gorodnichenko 2008) that two lags appear to be the
appropriate statistical description of serial correlation in the policy rule. The policy innovations r,t
are assumed to be independently distributed with mean zero and variance  r2 .


3    Estimation Approach
As in Ireland (2004), our log-linearized model has three variables that directly correspond to
observable macroeconomic series: the inflation rate, the growth rate of output, and the nominal
interest rate. The advantage of focusing on output growth, rather than the output gap as traditionally
done, is that output growth is directly observable, whereas the output gap is not. In addition, the

17
  We follow Ireland (2004) and allow for the central bank to respond to output growth rather than some measure of the
output gap. Our qualitative results are insensitive to the inclusion of an additional output gap term in the Taylor rule, as
shown in section 4.4.


                                                                         13
theoretically motivated output gap would tend to be poorly approximated by standard detrending
methods (see Andres et al (2005)).18 To estimate the underlying parameters of the model, we use a
method-of-moments approach that seeks to match the contemporaneous and intertemporal
covariances of the observable variables from the data to those of the model. After solving our model
for the unique rational expectations equilibrium and letting  denote the vector of parameters in the
model, we can rewrite it in reduced form as
         X t  A(  ) X t 1  B(  ) t  C (  ) t ,

where t is the vector of structural shocks, Xt is the vector [Yt Qt Yt1 Qt1 ... Yt p Qt p ] ,

Yt  [ gyt  t rt ] is the vector of observable variables, Qt is the vector of all unobservable variables,

and t is the vector of serially uncorrelated measurement errors.19 The value of p determines the
truncation point used for the sticky information sector. Denoting the variance-covariance matrix of
the structural and measurement shocks by    (  ) and     (  ) , the variance-

autocovariance matrix of Xt denoted with  X ( ) is

         vec( X (  ))   I  A(  )  A(  )  vec  B(  ) B(  )  C (  )C (  ) .
                                                   1



Because measurement errors are assumed to be serially and contemporaneously uncorrelated,  Ξ is
a diagonal matrix whose non-zero elements consist of the variances of measurement errors of the
growth rate of output (  me
                          2
                             , gy ), inflation (  me , ), and interest rates (  me , r ) respectively. The variance-
                                                   2                               2



autocovariance matrix for observable variables is then Y (  )   X (  )  where  is the
appropriate selection matrix.
        On the other hand, we can compute the sample autocovariance matrix for the observed
                         ˆ ) vec(
variables, Y ,n  [vech(        ˆ )  vec(
                                             ˆ )] where 
                                                          ˆ
                          Y ,0     Y ,1       Y ,n          Y , j is the sample estimate of


cov(Yt , Yt  j ) in the data. We extract the corresponding moments of the model for the observable

variables             and              denote             the           resulting             matrix             with



18
   Gorodnichenko and Ng (2008) also show that using growth rates of variables could lead to better statistical estimate
than using levels of persistent variables.
19
    Sargent (1989), Watson (1993) and others emphasize the importance of measurement errors in reported
macroeconomic variables as well as in improving the fit of dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models. We
introduce measurement errors to absorb those short-term fluctuations in macroeconomic variables that are unrelated to
structural shocks.


                                                          14
Y ,n ()  [vech(Y ,0 ()) vec(Y ,1 ())  vec(Y ,n ())] . In summary, our method of moments

estimator of the parameters is then given by

                        
         ˆ  arg min (  (  )   )  W  (  (  )   )
                       Y ,n      Y ,n         Y ,n      Y ,n           
where W is a weighting matrix. The resulting ̂ is a consistent estimate, provided that ̂ is
identified. Following Abowd and Card (1989), Altonji and Segal (1996) and others, we use the
identity weighting matrix in the estimation of the covariance structure.20 Note that because Y ,n (  )

is highly non-linear in  , it may be hard to find the global optimum. To address this problem, we
use stochastic search optimizers to achieve the global optimum.
         Most work on estimating DSGE models relies upon maximum likelihood or Bayesian
approaches. We follow our alternative method-of-moments approach for several reasons. First,
Ruge-Murcia (2003) compares method of moments estimators with other popular methods such as
maximum likelihood for estimating DGSE models and finds that it performs well in simulations.
Second, a particularly appealing feature of our method of moments approach is that the moments of
the data used in the estimation have an economic interpretation. Comparing the predicted moments
of the model to those of the data highlights which features of the data the model can and cannot
match. As we discuss in section 4.2.2, our method of moments estimator thus allows us to shed light
on why the pure models are rejected in favor of the hybrid model. Thus, we interpret our empirical
approach as one way to get inside the “black box” of estimated DSGE models. Finally, we use
simulation-based methods to estimate structural parameters without requiring the researcher to take a
stand on priors. Our simulation-based method illustrates how medium and large scale models can be
estimated within the classical statistical framework.


4    Results
We use U.S. data from 1984:Q1 until 2008:Q2.21                         The growth of output is measured as
400×log(RGDPt/RGDPt-1) where RGDP is chained real gross domestic product.                                  Inflation is
measured using the Consumer Price Index by 400×log(Pt/Pt-1). The interest rate is 400×log(1+Rt)

20
   These authors find that W equal to the identity matrix performs better than the optimal weighting matrix in the context
of estimating covariance structures. The optimal weighting matrix, which contains high order moments, tends to
correlate with the moments and this correlation undermines the performance of the method of moments estimator. We
investigate the robustness of our results to the weighting matrix in section 4.4.
21
   We focus on this period rather than the full sample because of the structural break in the monetary policy reaction
function as well as trend inflation which occurred in the early 1980s.


                                                           15
where Rt is the Effective Federal Funds rate (at a quarterly rate). We focus on the contemporaneous
covariances and the first three cross-autocovariances of these series to estimate the parameters of the
model. We restrict the number of autocovariances to minimize the computational burden and to
sharpen inference as the plethora of weakly informative moments tends to deteriorate the estimator’s
performance.22
         Our model contains the following set of parameters ={a, R ,  , , h, , si, sp, s1, s2, s3,
, gy, 1, 2, g, r, a, me,gy,        me,,   me,r}. We calibrate the balanced-growth inflation rate,
interest rate, and growth rate of output to those observed in our sample:   1.0077 , a  1.0076 ,
R  1.0130 . Following Ireland (2004), we impose  = 0.99 to guarantee that the consumer’s
problem is well bounded. We set                1, a fairly typical calibrated value for the Frisch labor supply
elasticity, and set θ = 10, such that the steady-state markup is about 11%.23 We experiment with
alternative values of η and θ in robustness checks. We choose to calibrate these parameters rather
than estimate them because these parameters have known identification problems. For example, Del
Negro and Schorfheide (2008) and Canova and Sala (2007) report that standard monetary models
have difficulties in distinguishing real (which is governed by η and θ) and nominal (which is
governed by δsp and δsi) rigidities. All other parameters are estimated using Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods, with details provided in Appendix 2. We set the truncation of past
expectations to p = 12. We restrict the degree of habit formation, the shares of firms, and the
persistence of the preference shock to be between 0 and 1. Price and informational rigidities (δsp and
δsi respectively) are restricted to be between 0.3 and 0.95. 24




22
   We consider the effect of using more moments in the robustness section 4.4.
23
   See Christiano, Eichembaum, and Evans (2005), for example.
24
   The lower bound on pricing and information rigidities is imposed to avoid identification issues, since when these
rigidities are low, firms in these sectors behave very much like flexible-price full-information firms, making
identification of shares of firms tenuous. In our estimation procedure we also restrict parameters to be consistent with a
unique determinate rational expectation equilibrium. To assess whether our results are affected by the boundaries, we
estimated a reparameterized version of the model (e.g., instead of drawing         0,1 , we drew          ∞. ∞ such that
             ) and found very similar results. We also calculated that, for the baseline specification, the MCMC chain
generated less than 0.05% (for the identity weight matrix) and 0.7% (for the diagonal weight matrix) of draws which led
to non-uniqueness/non-existence. Thus, most of our draws were away from the indeterminacy region. In addition, when
we ran multiple long (2 million draws or more) chains, we observed that the averages across chains converged to very
similar values as our baseline estimates (see Appendix Figure A5), which is consistent with the chains exploring the
parameter space sufficiently well. Finally, we re-ran chains while fixing close-to-boundary parameters and we found
very similar point estimates and standard errors for other parameters.


                                                           16
4.1 Baseline Estimates
Table 1 presents our baseline estimates for the hybrid model, as well as estimation results for
restricted models. For our baseline model, the degree of habit persistence, at 0.79, is well within the
range of estimates found in other studies.25 Our Taylor rule estimates imply strong responses by the
central bank to both inflation and the growth rate of output, with substantial inertia apparent in the
interest rate. The weight assigned to sticky-price firms is 62%. Sticky-information firms receive a
weight of 21%.           Both are significantly different from zero.   Thus, sticky-prices and sticky-
information jointly account for over 80% of firms in the model. Rule-of-thumb firms account for
9% of firms, while flexible price firms receive a share of eight percent. Note that the share of rule-
of-thumb firms is not statistically different from zero. If we adjust the shares to reflect the fact that
sticky-price firms charge higher prices on average than other sectors, the effective share of sticky-
price firms falls to 59% while the effective share of sticky-information firms rises to 23%. The
estimated degree of price rigidity is 0.81, which implies that sticky-price firms update their prices
every five quarters on average. Note that while this is higher than typical estimates of price rigidities
(Bils and Klenow (2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2007)), the average price duration across all
firms is on the order of two to three quarters, which is consistent with the literature. Sticky-
information firms, with an estimated degree of informational rigidity of 0.95, update their
information sets very infrequently, which is consistent with estimated degrees of informational
rigidities in Khan and Zhu (2006) and Knotek (2008) over the post-1982 period. In Appendix
Figures A1-A5, we provide a variety of diagnostics to verify that our MCMC estimation has
converged.
           Because no single firm type receives a share of 100%, the first implication of our results is
that our nested model best matches the data when more than a single type of firm is present.
However, sticky-price and sticky-information firms jointly account for most of the firms in the
economy. To assess the relative importance of each type of firm, we consider restricted estimates of
our models in Table 1. One version eliminates rule-of-thumb firms. The share of sticky-price firms
rises to 63%, while that of sticky-information goes to 23% of firms. The model achieves only a
slightly higher value of the objective function than the baseline case, indicating that rule-of-thumb
firms contribute little to the ability of the model to match the data. When one eliminates sticky-
information firms, on the other hand, the model fares worse in matching moments with a 15%

25
     See Fuhrer (2000), Grishchenko (2005), and Edge et al (2005).


                                                            17
increase in the value of the objective function. Thus, while rule-of-thumb firms do not appear to
play a significant role in matching moments of the data, the sticky-information firms certainly do.
Finally, we consider a specification in which both rule-of-thumb and flexible firms are set to zero.
This version of the model yields a distribution of firms of about three-quarters sticky-price firms and
one-quarter sticky-information firms. This model does almost as well as the baseline model in terms
of matching the moments of the data, with only a 2% increase in the objective function.
      Thus, the most striking result from our estimation is that sticky-price and sticky-information
firms play the most important role in matching the moments of the data. Once one accounts for
these two types of firms, there is little need to allow for rule-of-thumb behavior or flexible-price full-
information firms. This result is particularly noteworthy for two reasons. First, much of the
literature on sticky-prices and sticky-information has focused on testing one model against the other
(Korenok (2008), Kiley (2007), Coibion (forthcoming)). Our results imply instead that both are
needed to match the moments of the data. Second, sticky-price models are commonly augmented
with rule-of-thumb firms to introduce more inflation inertia (e.g., Gali and Gertler (1999)). As we
discuss in section 4.3, in the presence of strategic interaction across sectors rule-of-thumb firms
behave similarly to sticky-information firms so that the conventional emphasis on rule-of-thumb
firms could have been misplaced. When one allows for both rule-of-thumb and sticky-information
firms, the data favors sticky information as a complement to sticky-price models.


4.2 How Does The Hybrid Model Differ From The Nested Pure Models?
In this section, we study why the data prefers a hybrid sticky-price sticky-information model over
the pure models. To do so, we first re-estimate the structural parameters of the model under the
assumption that only one type of firm exists and use these estimates to construct variance
decompositions for each model. Second, we compare the predicted moments of the hybrid and pure
models to those of the data. Third, we contrast the impulse response functions of each estimated
model.


4.2.1 Estimates of Pure Models
To get a sense of why the pure models are rejected in favor of a hybrid, we first re-estimate the
parameters of the model while imposing that the model be entirely composed of sticky-price, sticky-




                                                   18
information, or flexible-price full-information firms.26 The results are presented in Table 2. Note
first that the sticky-price model achieves the lowest value of the objective function after the hybrid
model, the sticky-information model comes second, while the flexible-price model does much
worse. Across models, the estimated degree of habit formation (h) is fairly high, ranging from 0.69
in the sticky price model to 1.00 in the flexible model. The coefficients of the Taylor rule also differ
substantially across models. The sticky-price model points to somewhat stronger responses by the
Fed to inflation and output growth than in the hybrid model while the sticky information model
yields a much larger response to output growth but a smaller response to inflation. The estimated
degrees of price and informational rigidities are close to those in the hybrid model. Turning to
estimated shock processes, there are important differences in the size of the shocks across models.
For the sticky-price model and the flexible model, the volatility of interest rate shocks is not
significantly different from zero.          For the sticky-information model, the standard deviation of
technology shocks is much lower than in the hybrid model and insignificantly different from zero.
Measurement errors for estimated sticky-price and sticky-information models are of the same order
of magnitude as in the hybrid model. For the flexible model, on the other hand, measurement error
for the interest rate is much higher than previously found.
         These differences across models have important implications for the relative importance
attributed to each shock in explaining macroeconomic dynamics. Table 3 presents the one-year
ahead variance decompositions of output growth, inflation, and interest rates due to structural shocks
in each model.27 For output growth, all of the models yield the conclusion that most of the variance
is due to preference shocks. Note however that the second most important shock is the policy shock
in the sticky-information model and the technology shock in all other models. For inflation, there is
much more variation across models. The hybrid model attributes much of the variance of inflation
to technology and preference shocks. The sticky-price model yields a similar decomposition. The
sticky-information and flexible models, on the other hand, both attribute much more importance to

26
   Because the dynamic responses of each pure model are so different from each other across shocks, as well as the fact
that all the parameters of the model are estimated jointly, it is misleading to take our estimated values and simply
consider imposing that the model only consist of one type of firm to determine how each model fares independently.
27
   The share of variance attributed to measurement error is 51%, 68%, and 0.2% for output growth rate, inflation rate,
and interest rate respectively. Although the measurement errors soak up a relatively large fraction of contemporaneous
variation, they have no effect on (auto)covariances which the model can match well. The main reason why we have to
rely on measurement errors is because there is a clear break in the size of the autocovariances of output growth rate and
inflation rate. Any standard model we experimented with could not simultaneously generate the large variance and
(relatively) low autocovariances. The measurement error for the interest rate is not as large as it is for other variables
because the autocovariances are close in magnitude to the variance.


                                                           19
monetary policy innovations. With respect to interest rate fluctuations, all of the models attribute
much of the variation to preference shocks, although the sticky information model again attributes
some role (25%) to monetary policy innovations while the flexible model assigns a sizable weight to
technology shocks.        Thus, overall, the sticky-price model yields a variance decomposition of
macroeconomic variables that closely mirrors that of the hybrid model, with preference shocks being
most important but with technology shocks playing a key role in explaining inflation. The sticky-
information model places little weight on technology shocks, and instead assigns a much larger role
to monetary policy innovations.


4.2.2 Comparing Predicted Moments
To further contrast the pure and hybrid models, we consider which features of the data each model
can match. Figure 1 presents the autocovariances of the observable variables implied by the models
and those found in the data, as well as 95% confidence intervals derived from a non-parametric
bootstrap.28 First and most dramatically, the flexible price model is unable to reproduce the high
autocovariance of interest rates and output growth rate observed in the data. Second, all other
models perform adequately at reproducing the autocorrelation of output growth and interest rates,
largely because this is driven by the estimates of internal habit formation and high interest rate
smoothing in the central bank’s reaction function. Third, the sticky-information model tends to
somewhat overstate the persistence of inflation.
        Figure 2 presents the cross-covariances of inflation with respect to leads and lags of output
growth and interest rates, as well as that of output growth to leads and lags of interest rates. The
moments of the data indicate that inflation leads output growth and interest rates, such that high
inflation today is associated with higher interest rates and lower output growth in subsequent
quarters.    In addition, output growth leads interest rates.             The fully flexible model is largely
incapable of reproducing these lead-lag characteristics of the data. The sticky-information model
has difficulty reproducing the fact that inflation leads output growth and interest rates: in the case of
output growth, the sticky-information model predicts that the highest covariance (in absolute value)
is contemporaneous while in the case of interest rates, the sticky-information model predicts that
inflation should lag interest rates. The sticky-price model, on the other hand, replicates these lead-

28
  The boostrap is done by running a VAR(4) on our measures of GDP growth, inflation, and interest rates over the same
time period as our sample. We then use the VAR to simulate new data of the same length and calculate the auto and
cross covariances from the simulated data. We use 2000 bootstraps to generate the 95% confidence interval.


                                                         20
lag patterns more precisely. This reflects the forward-looking behavior embodied in the reset-price
decisions of sticky-price firms. The hybrid model, overall, yields dynamics that are very similar to
the sticky-price model.


4.2.3 Impulse Responses
To understand why the sticky-information model places more weight on monetary policy shocks but
less weight on technology than either the hybrid or pure sticky-price model, it is helpful to consider
the impulse responses of the observable variables to each shock from the different models. These
are presented in Figure 4 for the hybrid, sticky-price and sticky-information models.29 In each case,
we use the estimated parameters from each model, presented in Table 2, to derive impulse responses
to one-unit shocks.
        Consider first the effects of preference shocks, since these shocks account for the brunt of the
variance decomposition of macroeconomic variables across models. In response to preference
shocks, output growth jumps up and returns monotonically back to zero over time. This response is
similar across models and is driven by the estimated habit formation parameter and the persistence
of the shock. The rapid decline in output growth helps match the autocorrelation function of output
growth for all models. In addition, the interest rate rises in response to the positive output growth,
but does so in a hump-shaped manner, reflecting the strong degree of interest smoothing. This
gradual increase in the interest rate helps replicate the observation that output growth leads interest
rates in the data.      Because inflation is positive after this shock (albeit with a lag for sticky-
information), this shock can also help replicate the positive correlation between inflation and interest
rates observed in the data. However, it cannot explain the contemporaneous negative correlation
between inflation and output growth. For the sticky-information model, the delayed response of
inflation to the preference shock causes inflation to lag output growth and interest rates, a result at
odds with the data.
        Turning to technology shocks, the key finding for sticky price and hybrid models are the
contemporaneous decrease in inflation and increase in output growth. This response allows these
two models to replicate the unconditional negative correlation between inflation and output growth
observed in the data. In addition, because inflation jumps down on impact and returns rapidly to the

29
   We omit responses from the flexible price model because a) flexible price and rule-of-thumb firms account for a small
fraction of firms in the hybrid model and b) the responses of flexible firms are very large on impact and dwarf those of
the other models.


                                                          21
steady-state while output growth converges only slowly after this permanent shock, this shock
allows the sticky-price and hybrid models to replicate the finding that inflation leads output growth.
This accounts for the substantial weight assigned to this shock by the sticky-price and hybrid models
in accounting for inflation dynamics. For the sticky-information model, the permanent nature of the
technology shock yields a very delayed response of inflation, which again tends to counterfactually
imply that inflation lags output growth.
       In response to monetary policy shocks, the increase in the interest rate leads to a decrease in
output growth and inflation across models. Since this tends to imply a negative correlation between
output growth and interest rates, as well as between inflation and interest rates, the sticky-price and
hybrid models assign almost no weight to this shock, as the key lead-lag relationships are already
accounted for by the preference and technology shocks. However, we can see from this impulse
response why monetary policy shocks play such an important role for the sticky-information model.
Note that inflation declines for a number of quarters after a monetary policy shock under the sticky-
information model, a point emphasized by Mankiw and Reis (2002). The interest rate, on the other
hand, peaks in the second quarter then returns monotonically back to zero. Thus, after the first
period, the correlation between inflation and the interest rate is positive in the sticky information
model as inflation and interest rates decline simultaneously. In addition, because inflation falls in
the first period while the interest rate only starts to decline in the second period, this shock helps
deliver a lead of inflation over interest rates, which was the feature of the data that the sticky-
information model could not match with preference and policy shocks. Thus, the sticky-information
model places much more weight on monetary policy shocks than either the sticky-price or hybrid
models.


4.3 How Important Is Strategic Interaction Among Different Price-Setting Firms?
One question that naturally arises with hybrid models is how the behavior of firms within the hybrid
model compares to their behavior when they are the only type of firm. For this purpose, Figure 4
plots the response of inflation in each sector to each shock, as well as the response of aggregate
inflation in a model consisting only of this type of firm. For the latter, we use the estimated




                                                  22
parameters of the hybrid model and simply alter the share of firms to isolate the strategic interaction
effect.30
          Focusing first on sticky-price firms, in response to monetary policy, technology, and
preference shocks, inflation among sticky-price firms within a hybrid model is substantially
dampened (by about 30% on impact) relative to what it would have been had these been the only
type of firm in the model. For sticky-information firms, the effect is reversed: their inflation
response is more rapid within the hybrid model than in a pure sticky-information model. This is
strategic complementarity at work: the resulting inflation responses in each sector are much more
similar than the inflation responses of the pure models. The effect of strategic complementarity is
even more striking in the case of flexible-price full-information firms. Whereas inflation for these
firms would be substantial on impact—but virtually nil in subsequent periods—within the hybrid
model their inflation response is severely dampened. This reflects how much more sensitive these
firms are to the behavior of other firms because they are unconstrained in their actions whereas all
other firms face some kind of constraint, which is similar in spirit to Haltiwanger and Waldman
(1991).
          In the bottom row of Figure 4 we contrast the dynamics of aggregate inflation in the hybrid
model and the dynamics of the weighted average of inflation in the pure models. We interpret the
weighted average dynamics as a case where consumers have a two-tier utility function with very low
elasticity of substitution across sectors and θ=10 elasticity of substitution within sectors.31 The
hybrid model exhibits more gradual and persistent dynamics than the weighted average over pure
models thus suggesting that ignoring strategic interaction between firms with different price setting
may considerably distort the aggregate dynamics. Figure 4 also illustrates why previous work could
readily have mistaken sticky-information firms for rule-of-thumb firms. The behavior of sticky-
information firms within the hybrid model is quite similar to that of rule-of-thumb firms. Both
display delayed responses of inflation to shocks and serve to dampen the response of aggregate


30
   With policy responding to endogenous variables, the behavior of firms in pure models should differ from the hybrid
model even in the absence of pricing complementarities. We are grateful to an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
To address this issue, we considered a version of the model with exogenous money supply and a money demand curve.
The results were almost identical to those reported in the paper so we can argue that the dynamics in Figure 4 are driven
largely by strategic complementarity in price setting rather than by the endogenous response of monetary policy-makers.
31
   In other words, production in the economy is split into four islands, each of which is populated with a single-type of
price setting firms, there is no direct interaction across islands, aggregate behavior is a (weighted) sum of dynamics
across islands and then we compare these aggregate dynamics with the dynamics in the hybrid model when different
types of firms are allowed to interact.


                                                          23
inflation in the model. However, sticky-information firms adjust prices more gradually than rule-of-
thumb firms and, according to our empirical results, the data clearly favor sticky information over
rule-of-thumb firms within the hybrid model as complements to sticky-price firms.


4.4 Robustness Analysis
In this section, we consider the robustness of our estimates to several potential issues. First, we
consider the use of a larger set of moments in the estimation. Second, we discuss the use of a non-
identity weighting matrix in the estimation.               Third, we change the labor supply elasticity to
correspond to indivisible labor. Fourth, we relax the Taylor rule to allow for the central bank to
respond to the output gap. Fifth, we reproduce our estimates using only AR(1) interest smoothing in
the central bank’s reaction function.32 Sixth, we consider alternative values for the elasticity of
substitution in intermediate goods.
        The first issue we address is the set of moments used in the estimation. Our baseline results
relied on the autocorrelations of our observable variables over three quarters and dynamic cross-
correlations at maximum leads and lags of three quarters as well. The purpose of focusing on such a
restricted set of moments was to concentrate on those moments that are most precisely estimated.
As a robustness check, we consider the use of a larger set of moments, specifically using
autocovariances over two years, and report results in Table 4. Most of the parameters are similar to
baseline estimates. The estimated levels of price and informational rigidities are almost identical to
our baseline estimates and the estimated shares of firms continue to imply that more than 80% of
firms are sticky-price or sticky-information firms.
        An alternative approach to dealing with the precision of the moments used in the estimation
is to allow for a non-identity weighting matrix. Although the optimal weighting matrix would seem
an ideal candidate, many studies report poor performance of this weighting matrix in applications
(e.g., Boivin and Giannoni 2006) and Monte Carlo simulations (e.g., Altonji and Segal (1996)) that
involve estimation of covariance structures.33 A practical compromise is a diagonal weighting
matrix with estimated variances of the moments on the diagonal and zeros for off-diagonal entries.
Replicating our baseline estimation procedure with the diagonal weighting matrix, we find that


32
  All robustness checks are done by using the same starting values and estimation approach as the baseline estimation.
33
  We ran Monte Carlo simulations of our model and found that the identity weighting matrix outperformed the diagonal
weighting matrix and the optimal weighting matrix in time series of the same length as ours. These results are available
upon request.


                                                          24
sticky-price firms account for approximately fifty percent of firms (but we cannot reject equality to
the baseline estimate of sixty percent), while rule-of-thumb and sticky-information firms account for
18% and 16% respectively.            Neither of these estimates is statistically different from zero or
statistically different from our original estimates. Essentially, the use of the diagonal weight matrix
downplays some informative moments and does not allow us to clearly separate rule-of-thumb and
sticky-information firms. Most other parameter estimates are broadly similar to the estimates based
on the identity weight matrix.
        We also consider sensitivity to the elasticity of labor supply. While most empirical work has
found low elasticities of labor supply, some of the RBC literature has focused on the case with
infinite labor supply (as in Hansen (1985)). In Table 4, we present estimates of the hybrid model
under the assumption of indivisible labor ( = ), which implies that  = 0 so that there is no
strategic complementarity in price setting. Eliminating strategic complementary has a dramatic
effect on the results. Specifically, the shares of sticky-information and flexible price firms both go
to zero, while that of rule-of-thumb firms rises to 50%.                  This change in outcome leads to a
substantial deterioration in the model’s ability to match the data: the objective function rises by over
40%. The reduced share of sticky-information firms reflects the fact that, in the absence of strategic
complementarity in price setting, sticky-information firms fail to produce inflation inertia. Because
sticky-price firms tend to induce excessive forward-looking behavior in inflation, the model needs
other types of firms to slow down the adjustment of inflation to shocks. With sticky-information
firms unable to achieve this role in the absence of strategic complementarity, the estimation instead
places a significant weight on rule-of-thumb firms.
        Another robustness issue that we consider is allowing for the central bank to respond to the
output gap. While this is often included in Taylor rules, our baseline approach instead includes only
output growth. This is because output growth is directly observable to the central bank, whereas the
gap is not. In addition, Ireland (2004) and Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2008) find little evidence of
a response to the gap since the early 1980s once output growth is included in the Taylor rule. As a
robustness          check,          we          consider          the          following           Taylor          rule
rt  (1  1  2 )[  t  gy gyt  x xt ]  1rt 1  2 rt 2   r ,t where x is the log-deviation between actual

output and the level of output that would occur in the absence of price and informational rigidities.
The estimated response to the output gap is very low and not statistically different from zero while
the other parameters are largely unchanged.


                                                          25
       We also consider another robustness check with respect to the central bank’s reaction
function.      Specifically,    we    integrate    the    following     Taylor    rule   into    our    model
rt  (1  1 )[  t  gy gyt ]  1rt 1   r ,t which restricts interest smoothing to be an AR(1) process.

While much of the literature focuses on this specification, recent empirical evidence on the Fed’s
reaction function has found an AR(2) specification to be preferable (see Blinder and Reis (2005) and
Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2008)).           The estimated results using the AR(1) specification are
presented in Table 4. The results are broadly unchanged, with sticky-price firms accounting for 60%
of firms and sticky-information firms accounting for 15%. The share of flexible-price firms rises to
16%. However, imposing an AR(1) specification reduces the ability of the model to match the
moments of the data, and the objective function rises by over 10% relative to our baseline estimates.
       Our final robustness check is with respect to the elasticity of substitution across intermediate
goods θ. We fixed this parameter in our baseline estimation because previous work has shown that it
is difficult to differentiate empirically between nominal and real rigidities, making the joint
identification of θ and the shares of firms tenuous. To assess how sensitive our results are to θ, we
redid our baseline estimation procedure for values of θ ranging from 7 to 15. Our results for the key
parameters of interest, shares of firms and the degree of price and information rigidities, are in
Figure 5. In Panel A, we can see that lower values of θ have a substantial effect on estimated shares
of firms. Specifically, the share of sticky-information firms declines rapidly while that of sticky-
price firms rises. As lower values of θ reduce strategic complementarity in price setting, we get
higher estimates of price rigidity to keep the persistence of inflation high (Panel B). However, the fit
of the model worsens substantially as strategic complementarity decreases moderately (Panel C).
With higher values of θ, on the other hand, the estimated shares of firms are very similar to our
baseline estimates under the assumption of θ = 10.                 As θ rises, the degree of strategic
complementarity increases, as does the inherent persistence of inflation, so this leads to lower
estimates of price rigidity. The fit of the model actually improves with higher values of θ, indicating
that even more strategic complementarity is desirable to match the data. Thus, one could interpret
our baseline results as a lower bound on the importance of strategic complementarity in price setting
across heterogeneous price-setting firms.




                                                     26
5   Implications for Optimal Monetary Policy
The presence of different types of firms in the model raises the issue of what kind of monetary
policy is optimal in such a setting. To assess the effect of different policies, we follow much of the
literature and assume that the central banker has the following loss function
        L1  var( t )   y var( xt )  r var( rt ) ,                                      (21)

where y and r show the weight on output gap and interest rate volatility relative to inflation
volatility so that the variability in the output gap (and later the output growth rate) and the interest
rate are converted to their inflation-variance equivalents. We also consider an alternative loss
function which penalizes the volatility of output growth instead of the volatility of the output gap:
        L2  var( t )   y var( gyt )  r var( rt ) ,                                     (22)

This alternative loss function may be interesting for our analysis because, as Amato and Laubach
(2004) show, habit formation introduces a concern for the volatility in the change of consumption
and, hence, the loss function should include a term that captures the volatility of output growth.
       In principle, parameter y can be derived from the Phillips curve. However, because we
have different interacting price-setting mechanisms as well as non-zero steady state inflation, we
could not find a closed-form solution for the Phillips curve and y and so objective functions (21)
and (22) are not necessarily model consistent for welfare calculations.          Consequently, we are
agnostic about the relative weight of output gap variability and we experiment with different values
of y. In the baseline scenario, we set y = 1. The last term in the loss function is the penalty for the
volatility of the policy instrument (interest rate). Having r greater than zero helps to keep the
optimal responses to output growth and inflation bounded.           We follow Woodford (2003) and
calibrate r  0.077 .
       We constrain our analysis to simple rules similar to the estimated interest rate rule (20) for
reasons highlighted in Williams (2003). First, simple rules can often closely approximate fully
optimal rules. Second, simple rules tend to be more robust. Third, with many sectors and
complicated structure of the model, we could not find a closed form solution of the objective
function and hence could not derive fully optimal rules.
       The first question we pose is whether the central bank could have achieved lower losses by
responding differently to aggregate inflation and output growth than what is implied by our estimates
of the Taylor rule. Panel A in Figure 6 presents the isoloss maps for different combinations of 



                                                           27
and gy in the Taylor rule.34 Generally, there are substantial gains from increasing the response to
inflation which reduces the volatility of inflation, the interest rate and the output gap. Holding
everything else constant, a more aggressive response to inflation decreases the volatility of inflation,
the interest rate, and the output gap and weakly increases the volatility of output growth (see
Appendix Figure A6). In contrast, a stronger response to the output growth rate has the opposite
effect on the volatility of relevant macroeconomic variables. Since the volatility of output growth is
fairly insensitive to changes in  and gy in the Taylor rule, social welfare generally improves with
larger  and somewhat smaller gy irrespective of what values we use for y in the loss functions
(see Appendix Figure A9).
         The second question we ask is whether the optimal policies in pure sticky-price and sticky-
information models are similar to those found in the hybrid model. In particular, one may be
concerned that using pure models to design policy rules can misguide the policymaker about his or
her tradeoffs. Because scales of the social loss maps vary across models, we compute isoloss maps
for pure sticky price (PSP) and pure sticky information (PSI) models and normalize these maps by
the corresponding values of the loss function evaluated at the estimated Taylor rule parameters.
These rescaled isoloss maps, which we call relative welfare maps, can be interpreted as losses
relative to the loss incurred when the policymaker uses the estimated Taylor rule. We also scale the
isoloss map for the hybrid model and then divide the relative welfare for the PSP and PSI models by
the relative welfare map for the hybrid model. In summary, we consider maps
                               PSP ˆ    ˆ                                  PSI ˆ    ˆ
          LPSP
              k ( , gy ) / Lk ( ,  gy )
                                                      LPSI
                                                          k ( ,  gy ) / Lk ( ,  gy )
                                                                                           
          HYBR                                 and                                       , k  1, 2,             (23)
          Lk ( , gy ) / Lk (ˆ , ˆgy )       Lk ( , gy ) / Lk (ˆ , ˆgy ) 
                               HYBR                      HYBR               HYBR



where (ˆ , ˆgy ) are estimated values of the policy reaction function reported in Table 1.

         The resulting maps (23) show to what extent using PSP and PSI models misinforms the
policymaker about tradeoffs relative to the hybrid model.35 Specifically, if the ratio of relative
welfare maps for PSP or PSI to the relative welfare map for the hybrid model is close to one
uniformly in (,gy) space, there is no distortion in the tradeoffs. If the ratio is greater than one
(smaller than one) with deviations of (,gy) from (ˆ , ˆgy ) , then using the PSP or PSI model

34
   In this and subsequent exercises, we hold the interest rate smoothing parameters of the Taylor rule fixed at their
estimated values.
35
   Alternatively, one can interpret the ratio of the relative welfare maps as the difference-in-difference estimator for the
changes in the welfare changes when the policymaker considers alternative values of  and gy in the Taylor rule.


                                                             28
understates (overstates) the gain in welfare. Panels B and C in Figure 6 show the ratio of relative
welfare maps (23) for PSP and PSI models respectively. These maps demonstrate that using pure
models instead of the hybrid model can greatly mislead the policymaker about potential gains from
using alternative policy rules. For example, when the policymaker uses the PSI model to design
policy, he or she underestimates the benefits from stronger responses to inflation relative to gains
implied by the hybrid model because the ratio of relative welfare maps rapidly falls as  increases.
Hence, we conclude that using pure models can provide a distorted picture of tradeoffs actually
faced when price-setting is heterogeneous.
       Given that PSP and PSI models have different implications for whether the central bank
should target the price level or inflation, the third question we ask is whether our hybrid model
predicts an important role for price level targeting. To answer this, we augment the Taylor rule with
a term that corresponds to price level targeting (PLT):
        rt  (1  1,r   2,r )  t  (1  1,r   2,r )PLT pt  (1  1,r   2,r )gy gyt  1,r rt 1   2,r rt 2   r ,t ,

where pt is the price level linearized around pt*  p0 t . In this exercise, we fix gy at the estimated

value, vary  and PLT and plot the resulting isoloss amps in Panel D of Figure 6 and the associated
volatilities of the growth rate of output, the output gap, inflation and the interest rate in Appendix
Figure A7. In general, there are significant welfare gains from having an element of PLT in the
Taylor rule.      In fact, even small positive responses to deviations from the price level target
dramatically reduce the volatility of the output gap, the interest rate and inflation. At the same time,
similar to the inflation response, a more aggressive PLT response tends to weakly increase the
volatility of output growth. However, because this increase is very small, the changes in welfare are
strongly dominated by declines in var( xt ) , var( t ) , and var(it ) so that PLT is generally desirable

for all reasonable values of y (see Appendix Figure A7). Importantly, introducing PLT in the
policy reaction function eliminates a region of equilibrium indeterminacy (compare with Panel A,
Figure 6) and therefore PLT could be useful in ways other than reducing the volatility of
macroeconomic variables.
       Finally, having the central bank respond to aggregate inflation imposes the restriction that a
one percent increase in inflation in a sector leads to an increase in the interest rate proportional to
that sector’s effective share of inflation dynamics, as defined in equation (20). The fourth question




                                                                    29
we ask is whether there are gains to be had by responding differently to inflation in each sector. For
this purpose, we compute optimal policy rules using
         rt    (1  1,r   2,r )( SP ) t( SP )  (1  1,r   2,r )( SI  ROT  FLEX ) t( SI  ROT  FLEX )
                   (1  1,r   2,r )gy gyt  1,r rt 1   2,r rt 2   r ,t ,

where we assume that the central banker can differentiate between sectors that have prices fixed for
some time (SP) and those that have prices changing every period (SI, ROT and FLEX). Here, we
again fix gy at the estimated value, vary ( SP ) and ( SI  ROT  FLEX ) and plot the resulting isoloss maps

in Panel E of Figure 6 and associated volatilities of the growth rate of output, the output gap,
inflation and the interest rate in Appendix Figure A8.36 We find a striking result: the isoloss maps
are approximately linear in ( SP ) and ( SI  ROT  FLEX ) in the neighborhood of the estimated response to
inflation. Hence, the policymaker does not face an increasing marginal penalty for targeting only one
of the sectors. In addition, we find that only responding to inflation in the sticky-price sector is
generally more stabilizing than only responding to inflation in the other sectors, which is consistent
with Aoki (2001) and with the notion that sticky-price firms play a disproportionally large role in
governing inflation dynamics through strategic complementarity in pricing setting, as demonstrated
in section 4.3. At the same time, the policymaker can generally achieve a lower level of social loss
by having a less aggressive response to inflation when he or she targets inflation in all sectors rather
than in just one sector. Although the slope of the isoloss curves is not equal to one and hence there is
a possibility to improve welfare by making the response to inflation more aggressive in one sector
and less aggressive in another sector, the gains from the differentiated response to sector-specific
inflation appear to be rather small.


6    Conclusion
Empirical work has documented a striking amount of heterogeneity in pricing practices: both in the
frequency at which firms update prices as well as in the source of costs underlying firm decision-
making processes. We present a model in which four commonly used representations of how firms
set prices are allowed to coexist and interact via their price-setting decisions. This model nests many
specifications previously considered in the literature. We find that the two most important types of
price-setting behavior are described by sticky prices and sticky information while rule-of-thumb and
36
  Note that moving along the 45 line in Panel E corresponds to moving along the vertical line that passes the estimated
Taylor rule parameter combination in Panel A.


                                                                     30
flexible pricing are quantitatively unimportant. This finding suggests that sticky-information firms
may be more important than previously thought.
       In addition, because the dynamic cross-covariances reveal important insights about the lead-
lag structure of economic relationships, we can provide intuitive explanations for how the hybrid
model outperforms pure sticky-price or sticky-information models. For example, we argue that a
pure sticky information model tends to under-predict the degree of forward-looking behavior in
inflation. In contrast, previous work that emphasized the time series representation of the data could
not readily provide an economic rationale for why one model is preferred to others.
       Heterogeneity in price-setting poses important issues for policymakers. We demonstrate that
focusing on models with a single price-setting mechanism can misinform central bankers about
trade-offs they face. Our simulations suggest that a more aggressive response to inflation, which
may include an element of price level targeting, could substantially improve social welfare
functions. At the same time, we do not find large benefits from targeting sectors with some
particular form of price setting so that targeting aggregate inflation is a reasonable strategy for
policymakers.
       While we focus on the possibility of important differences in how firms set prices, this
approach could be naturally extended to wage-setting decisions. Christiano, Eichembaum and Evans
(2005), for example, argue that sticky wages with indexation are a particularly important element in
matching macroeconomic dynamics. Yet, as with prices, allowing for indexation cannot reproduce
the fact that wages often do not change for extended periods of time. A more natural approach could
be to allow for heterogeneity in wage-setting assumptions for different sectors of the economy. This
would capture the fact that some sectors have highly flexible wages, others have sticky wages
without indexation, and some sectors, particularly those under union contracts, choose time paths for
future wages infrequently.    Even with relatively small sticky-wage or union-wage sectors, the
behavior of the flexible-wage sector could be substantially altered if there is strategic
complementarity in wage-setting decisions.




                                                 31
References
Abowd, John M. and David Card. 1989. “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
        Changes,” Econometrica 57(2), 411-445.
Altonji, Joseph G., and Lewis G. Segal, 1996. “Small-sample bias in GMM estimation of covariance
        structures,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 14(3), 353 -366.
Amato, J.D., and T. Laubach, 2004. "Implications of habit formation for optimal monetary policy,"
        Journal of Monetary Economics 51(2), 305-325.
Andres, Javier, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson. 2005. “Sticky-Price Models and the
        Natural Rate Hypothesis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(5), 1025-1053.
Ascari, Guido. 2004. “Staggered Prices and Trend Inflation: Some Nuisances,” Review of Economic
        Dynamics 7, 642-667.
Aoki, Kosuki. 2001. “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative-Price Changes,” Journal of
        Monetary Economics 48, 55-80.
Ascari, Guido and Tiziano Ropele. 2005. “Trend Inflation, Taylor Principle, and Indeterminacy.”
        Manuscript.
Ball, Laurence, N. Gregory Mankiw, and Ricardo Reis. 2005. “Monetary Policy for Inattentive
        Economies,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(4), 703-725.
Barsky, Robert and Lutz Killian. 2001. “Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great Stagflation?
        A Monetary Alternative,” in B. Bernanke and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
        Annual 2001, May 2002, 137-183.
Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on Importance of Sticky-Prices,” Journal of
        Political Economy 112, 947-985.
Blinder, Alan S. and Ricardo Reis, 2005. “Understanding the Greenspan Standard,” published in The
        Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, Jackson Hole: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
        11-96.
Bouakez, Hafed, Emanuela Cardia and Francisco Ruge-Murcia. 2006. “The Transmission of
        Monetary Policy in a Multi-Sector Economy.” Manuscript.
Boivin, Jean and Marc Giannoni, 2006, “Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 445-462.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,” Journal of
        Monetary Economic 12, 383-398.
Canova, Fabio, and Luca Sala. 2007. “Back to square one: identification issues in DSGE models,”
        manuscript.
Carvalho, Carlos Viana de. 2006. “Heterogeneity in Price Setting and the Real Effects of Monetary
        Shocks," Frontiers of Macroeconomics: Vol. 2 : Iss. 1, Article 1.
Chernozhukov, Victor and Han Hong. 2003. “An MCMC Approach to Classical Estimation,”
        Journal of Econometrics 115(2), 293-346.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 2005. “Nominal Rigidities and the
        Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy 113(1), 1-45.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler. 2000. “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
        Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 155(1), 147-180.
Cogley, Timothy and Argia M. Sbordone. 2008. “Trend Inflation, Indexation, and Inflation
        Persistence in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” forthcoming in American Economic
        Review.
Coibion, Olivier, 2006. “Inflation Inertia in Sticky-Information Models,” BE Journals: Contributions
        to Macroeconomics 6(1), Article 1.
Coibion, Olivier. “Testing the Sticky Information Phillips Curve,” forthcoming in The Review of
        Economics and Statistics.

                                                32
Coibion, Olivier and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, 2008. “Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation and the Great
        Moderation: An Alternative Interpretation.” Manuscript.
Del Negro, Marco, and Frank Schorfheide. 2008. “Forming priors for DSGE models (and how it
        affects the assessment of nominal rigidities),” Journal of Monetary Economic 55(7), 1191-
        1208.
Dhyne, Emmanuel, Luis J. Alvarez, Herve Le-Bihan, Giovanni Veronese, Daniel Dias, Johannes
        Hoffmann, Nicole Jonker, Patrick Lunnemann, Fabio Rumler, and Jouko Vilmunen. 2005.
        “Price setting in the euro area: some stylized facts from individual consumer price data,”
        European Central Bank, Working Paper 524.
Dupor, Bill, Tomiyuki Kitamura, and Takayuki Tsuruga. “Integrating Sticky Information and Sticky
        Prices” forthcoming in The Review of Economics and Statistics.
Edge, Rochelle M., Michael T. Kiley, and Jean-Philippe Laforte. 2005. “An Estimated DSGE
        Model of the US Economy.” Manuscript.
Fabiani, S., C. Kwapil, M. Druant, I. Hernando, B. Landau, C. Loupias, F. Martins, T. Matha, R.
        Sabbatini, H. Stahl, A.C.J. Stokman, 2005. “The pricing behaviour of firms in the euro area -
        new survey evidence,” European Central Bank, Working Paper 535.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 2000. “Habit Formation in Consumption and Its Implications for Monetary Policy
        Models,” American Economic Review 90(3), 367-390.
Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler. 1999. “Inflation dynamics: a structural econometric analysis,”
        Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.
Gelman, Andrew, John B. Carlin, Hal S. Stern, and Donald B. Rubin, 2004. Bayesian Data Analysis,
        Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Gelman, Andrew, and Donald B. Rubin. 1992. Inference from iterative simulation using multiple
        sequences,” Statistical Science 7, 457-511.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Serena Ng. 2008. “Estimation of DSGE models when data are
        persistent.” Manuscript.
Gorodnichenko, Yuriy, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2007. “Monetary policy when potential output is
        uncertain: Understanding the growth gamble of the 1990s,” Journal of Monetary Economics
        54(4), 1132-1162.
Grishchenko, Olesya. 2005. “Internal vs External Habit Formation: The relative importance for asset
        pricing.” Manuscript.
Haltiwanger, John, and Michael Waldman, 1991. “Responders Versus Non-Responders: A New
        Perspective on Heterogeneity,” Economic Journal 101, 1085-1102.
Hansen, Gary D. 1985. “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics
        56, 309-327.
Hornstein, Andreas and Alexander L. Wolman. 2005. “Trend Inflation, Firm-Specific Capital, and
        Sticky-Prices,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 91(4), 57-83.
Horowitz, Joel L. 1998. “Bootstrap methods for covariance structures,” Journal of Human Resources
        33(1), 39-61.
Ireland, Peter. 2004. “Technology Shocks in the New Keynesian Model,” Review of Economics and
        Statistics 86(4), 923-936.
Khan, Hashmat and Zhenhua Zhu. 2006. “Estimates of the Sticky-Information Phillips Curve for the
       United States,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 38(1), 195-207.
Kiley, Michael T. 2004. “Is Moderate-To-High Inflation Inherently Unstable?” Finance and
        Economics Discussion Series Working Paper # 2004-43, Federal Reserve Board.
Kiley, Michael T. 2007. “A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky Price and Sticky Information
        Models of Price Setting,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39 (1): 101-125 Suppl. S.
Kitamura, Tomiyuki. 2008. “Optimal Monetary Policy under Sticky Prices and Sticky Information,”
        Manuscript.


                                                 33
Klenow, Peter J., and Jonathan L. Willis, 2007. “Sticky information and sticky prices”, Journal of
       Monetary Economics 54, 79–99.
Knotek, Edward S. II. 2008. “A Tale of Two Rigidities: Sticky-Prices in a Sticky-Information
       Environment,” Manuscript.
Korenok, Oleg. 2008. “Empirical Comparison of Sticky Price and Sticky Information Models.”
       Journal of Macroeconomics 30, 906-927.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott. 1982. “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,”
       Econometrica 50, 1435-1370.
Linde, Jesper. 2005. “Estimating New Keynesian Phillips Curves: A Full Information Maximum
       Likelihood Approach,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(6), 1135-1149.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2002. “Sticky Information Versus Sticky Prices: A
       Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       117(4), 1295-1328.
Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis. 2003. “What Measure of Inflation Should a Central Bank
       Target?” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(5), 1058-1086.
Nakamura, Emi and Jon Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
       Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(4), 1415-1464.
Ravina, Enrichetta. 2004. “Keeping Up with the Joneses: Evidence from Micro Data”. Manuscript.
Reis, Ricardo. 2006. “Inattentive Producers,” Review of Economic Studies 73 (3), 793-821.
Rudd, Jeremy and Karl Whelan. 2006. “Can Rational Expectations Sticky-Price Models Explain
       Inflation Dynamics?” American Economic Review 96(1), 303-320.
Ruge-Murcia, Francisco J., 2003. “Methods to Estimate Stochastic General Equilibrium Models,”
       mimeo.
Sargent, Thomas J., 1989. “Two Models of Measurements and the Investment Accelerator,” Journal
       of Political Economy 97(2), 251-287.
Sims, Christopher A. 2003. “Implications of Rational Inattention.” Journal of Monetary Economics
       50(3), 665-690.
Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie Rochester Conference
       Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214.
Taylor, John B. 1999. “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics.” in J.B. Taylorand
       M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-
       Holland, 1999 1009-1050.
Watson, Mark W. 1993. "Relative value of the objective function is relative to the hybrid model,"
       Journal of Political Economy 101(6): 1011-1041.
Williams, John C. 2003. “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy,” Economic Review of Federal Reserve
       Bank of San Francisco, 1-12.
Woodford, Michael. 2001. “Imperfect Common Knowledge and the Effects of Monetary Policy” in
       Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund
       Phelps, ed. by P. Aghion, R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, Princeton University
       Press.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
       Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Zbaracki, Mark J, Ritson M, Levy D, Dutta S, Bergen M, 2004. “Managerial and customer costs of
       price adjustment: Direct evidence from industrial markets,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics 86(2): 514-533.




                                               34
APPENDIX 1: Proof of Proposition 1
Note first that, rewriting equation (7) in terms of relative price ratios in the steady-state yields
                     1             1
        1   s1 p sp  (1  s1 ) p #  .                                                       (A1)
                                                   
so that if the relative optimal price is less than one, the sticky-price relative price ratio must be
greater than one. The steady-state relative optimal price is given by
                                                                                             1/(1 )
                 1   sp   1    (1 ) /(1 )             
           p   s1 
            #
                                     
                                           1
                                                        1  s                                      .                                         (A2)
                 1   sp   1   2 
                                1                             1
                                                                    
                                           (1 ) /(1 )
                       
Thus, if  1   sp 1   1   1                           1 , then p <1 and p  1 .
                                                                            #        sp
                       
             1   sp      1  2 
Recall that 1 and 2 are given by  1   sp aR 1  and  2   sp aR 1 1 1  . The bond condition (3)
evaluated in the steady-state yields 1   R /(a ) so we can rewrite 1 and 2 as  1   sp   1 and
 2   sp   1  . Now define
                                                          (1 ) /(1 )                                                  (1 ) /(1  )
               1   sp   1   1                                         1   sp   1   sp   1           
           X                                                                                                                            .   (A3)
               1   sp  1   1   2                                1   sp  1   1     1    
                                                                                                   sp             
Note first that X          1
                                  1 , so without trend inflation the average relative price of sticky-price firms is
                                                                                  1
1 in the steady-state. A well-defined steady-state requires 1<1, 2<1, and  sp      1 . Thus,
                                           1 C
           X 1                                         * ( ,  ,  sp ,  )                                                                (A4)
                                      sp ( 1  C )
                                              1

                                   (1 ) /( 1)
           1   sp  1 
where C                                            . Note that for positive trend inflation (  1) , C  1 and
           1   sp 
                          
 1  C  0 .




                                                                                        35
APPENDIX 2: Technical Details on Estimation
To estimate the model, we use a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method developed in
Chernozhukov and Hong (2003; henceforth CH). CH show that, under certain conditions, the
parameter estimates as well as their standard errors can be computed directly from the generated
chains. Specifically, the average value for a parameter in a chain will provide a consistent estimate if
this parameter is globally identified and other conditions standard for GMM estimation are satisfied.
Likewise, standard errors can be calculated as (appropriately adjusted if necessary) standard
deviation of parameter draws in the generated chain.
        We employ the Hastings-Metropolis algorithm to implement CH’s estimation method.
Specifically our procedure to construct chains of length N can be summarized as follows:
     Step 1: Draw ( n ) , a candidate vector of parameter values for the chain’s n+1 state, as
         ( n )   ( n )   ( n ) where  ( n ) is the current n state of the vector of parameter values in the

        chain,  ( n ) is a vector of i.i.d. shocks taken from N (0,  ) ,  is a diagonal matrix.
     Step 2: Take the n+1 state of the chain as

             ( n 1)     ( n ) with probability min{1, exp[ J ( ( n ) )  J (( n ) )]}
                        (n)
                          otherwise
        where J ( ( n ) ) is the value of the objective function at the current state of the chain and

         J (( n ) ) is the value of the objective function using the candidate vector of parameter values.

Our choices for initial values  (0) and size of the shocks  ( n ) described by  are summarized in
Appendix Table A1. The initial values for most variables are chosen to more rapidly approach the
global minimum, while  is calibrated to about one percent of the parameter value and then
adjusted on the fly for the first 100,000 draws to generate 0.3 acceptance rates of candidate draws, as
proposed in Gelman et al (2004).

                                            
                                                N
        CH show that                  1
                                        N       n1
                                                       ( n ) is a consistent estimate of  under standard regularity

assumptions of GMM estimators. CH also prove that if the optimal weight matrix is used in the

                                                            
                                                                N
GMM objective function, then V                         1
                                                        N       n 1
                                                                       ( ( n )   )2  var( ( n ) ) is a consistent estimate of the

asymptotic covariance matrix of the parameter estimates. In a more general case with a given weight
matrix W in the GMM objective function, the covariance matrix for the parameter estimates is given
by T 1V V where   DW WD , D is the Jacobian of the moment conditions, T is sample size,
and  is the covariance of moment conditions.37 CH show that these estimates of sampling

37
  Although one may use Newey-West estimate of Γ, we found, in line with Horowitz (1998), that bootstrap-based
estimates of Γ improve the finite sample properties of the covariance estimators.
                                                                           36
uncertainty recover asymptotic standard errors well. However, in highly nonlinear models and in
short samples, one may be inclined to employ bootstrap-based standard errors to have better
coverage. Given that our sample is fairly short, we prefer the latter approach. Our bootstrap
procedure can be summarized as follows: a) we estimate a VAR; b) resample the residuals; c)
construct new series using the resampled residuals and estimated VAR; d) estimate the parameters
on newly created data;38 e) repeat steps b)-d) many times; f) compute standard errors based on
bootstrap replications. We found in simulations that this procedure works very well.
          We use 500,000 draws for our baseline and robustness estimates, and drop the first 100,000
draws (“burn-in” period). We run a series of diagnostics to check the properties of the resulting
distributions from the generated chains. We present results only for the baseline specification.
Diagnostics for other specifications are similar and hence not reported. First, Appendix Figure A1
shows the histograms of parameter values in the generated chain. The distributions are single peaked
and generally bell-shaped although the distributions are not symmetric for some parameters. The
three exceptions are s3, δsi, and σme,r which converge to the boundary. Second, well-identified
parameters should exhibit a U-shaped pattern for the lower envelope of the draws against the value
of the objective function. Appendix Figure A2 plots the distribution of parameter draws against the
value of the objective function and we clearly observe the desired pattern. Third, we diagnose
whether our chain converges to a stationary distribution. We use the approach developed in Gelman
and Rubin (1992) which examines convergence across multiple chains. Appendix Figure A3 shows

                                                                                          
                                                                                              M
the dynamics of between variation of generated chains BN                             1
                                                                                      M       m 1
                                                                                                     ( ( m )   )2 and within

                                              
                                               M      N
variation across chains WN              1
                                        MN     m 1   n 1
                                                             ( (( nm))   ( m ) ) 2 as a function of chain length N where

                                                                                                 
                  N                                                                                    M
 (m)    1
          N       n1
                         (( mn )) is the average of parameter values in chain m,           1
                                                                                              M        m1
                                                                                                              ( m ) is the average

of parameter values across chains,  (( nm)) is the parameter value in chain m in draw n, M is the

number of chains Consistent with convergence, BN shrinks to zero and WN stabilizes as the chain

length N increases. Likewise, Appendix Figure A4 shows that RN  ( NN1 WN  BN ) / WN , the
convergence statistic suggested by Gelman and Rubin (1992), converges to one. Although Appendix
Figures A3 and A4 suggest that the required chain length is about one million draws, Appendix
Figure A5 demonstrates that a chain with 500,000 draws yields estimates very close to estimates
generated from longer chains and hence in our simulations we use only 500,000-draw chains.




38
   Note that we did not use the MCMC procedure to estimate the parameters, but rather a built-in minimizing function
starting at our estimated values.
                                                                 37
                                                                   Table 1: Estimation Results:

                                                                      Hybrid Model          No ROT Firms            No SI Firms       Only SP and SI Firms
                                                                    estimate   (s.e.)      estimate  (s.e.)      estimate    (s.e.)    estimate    (s.e.)

               Fundamentals
                  Labor Supply Elasticity ( )                          1                     1                      1                     1
                  Elasticity of Substitution across Goods ( )         10                    10                     10                    10
                  Habit formation (h )                                0.79     (0.09)       0.80      (0.16)       0.75      (0.23)      0.77     (0.16)
               Taylor Rule
                   Inflation Response (  )                          2.80     (0.66)       3.15      (0.93)       3.30      (0.92)      2.92     (0.84)
                   Output Growth Response ( gy )                     2.61     (0.77)       3.38      (1.18)       2.45      (1.06)      2.88     (0.97)
                   Interest Smoothing ( 1 )                          1.52     (0.09)       1.33      (0.15)       1.32      (0.28)      1.46     (0.16)
                   Interest Smoothing ( 2 )                          -0.59    (0.08)       -0.40     (0.13)      -0.42      (0.21)      -0.53    (0.14)

               Price-Setting
                   Sticky-Price Sector (s 1 )                         0.62     (0.12)       0.63      (0.15)       0.66      (0.22)      0.75     (0.13)
                   Sticky-Information Sector (s 2 )                   0.21     (0.10)       0.23      (0.11)       0.00                  0.25     (0.13)
                   Rule-of-Thumb Sector (s 3 )                        0.09     (0.06)       0.00                   0.32      (0.18)      0.00
                   Price Rigidity ( sp )                             0.81     (0.07)       0.81      (0.08)       0.80      (0.14)      0.80     (0.10)
                   Information Rigidity ( si )                       0.95     (0.13)       0.95      (0.13)       0.75                  0.95     (0.14)

               Shocks
                   Persistence Preference Shock ( g )                0.85     (0.15)       0.88      (0.13)       0.87      (0.12)      0.87     (0.12)
                   Standard Deviation: Policy Shocks ( r )           0.21     (0.05)       0.25      (0.12)       0.30      (0.21)      0.23     (0.10)
                   Standard Deviation: Preference Shocks ( g )       9.26     (3.19)       10.33     (3.06)       9.33      (3.70)      9.54     (3.06)
                   Standard Deviation: Technology Shocks ( a )       3.26     (1.35)       2.92      (1.12)       2.84      (1.45)      3.20     (1.09)

               Measurement Error
                   Standard Deviation: Output Growth (me,gy )        1.44     (0.38)       1.47      (0.31)       1.43      (0.52)      1.44     (0.31)
                   Standard Deviation: Inflation (me,  )            1.23     (0.12)       1.22      (0.16)       1.27      (0.34)      1.22     (0.14)
                  Standard Deviation: Interest Rate ( me,r )         0.09     (0.07)       0.11      (0.07)       0.09      (0.07)      0.10     (0.05)

               Value of Objective Function                            51.2                  52.4                   59.0                  52.3
               Relative Value of Objective Function                   1.00                  1.02                   1.15                  1.02


Note: The table presents estimates of the baseline model, using a truncation of past expectations for sticky-information firms of 12, as well as estimates of restricted
models. We use contemporaneous covariances and cross-autocovariances up to three lags. Data are from 1984:Q1 to 2008:Q2. Relative value of the objective function is
relative to the hybrid model. Standard errors are constructed using non-parametric bootstrap. Bootstraps are done by running a 4-lag VAR on our data, and using the
VAR coefficients and residuals to generate 2000 replications of the data which are used to re-estimate the model in each bootstrap replication. See text and appendix for
details on estimation approach.
                                                                                   38
                                                               Table 2: Estimates of the Pure Models:

                                                                         Sticky-Price Model          Sticky-Info Model         Fully Flexible Model
                                                                        estimate      (s.e.)        estimate      (s.e.)       estimate       (s.e.)
                Fundamentals
                   Labor Supply Elasticity ( )                             1                           1                          1
                   Elasticity of Substitution across Goods ( )            10                          10                         10
                   Habit formation (h )                                   0.69         (0.21)         0.82                       1.00       (0.03)
                Taylor Rule
                    Inflation Response (  )                             3.46         (0.92)         1.70        (0.85)         1.74       (0.71)
                    Output Growth Response ( gy )                        2.44         (1.19)         4.52        (1.31)         0.76       (0.44)
                    Interest Smoothing ( 1 )                             1.29         (0.22)         1.45        (0.14)         1.15       (0.46)
                    Interest Smoothing ( 2 )                             -0.39        (0.19)        -0.50        (0.14)         -0.67      (0.24)
                Price-Setting
                    Sticky-Price Sector (s 1 )                            1.00                        0.00                       0.00
                    Sticky-Information Sector (s 2 )                      0.00                        1.00                       0.00
                    Rule-of-Thumb Sector (s 3 )                           0.00                        0.00                       0.00
                    Price Rigidity ( sp )                                0.80         (0.09)
                    Information Rigidity ( si )                                                      0.90        (0.07)
                Shocks
                    Persistence Preference Shock ( g )                   0.88         (0.11)         0.86        (0.14)         1.00       (0.28)
                    Standard Deviation: Policy Shocks ( r )              0.27         (0.17)         0.34        (0.15)         0.29       (0.20)
                    Standard Deviation: Preference Shocks ( g )          9.54         (3.08)         9.29        (4.25)         9.87       (4.68)
                    Standard Deviation: Technology Shocks ( a )          3.05         (1.27)         0.57        (0.42)         3.54       (1.65)
                Measurement Error
                    Standard Deviation: Output Growth (me,gy )           1.37         (0.43)         1.44        (0.40)         1.91       (0.25)
                    Standard Deviation: Inflation (me,  )               1.24         (0.14)         1.17        (0.16)         0.93       (0.49)
                   Standard Deviation: Interest Rate ( me,r )            0.09         (0.07)         0.12        (0.09)         1.52       (0.15)

                Value of Objective Function                               60.0                        92.3                      1431.3
                Relative Value of Objective Function                      1.17                        1.80                      27.96

Note: The table presents estimates of the pure models where firms use only one pricing mechanism. We use contemporaneous covariances and cross-autocovariances up
to three lags. Data are from 1984:Q1 to 2008:Q2. Relative value of the objective function is relative to the hybrid model. Standard errors are constructed using non-
parametric bootstrap. Bootstraps are done by running a 4-lag VAR on our data, and using the VAR coefficients and residuals to generate 2000 replications of the data
which are used to re-estimate the model in each bootstrap replication. See text and appendix for details on estimation approach.



                                                                                  39
                                        Table 3: Variance Decomposition

                                               Source of Variance of Growth in Output
                             Model             Policy        Preference      Technology
                        Hybrid                   5                 85                 10
                        Sticky-Price             5                 72                 23
                        Sticky-Info              20                80                 0
                        Flexible                 0                 67                 33
                                                    Source of Variance of Inflation
                             Model             Policy         Preference      Technology
                        Hybrid                   5                 25                 70
                        Sticky-Price             5                 41                 54
                        Sticky-Info              50                44                 7
                        Flexible                 57                29                 14
                                                 Source of Variance of Interest Rates
                             Model             Policy        Preference       Technology
                        Hybrid                   10                90                 0
                        Sticky-Price             5                 95                 0
                        Sticky-Info              25                75                 0
                        Flexible                 0                 67                 33



Note: Table presents variance decompositions given the parameter estimates for the hybrid model from Table 1 and the pure
models from Table 2. Horizon is four quarters.




                                                          40
                                                                 Table 4: Robustness of Estimates:
                                                                                    Diagonal                               Response to        AR(1) Interest
                                                             More moments                          Indivisible Labor
                                                                                Weighting Matrix                           Output Gap            Smoothing
                                                            estimate   (s.e.)   estimate (s.e.)    estimate   (s.e.)    estimate (s.e.)      estimate (s.e.)
         Fundamentals
            Labor Supply Elasticity ( )                       1                   1                  ∞                     1                    1
            Elasticity of Substitution across Goods ( )      10                  10                  10                   10                   10
            Habit formation (h )                             0.87      (0.09)    0.75     (0.18)     0.81     (0.06)      0.81    (0.12)       0.81    (0.19)
         Taylor Rule
             Inflation Response (  )                       2.58      (0.93)    3.04     (0.80)     2.13     (0.52)      2.67    (0.73)       3.48    (0.98)
             Output Growth Response ( gy )                  1.87      (0.87)    2.75     (1.09)     2.83     (0.86)      2.73    (0.90)       4.05    (1.18)
             Output Gap Response ( x )                      0.00                0.00                0.00                 0.02    (0.01)       0.00
             Interest Smoothing ( 1 )                       1.74      (0.09)    0.66     (0.16)     1.50     (0.20)      1.60    (0.17)       0.91    (0.11)
             Interest Smoothing ( 2 )                       -0.79     (0.08)    0.14     (0.09)    -0.57     (0.17)     -0.66    (0.15)       0.00
         Price-Setting
             Sticky-Price Sector (s 1 )                      0.57      (0.17)    0.48     (0.18)     0.49     (0.14)      0.61    (0.15)       0.60    (0.14)
             Sticky-Information Sector (s 2 )                0.24      (0.12)    0.16     (0.10)     0.00     (0.00)      0.23    (0.10)       0.15    (0.07)
             Rule-of-Thumb Sector (s 3 )                     0.11      (0.07)    0.18     (0.12)     0.51     (0.14)      0.08    (0.05)       0.09    (0.05)
             Price Rigidity ( sp )                          0.82      (0.11)    0.76     (0.15)     0.85     (0.02)      0.80    (0.12)       0.81    (0.09)
             Information Rigidity ( si )                    0.95      (0.15)    0.65     (0.24)     0.52     (0.16)      0.95    (0.15)       0.94    (0.16)
         Shocks
             Persistence Preference Shock ( g )             0.79      (0.15)    0.85     (0.11)     0.85     (0.23)      0.84    (0.15)       0.89    (0.08)
             Standard Deviation: Policy Shocks ( r )        0.02      (0.01)    0.89     (0.49)     0.39     (0.13)      0.15    (0.08)       0.47    (0.22)
             Standard Deviation: Preference Shocks ( g )    11.70     (4.31)    10.61    (3.75)     8.66     (3.25)      9.52    (3.99)      10.63    (3.35)
             Standard Deviation: Technology Shocks ( a )    3.46      (1.54)    1.56     (0.95)     0.85     (0.39)      3.32    (1.32)       2.49    (1.00)
         Measurement Error
             Standard Deviation: Output Growth (me,gy )     1.28      (0.48)    1.30     (0.47)     1.42     (0.53)      1.45    (0.37)       1.50    (0.32)
             Standard Deviation: Inflation (me,  )         1.33      (0.19)    1.19     (0.20)     1.20     (0.44)      1.24    (0.15)       1.20    (0.18)
            Standard Deviation: Interest Rate ( me,r )      0.20      (0.13)    0.51     (0.29)     0.10     (0.04)      0.12    (0.08)       0.10    (0.06)

         Value of Objective Function                         123.4                4.3                73.1                 50.9                 56.8
         Relative Value of Objective Function                 NA                  NA                 1.43                 0.99                 1.11


Note: The table presents robustness estimates of the baseline model. The truncation of past expectations for sticky-information firms is 12. We use
contemporaneous covariances and cross-autocovariances up to three lags unless otherwise specified. Data are from 1984:Q1 to 2008:Q2. Relative value of the
objective function, wherever relevant, is relative to the hybrid model. In the scenario “More moments”, we use contemporaneous covariances and cross-
autocovariances up to eight lags. Standard errors are constructed using non-parametric bootstrap. Bootstraps are done by running a 4-lag VAR on our data, and
using the VAR coefficients and residuals to generate 2000 replications of the data which are used to re-estimate the model in each bootstrap replication. See text and
appendix for details on estimation approach.
                                                                                   41
                                                   Figure 1: Autocorrelations of Observable Variables
                      Output Growth                                        Inflation                                        Interest Rate
                                                         3                                                 10
                 4
                                                         2
  Hybrid




                 2                                                                                          5
                                                         1
                 0
                                                         0
                                                                                                            0
                 -3   -2         -1          0           -3           -2               -1        0           -3           -2            -1           0

                                                         3                                                 10
                 4
  Sticky-Price




                                                         2
                 2                                                                                          5
                                                         1
                 0
                                                         0
                                                                                                            0
                 -3   -2         -1          0           -3           -2               -1        0           -3           -2            -1           0

                                                         3                                                 10
                 4
                                                         2
  Sticky-Info




                 2                                                                                          5
                                                         1
                 0
                                                         0
                                                                                                            0
                 -3   -2         -1          0           -3           -2               -1        0           -3           -2            -1           0

                                                         3                                                 10
                 4
                                                         2
  Flexible




                 2                                                                                          5
                                                         1
                 0
                                                         0
                                                                                                            0
                 -3   -2         -1          0           -3           -2               -1        0           -3           -2            -1           0
Note: The figure plots autocovariances of the observable variables in the data (1984:Q1-2008:Q2), as the black bold lines, as well as those predicted by the hybrid
model and pure models (using estimates in Tables 1 and 2), as the bold black dashed lines. The grey shaded areas are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
Bootstraps are done by running a 4-lag VAR on our data, and using the VAR coefficients and residuals to generate 2000 replications of the data, from which we
generate a distribution of autocovariances. The horizontal axis indicates the timing in quarters of the lagged variable used in the autocovariance.

                                                                                 42
                                                              Figure 2: Cross-Correlations of Observable Variables
                            Inflation(t)/Output Growth(t+x)                   Inflation(t)/Interest Rate(t+x)              Output Growth(t)/Interest Rate(t+x)
                     1                                                                                               3
                   0.5                                                 2                                             2
                     0                                                                                               1
    Hybrid



                                                                       1
                   -0.5                                                                                              0
                     -1                                                0                                            -1
                   -1.5                                                                                             -2
                       -3   -2     -1      0      1      2    3         -3   -2     -1      0       1       2   3     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2      3

                     1                                                                                               3
                   0.5                                                 2                                             2
    Sticky-Price




                     0                                                                                               1
                                                                       1
                   -0.5                                                                                              0
                     -1                                                0                                            -1
                   -1.5                                                                                             -2
                       -3   -2     -1      0      1      2    3         -3   -2     -1      0       1       2   3     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2      3

                     1                                                                                               3
                   0.5                                                 2                                             2
    Sticky-Info




                     0                                                                                               1
                                                                       1
                   -0.5                                                                                              0
                     -1                                                0                                            -1
                   -1.5                                                                                             -2
                       -3   -2     -1      0      1      2    3         -3   -2     -1      0       1       2   3     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2      3

                     1                                                                                               3
                   0.5                                                 2                                             2
    Flexible




                     0                                                                                               1
                                                                       1
                   -0.5                                                                                              0
                     -1                                                0                                            -1
                   -1.5                                                                                             -2
                       -3   -2     -1      0      1      2    3         -3   -2     -1      0       1       2   3     -3     -2     -1      0      1      2      3
Note: The figure plots cross-autocovariances of the observable variables: output growth (gy), inflation (), and interest rates (r) in the data (1984:Q1-2008:Q2) and
those predicted by the hybrid model as well as those predicted by the pure models (using estimates in Table 1). Black solid lines are from datawhile the bold dashed
black lines are those of each model. The grey shaded areas are bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals. Bootstraps are done by running a 4-lag VAR on our data,
and using the VAR coefficients and residuals to generate 2000 replications of the data, from which we generate a distribution of cross-autocovariances. The
horizontal axis indicates the timing of the variable used in the cross-autocovariances (negative numbers indicate lags, positive numbers are leads).

                                                                                         43
Figure 3. Impulse response functions
                              Policy Shock                                 Preference Shock                                     Technology Shock
                   0.5                                       0.2                                                  0.2
                                                                                         Hybrid
   Output Growth


                     0                                                                   Sticky-Price
                                                             0.1                                                  0.1
                                                                                         Sticky-Info
                   -0.5
                                                               0                                                    0
                    -1

                   -1.5                                     -0.1                                                 -0.1
                          5           10        15                         5            10           15                         5            10           15


                     0                                     0.03                                                     0

                   -0.1                                    0.02
   Inflation




                   -0.2                                    0.01                                                 -0.05

                   -0.3                                        0

                   -0.4                                    -0.01                                                 -0.1
                          5           10        15                         5            10           15                         5            10           15


                     1                                       0.1                                                0.02

                                                                                                                    0
   Interest Rate




                   0.5
                                                           0.05                                                 -0.02
                     0
                                                                                                                -0.04

                   -0.5                                        0                                                -0.06
                          5           10        15                         5            10           15                         5            10           15

Note: The figure plots impulse responses (percent deviation from steady-state) of baseline (hybrid), pure sticky-price and pure sticky-information models (based on
estimates reported in Tables 1 and 2) to a 1-unit innovation to monetary policy, preference shock, and technology. Time is in quarters on the horizontal axis.



                                                                                44
                                                            Figure 4: Sector-Specific vs. Pure Model Inflation
                                       Interest Rate                                Preference                                          Technology
                          0                                          0.4                                                0
       Sticky-Price



                       -0.05                                         0.2                                             -0.2

                        -0.1                                          0                                              -0.4
                               0   5        10         15    20            0    5        10       15        20              0      5        10        15        20
                                                                                                                        0
       Sticky-Info




                       -0.01                                         0.1
                                                                    0.05                                            -0.05
                       -0.02
                                                                       0
                       -0.03                                       -0.05                                             -0.1
                               0   5        10         15    20            0    5        10       15        20              0      5        10        15        20
                       0.05                                          0.2
       Rule-of-Thumb




                                                                                                                        0
                          0                                          0.1
                       -0.05                                          0                                              -0.2

                        -0.1                                        -0.1                                             -0.4
                               0   5        10         15    20            0    5        10       15        20              0      5        10        15        20

                          0                                           0                                                 0
       Flexible




                          -1                                          -2                                               -2

                          -2                                          -4                                               -4
                               0   5        10         15    20            0    5        10       15        20              0      5        10        15        20
                          0                                          0.2                                                0
                                                                     0.1
        Hybrid




                        -0.1
                                                                      0
                                                                                                                     -0.5
                        -0.2                                        -0.1
                               0   5        10         15    20            0    5        10       15        20              0      5        10        15        20
Note: The figure displays the response of inflation (percent deviation from steady-state) to shocks (labeled on top). Black solid lines indicate the response of
inflation in each sector (labeled at left) within the hybrid model (using estimates of Table 1) while the red dash lines indicate the response of a pure model consisting
only of that sector’s type of firms (i.e., sj = 1 for sector j). The bottom row compares the response of aggregate inflation in the hybrid model (in black solid lines) to
a weighted average of inflation rates from the pure models (red dashed lines), where the weights are the effective weights (sCPI) of each sector from the baseline
estimates. Baseline parameter estimates are used in each case. Time is in quarters on the horizontal axis.


                                                                                    45
                                                                 Figure 5: Robustness of Estimates to Elasticity of Substitution (θ)
                                                  Panel A: Share of firms                               Panel B: price and information stickiness
                                                                                                                    0.95
                                        0.8
                                                                                             s1
                                        0.7                                                  s2
                                                                                                                     0.9                                    sp
                                                                                             s3
                                        0.6
                                                                                                                                                            si

                                        0.5                                                                         0.85
  shares of firms




                                                                                                       stickiness
                                        0.4

                                                                                                                     0.8
                                        0.3


                                        0.2
                                                                                                                    0.75

                                        0.1


                                         0                                                                           0.7
                                              7       8    9     10   11      12   13   14        15                       7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14     15
                                                                                                                                           

                                                  Panel C: fit of the model
                                        54


                                        53
      value of the objective function




                                        52


                                        51


                                        50


                                        49


                                        48


                                        47
                                          7           8    9     10   11      12   13   14        15
                                                                       



Note: The panels display estimation results of the baseline model for different values of θ, as indicated on the horizontal axis of each
panel. For each value of θ, we ran a chain of 500,000 iterations, dropping the first 100,000 iterations. Panel A presents the estimated
shares of sticky price (s1), sticky-information (s2), and rule-of-thumb firms (s3) for different values of θ. Panel B presents the
estimated levels of price rigidity (δsp) and informational rigidity (δsi) for different values of θ. Panel C presents values of the objective
function (averaged across chains) for each value of θ.




                                                                                                       46
                                        Figure 6. Welfare isoloss maps.
                   Loss function L1                                   Loss function L2
   Panel A: Baseline hybrid model.




Panel B: Ratio of the relative map for pure sticky-price model to the relative map for the hybrid model.




Panel C: Ratio of the relative map for pure sticky-information model to the relative map for the hybrid model.




   (continued on next page)
                                                       47
    Panel D. Price level targeting.




    Panel E. Differential responses to sector-specific inflation.




Notes: The figure plots isoloss maps for two welfare functions L1 and L2 for various combinations of the policy reaction
function (Taylor rule). Volatilities of the variables are computed using the parameter estimates of the hybrid model. The
red star indicates the position of the estimated Taylor rule. In panels A, B and C, gy on the horizontal axis shows the long-
run response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in the output growth rate. On the vertical axis, 
shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in inflation. Other parameters in the
Taylor rule (interest rate smoothing, volatility of the interest rate shock) are held constant. In panel D, the figures in
square parentheses show the value of the social loss function evaluated at the estimated Taylor rule. On the horizontal
axis, PLT shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in the deviation of the
price level from its target. On the vertical axis,  shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a
unit increase in inflation. Other parameters in the Taylor rule (interest rate smoothing, volatility of the interest rate shock,
output growth rate response) are held constant. In panel E, :SP+ROT+FLEX on the horizontal axis shows the long-run
response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in aggregate inflation in the sticky-information, rule-of-
thumb and flexible price sectors. On the vertical axis, :SP shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest
rate) to a unit increase in inflation in the sticky-price sector. Other parameters in the Taylor rule (interest rate smoothing,
volatility of the interest rate shock, output growth rate response) are held constant. The shaded region shows the Taylor
rule parameter combinations associated with equilibrium indeterminacy.




                                                              48
                Appendix Table A1: Initial Parameter Values and Standard Deviations of Shocks

                                          h                        gy           1           2             
      Initial Value         10            0.9             3              1            1.4           -0.5
      St.D. Shocks                       0.005          0.15           0.03          0.005         0.005
                             s1            s2             s3            sp           si           g
      Initial Value        0.25           0.25          0.25          0.75           0.75           0.8
      St.D. Shocks         0.01           0.01          0.01          0.005          0.005         0.004
                             r           g            a         me,gy         me,          me,r            
      Initial Value         0.5           10.0           3.0            1             0.5           0.5
      St.D. Shocks        0.0035          0.07          0.021         0.007         0.0035        0.0035



Note: The table displays the initial values used in MCMC algorithm, as well as the initial standard deviations of shocks used in
generating distribution of parameter estimates.




                                                                49
Appendix Figure A1. Histograms of Baseline Parameters from MCMC.
   x 10
       4 
                      x 10
                           4 
                               gy           x 10
                                                4 s1         x 10
                                                                 4 s2                                              x 10
                                                                                                                       4    s3                x 10
                                                                                                                                                   4   g
 15                        15                       10                           15                           15                         8

                                                                                                                                         6
 10                        10                                                    10                           10
                                                     5                                                                                   4
   5                        5                                                    5                            5
                                                                                                                                         2

   0                        0                        0                           0                            0                          0
       2       3       4        0               5        0          0.5      1        0         0.5     1          0       0.5       1            0.7 0.8 0.9
           4   i1                  4    i2                   4
                                                                     h                     4    sp                    5    si                    4   r
       x 10                     x 10                     x 10                         x 10                         x 10                       x 10
 10                        15                       10                           15                           4                          15

                                                                                                              3
                           10                                                    10                                                      10
   5                                                 5                                                        2
                            5                                                    5                                                       5
                                                                                                              1

   0                        0                        0                           0                            0                          0
       1       1.5     2     -1         -0.5    0            0.6      0.8    1            0.7 0.8 0.9         0.8              0.9            0        0.5      1
           4   g                   4    a                    4    me gy                 4    me                   4    me r
       x 10                     x 10                     x 10                         x 10                         x 10
   8                       15                       15                           15                           15

   6
                           10                       10                           10                           10
   4
                            5                        5                           5                            5
   2

   0                        0                        0                           0                            0
       5       10     15        0        2      4        0           1       2        1                 1.5        0       0.5       1


Note: The figure plots the distribution of the last MCMC 400,000 draws of baseline estimation of the hybrid model from Table 1.

                                                                                 50
Appendix Figure A2: Shape of Objective Function with respect to each Parameter




Note: This figure presents scatter plots of values of the objective function associated with parameter values for different draws from the Markov Chain of the
baseline estimation of the hybrid model from Table 1. We drop the first 100,000 iterations, then plot every one-hundredth draw from the chain.



                                                                               51
Appendix Figure A3: Between and Within Variances across chains.
                                     gy                          s1                     -3    s2                            s3                     -3    g
                                                                                  x 10                                                            x 10
   0.2                       1                   0.01                         6                             0.015                            4

  0.15                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                              4                              0.01
   0.1                      0.5                 0.005                                                                                        2
                                                                              2                             0.005
  0.05                                                                                                                                       1

     0                       0                      0                         0                                0                             0
         0       200              0    200              0           200           0              200                0         200                 0         200
                 i1                   i2                    -3
                                                                    h                      -4    sp                     -4   si                           r
                                                        x 10                      x 10                              x 10
  0.04                     0.04                     6                         6                                4                           0.03

  0.03                     0.03                                                                                3
                                                    4                         4                                                            0.02
  0.02                     0.02                                                                                2
                                                    2                         2                                                            0.01
  0.01                     0.01                                                                                1

     0                       0                      0                         0                                0                             0
         0       200              0    200              0           200           0              200                0         200                 0         200
                 g                    a                      -3    me gy                 -3     me                        me r
                                                            x 10                      x 10
   0.8                      0.2                      8                            3                           0.01

   0.6                     0.15                      6
                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                           Within Variance
   0.4                      0.1                      4                                                       0.005
                                                                                                                                                           Between Variance
                                                                                  1
   0.2                     0.05                      2

     0                       0                       0                            0                             0
         0       200              0    200               0          200               0           200                0         200

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of between variation of generated chains                                       ∑         Ψ        Ψ    and within variation across chains
             ∑   ∑     Ψ     Ψ        as a function of chain length N where Ψ                    ∑N     Ψ   is the average of parameter values in chain m, Ψ                ∑M   Ψ
                                                                                            N                                                                           M
is the average of parameter values across chains, Ψ       is the parameter value in chain m in draw n. In these simulations, M=4. The horizontal axis shows the
length of the chain in 5000 increments (i.e., 100 corresponds to 500,000 draws).



                                                                                      52
Appendix Figure A4: Convergence Statistic RT
                                        gy                       s1                          s2                        s3                         g
    3                        3                         1.2                                                   1.1                         5
                                                                                   1.4
  2.5                      2.5                     1.15                                                                                  4

    2                        2                         1.1                                                  1.05                         3
                                                                                   1.2
  1.5                      1.5                     1.05                                                                                  2

    1                        1                          1                            1                        1                          1
        0     200                0       200                 0      200                  0      200                0      200                0       200

              i1                        i2                        h                          sp                       si                         r
    6                        6                          2                          1.1                       1.1                         3
    5                        5                                                                                                         2.5
    4                        4
                                                       1.5                        1.05                      1.05                         2
    3                        3
    2                        2                                                                                                         1.5

    1                        1                          1                            1                        1                          1
        0     200                0       200                 0      200                  0      200                0      200                0       200

              g                         a                        me gy                      me                      me r
    3                        3                         1.1                         1.1                       1.1

  2.5                      2.5

    2                        2                     1.05                           1.05                      1.05

  1.5                      1.5

    1                        1                          1                            1                        1
        0     200                0       200                 0      200                  0      200                0      200

Note: This figure shows the dynamics of                             /       as a function of chain length N where          ∑      Ψ       Ψ      is the between variation
of generated chains,         ∑       ∑         Ψ   Ψ         is within variation across chains, Ψ           ∑N Ψ       is the average of parameter values in chain m,
                                                                                                        N
Ψ       ∑M   Ψ     is the average of parameter values across chains, Ψ is the parameter value in chain m in draw n. In these simulations, M=4. The horizontal
      M
axis shows the length of the chain in 5000 increments (i.e., 100 corresponds to 500,000 draws).

                                                                                    53
Appendix Figure A5: Mean Values across Chains
                                      gy                       s1                        s2                         s3                       g
   5                         5                         1                       0.5                       0.4                       1.5

                             4                                                 0.4                       0.3
   4                                                 0.8
                                                                               0.3                       0.2                          1
   3                         3                       0.6
                                                                               0.2                       0.1
                             2
   2                                                 0.4
                                                                               0.1                          0                      0.5
                             1
   1                                                 0.2                         0                       -0.1
       0      200                0      200                0      200                0      200                 0     200                 0     200
              i1                       i2                        h                        sp                       si                       r
 1.8                      -0.4                                                   1                       1.4                       0.4

                                                     0.9
                          -0.5                                                 0.9                       1.2                       0.3
 1.6
                                                     0.8
                          -0.6                                                 0.8                          1                      0.2
                                                     0.7
 1.4
                          -0.7                                                 0.7                       0.8                       0.1
                                                     0.6

                          -0.8                       0.5                                                                              0
       0      200                0      200                0      200                0      200                 0     200                 0     200
              g                        a                       me gy                    me                       me r
  20                         8                       2.5                       1.8
                                                                               1.6                       0.4
  15                         6                         2
                                                                               1.4
                                                                                                         0.2
  10                         4                       1.5
                                                                               1.2

   5                         2                         1                         1                          0

                                                                               0.8
   0                         0                       0.5                                                 -0.2
       0      200                0      200                0      200                0      200                 0     200

Note: The figure plots our baseline estimate of the hybrid model from Table 1 using 500,000 iterations (solid black line) and two standard error bands (dashed
black lines) along with the mean values of parameter estimates across four additional chains (red dotted line), each run for 2 million iterations, dropping the first
100,000 of each. The horizontal axis shows the length of the chain in 5000 increments (i.e., 100 corresponds to 500,000 draws).

                                                                                 54
Appendix Figure A6. Baselines volatility maps for key macroeconomic variables.




Notes: The figure plot iso-curves for volatility of output growth rate (gy), output gap (x), inflation () and
interest rate (i). On the horizontal axis, gy shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest rate)
to a unit increase in the output growth rate. On the vertical axis,  shows the long-run response of the policy
instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in the inflation. Other parameters in the Taylor rule (interest rate
smoothing, volatility of the interest rate shock) are held constant. The red star denotes the combination of gy
and  corresponding to the estimated Taylor rule. Volatilities of the variables are computed using the
parameter estimates of the hybrid model.




                                                       55
Appendix Figure A7. Price level targeting and volatility maps for key macroeconomic variables.




Notes: The figure plot iso-curves for volatility of output growth rate (gy), output gap (x), inflation () and
interest rate (i). On the horizontal axis, PLT shows the long-run response of the policy instrument (interest
rate) to a unit increase in the deviation of the price level from its target. On the vertical axis,  shows the
long-run response of the policy instrument (interest rate) to a unit increase in the inflation. Other parameters
in the Taylor rule (interest rate smoothing, volatility of the interest rate shock, output growth rate response)
are held constant. The red star denotes the combination of PLT and  corresponding to the estimated Taylor
rule. The value in squared parentheses shows the level of volatility at the estimated Taylor rule. Volatilities
of the variables are computed using the parameter estimates of the hybrid model.




                                                      56
Appendix Figure A8. Differentiated inflation response and volatility maps for key macroeconomic variables.




Notes: The figure plot iso-curves for volatility of output growth rate (gy), output gap (x), inflation () and
interest rate (i). On the horizontal axis, :SI+ROT+FLEX shows the long-run response of the policy instrument
(interest rate) to a unit increase in the aggregate inflation in the sticky-information, rule-of-thumb and
flexible price sectors. On the vertical axis, :SP shows the long-run response of the policy instrument
(interest rate) to a unit increase in the inflation in the sticky-price sector. Other parameters in the Taylor rule
(interest rate smoothing, volatility of the interest rate shock, output growth rate response) are held constant.
The red star denotes the combination of :SI+ROT+FLEX and :SP corresponding to the estimated Taylor rule
where :SI+ROT+FLEX = :SP. Volatilities of the variables are computed using the parameter estimates of the
hybrid model.




                                                        57
Appendix Figure A9. Welfare isoloss maps for alternative values for the weight on output volatility.
                    Loss function L1                                     Loss function L2




                                                    58
