                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    LONG-TERM CARE OF THE DISABLED ELDERLY:
                  DO CHILDREN INCREASE CAREGIVING BY SPOUSES?

                                          Liliana E. Pezzin
                                          Robert A. Pollak
                                          Barbara S. Schone

                                        Working Paper 14328
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14328


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Institute on Aging under
grants 1 R01 AG24049 and 1 R01AG 025475. Early versions of this paper were presented at the Economic
Demography Workshop, Population Association o f America, New York, NY 2007; the National Bureau
of Economic Research Cohort Studies, Cambridge MA 2006; and at the European Society of Population
Economics, Paris, France, 2005. The views in this paper are the authors. No official endorsement
by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality of the Department of Health and Human Services
is intended or should be inferred. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Liliana E. Pezzin, Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara S. Schone. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Long-Term Care of the Disabled Elderly: Do Children Increase Caregiving by Spouses?
Liliana E. Pezzin, Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara S. Schone
NBER Working Paper No. 14328
September 2008
JEL No. D1,J1,J2

                                              ABSTRACT

Do adult children affect the care elderly parents provide each other? We develop two models in which
the anticipated behavior of adult children provides incentives for elderly parents to increase care for
their disabled spouses. The "demonstration effect" postulates that adult children learn from a parent's
example that family caregiving is appropriate behavior. The "punishment effect" postulates that adult
children may punish parents who fail to provide spousal care by not providing future care for the nondisabled
spouse when necessary. Thus, joint children act as a commitment mechanism, increasing the probability
that elderly spouses will provide care for each other; stepchildren with weak attachments to their parents
provide weaker incentives for spousal care than joint children. Using data from the HRS, we find
evidence that spouses provide more care when they have children with strong parental attachment.


Liliana E. Pezzin                                     Barbara S. Schone
Health Policy Institute                               Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
PCOR & Dept. of Medicine                              540 Gaither Road
8701 Watertown Plank Road                             Rockville, MD 20850
Milwaukee, WI 53226                                   and Georgetown Public Policy Institute
lpezzin@mcw.edu                                       3520 Prospect St. NW
                                                      Washington, DC 20007
Robert A. Pollak                                      bschone@ahrq.gov
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
1. Introduction

       Although spouses remain the largest group of primary caregivers to the disabled elderly in

the U.S. (Spillman and Pezzin 2000), the long-term care literature has focused on the care adult

children provide for their disabled elderly parents.1 More specifically, the literature has focused on

the care adult children provide for their unpartnered, disabled, elderly parents. Because women

usually marry older men and because women usually live longer than men, most of these

unpartnered, disabled, elderly parents are women. Thus, we can capsulize the problem of long-term

care for an unpartnered, disabled elderly parent as: "Who's going to take care of Mom?"

       In contrast, the question motivating this paper is: "Who's going to take care of Dad?" That

is, we consider the care that elderly spouses provide for each other and how joint children and

stepchildren affect the willingness of elderly spouses to provide care for one another. We develop

two models in which the anticipated behavior of adult children provides an incentive for the elderly

to provide more care for their disabled spouses than they otherwise would. Our first model

postulates a "demonstration effect" -- adult children learn from a parent's example that family

caregiving is appropriate behavior. Our second model postulates a "punishment effect" -- if the

nondisabled spouse fails to provide care for the disabled spouse, then the children may respond by

not providing future care for the nondisabled spouse when care becomes necessary. Both models

assume that the nondisabled elderly parent recognizes that his or her caregiving behavior will affect

the children's willingness to provide care in the future. In essence, children act as a commitment

mechanism, increasing the probability that elderly spouses will provide care for one another.




1
 For references to this literature, see McGarry and Schoeni (1997); Pezzin and Schone (1997,
1999 a, b); Heidemann and Stern (1999); Engers and Stern (2002); Checkovich and Stern
(2002); and Pezzin, Pollak, and Schone (2007, 2008).
                                                   1
       In section 2 we describe our model. The potency of the demonstration effect and the

punishment effect depend on the strength of the child's attachment to the disabled parent (the

husband) and the nondisabled parent (the wife). We assume that biological children are strongly

attached to their parents, while stepchildren may have stronger attachment to a biological parent

than to a stepparent, and that the attachment of a stepchild to a stepparent may depend on the age at

which the stepparent came into the child's life. In Section 3 we discuss the data -- we use waves 4

and 5 of AHEAD -- and describe our estimation procedure. In section 4 we describe our results.

Section 5 is a brief conclusion.



2. Conceptual Framework

       We begin by describing the demonstration effect and the punishment effect in general terms,

emphasizing that both effects depend in different ways on the strength of the child's attachment to

the disabled parent (the husband) and to the nondisabled parent (the wife). We then consider

various cases in which we expect to find systematic differences in a stepchild's attachment to the

disabled and the nondisabled parent. We begin with the case in which the child is the wife's

biological child and the husband's stepchild because this is the most common case.

       The demonstration effect postulates that "parents teach children the desired behavior by

setting an example" (Stark 1995). The traditional specification of the demonstration effect involves

three generations. For example, adult children care for their elderly parents in order to teach their

own offspring that children should care for their parents (Cox and Stark 2005). We propose a two-

generation version of the demonstration effect: nondisabled elderly spouses provide care for their

disabled spouses to teach their own children that family members should take care of one another.

That is, the nondisabled parent "models" appropriate behavior by caring for the disabled parent; the

                                                   2
adult child, observing the parent's caregiving behavior, infers the appropriateness of family

caregiving. The nondisabled parent, recognizing that the child will learn from her example,

provides more care than she otherwise would (that is, care above and beyond that which an altruistic

spouse would provide in the absence of children) in order to teach the adult child the importance of

family caregiving.

        Not only does the demonstration effect provide a mechanism for the intergenerational

transmission of caregiving norms but, because wives far outnumber husbands as primary caregivers

to their spouses, for the transmission of gendered caregiving norms. That is, the demonstration

effect may be one of the reasons why daughters are more likely than sons to provide long-term care

to their disabled parents. Because wives are more likely than husbands to be the caregiving spouse

— women have a longer life expectancy and typically marry older men — the lesson drawn by the

adult children may be not only that caregiving is a family responsibility but that caregiving is a

female responsibility.

         The punishment effect assumes not only that the adult child already knows that family

members are supposed to care for one another, but also that the adult child is willing to punish the

nondisabled spouse for violating this norm. Hence, the punishment effect raises issues of credibility.

Both in real and in experimental situations, individuals often expend their own resources to punish

those who have violated behavioral norms in situations in which the punisher derives no apparent

self-interested advantage from punishing. For example, responders in ultimatum games frequently

reject "ungenerous" or "insultingly low" offers. (Roth [1995] provides a discussion and references

to the experimental literature.) Such behavior is often termed "altruistic punishment" to indicate that

the punisher incurs material costs that outweigh the material benefits from punishing. From a

revealed preference standpoint, it is a tautology that the total benefits (i.e., material plus psychic) for

                                                    3
a punisher of punishing outweigh the costs, because otherwise the punisher would not punish. Some

have speculated that the willingness of some individuals to punish those who violate norms, even

when such punishment is costly to the punisher, may have been a crucial factor in the evolution of

human cooperation. (Carpenter [2002] provides a discussion of the altruistic punishment of free

riders. In a recent article in Science, de Quervain et al. [2004] identify a neural basis for altruistic

punishment.)

        The possibility of altruistic punishment makes credible the threat that a child will retaliate if

a nondisabled spouse fails to care for a disabled spouse. More specifically, we assume that the

nondisabled spouse knows that, if she fails to provide care for the disabled spouse, then the children,

with some probability, will retaliate by refusing to provide care for her when she becomes disabled.

Thus, a nondisabled spouse's perception of the effect of her failing to provide care on the probability

that the child will provide future care for her will affect the nondisabled spouse’s caregiving

behavior.

        Comparing couples with a joint child and couples with no children, both the demonstration

and the punishment effects predict that, for a given level of altruism, couples without children will

be less likely to provide care for each other than couples with joint children.2 Next consider a

married couple with one stepchild and no joint children. 3 For both the demonstration effect and the

punishment effect, the analysis depends on the strength of the attachment between the stepchild and

the disabled parent and between the stepchild and the nondisabled parent. Table 1 below delineates


2
 It is important to note that this prediction is not a consequence of selection (i.e., the decision to
have children or not), although selection may be important empirically. We discuss the empirical
problems that arise from preference heterogeneity (e.g., if individuals with more altruistic
preferences are more likely to have children) later in the text.
3
 We treat cohabiting couples as if they were legally married.

                                                    4
the potency of the demonstration effect and the punishment effect under various assumptions about

the strength of attachment between the child and the parents.



Table 1. The Potency of the Demonstration and Punishment Effects

                                                   Families with Stepchildren Only

                             No                                                                        Joint
                                      Low Attachment        Low Attachment to   High Attachment to
                           Children    to Nondisabled           Disabled            Stepparent       Children
                                           parent              Stepparent

    Demonstration Effect    None           Weak                  Strong              Stronger        Strongest

     Punishment Effect      None           None                   None               Stronger        Strongest




           To explore the implications of the demonstration and punishment effects more fully, we

consider three specific cases. (1) We begin with the case in which the child is the husband's

stepchild and the wife's biological child. Because a child who is not reared by both biological

parents is much more likely to be reared by the mother than by the father, this is the leading case.

(2) We next turn to the case in which the child is the wife's stepchild, maintaining our convention

that the husband is the disabled spouse. (3) Finally, we consider cases in which the child has weak

attachment to the biological parent. This arises if (3a) the child is the husband's by a previous

marriage or if (3b) the child is the wife's by a previous marriage. We cannot observe the strength of

a child's attachment to her stepparent, but we assume that it is positively related to the fraction of her

childhood that she lived with the parent or stepparent.4 This implies that the strength of a child's

attachment to a parent or stepparent depends on the child's age when the parent divorced or

remarried.


4
  The strength of attachment need not be positively related to the duration of coresidence, but we
assume that it is.
                                                        5
2.1. The child is the husband's stepchild and the wife's biological child.

        Three subcases illustrate the range of possibilities: (i) The couple married when the child

was an infant and the child lived her entire childhood with the stepfather. (ii) The couple married

when the child was nine and the child spent about half her childhood with her stepfather. (iii) The

couple married when the child was 39, so the adult child spent none of her childhood with her

stepfather.

        The demonstration effect is the same in all three subcases. The demonstration effect

depends on the child's susceptibility to influence by her mother's example when the stepfather

requires care. Although the three subcases differ in the age at which the child became a stepchild,

they do not differ in the age at which the stepchild observes her mother providing care, or not

providing care, for her disabled stepfather. Usually, although not necessarily, the mother is elderly

and the child is middle-aged. Susceptibility presumably depends on the strength of attachment, and

the attachment between the child and her mother is the same in all three subcases.

        The punishment effect, unlike the demonstration effect, differs in the three subcases. (i) If

the couple married when the child was an infant and the child spent her entire childhood with her

stepfather, she may be willing to punish her mother for failing to provide care for her disabled

stepfather — indeed, she may be as likely to punish as a joint child. (ii) If the couple married when

the child was nine and the child spent about half her childhood with her stepfather, then she is less

likely than a joint child to punish her mother for failing to provide care. (iii) If the couple married

when the child was an adult, so the child spent none of her childhood with her stepfather, then she is

unlikely to punish her mother for failing to care for her disabled stepfather. 5


5
 A caveat: although the likelihood of punishment depends on the child's attachment to her
stepfather, the absence of attachment does not imply the absence of punishment. We recognize
the possibility of disinterested altruistic punishment to enforce community norms.
                                                   6
2.2. The child is the wife's stepchild and the husband's biological child

        We now turn to the case in which the child is the wife’s stepchild, maintaining our

convention that the husband is the disabled spouse. As before, we consider three subcases that differ

in the strength of the child's attachment to the step parent. The demonstration effect now depends

on the child's susceptibility to influence by the example set by her stepmother when her father

requires care, and this susceptibility differs with the strength of the child's attachment to her

stepmother. (i) If the couple marred when the child was an infant and the child spent her entire

childhood with the stepmother, then she may be strongly influenced by her stepmother's behavior --

indeed, she may be as susceptible to influence as a joint child. (ii) If the couple married when the

child was nine and the child spent about half her childhood with her stepmother, then the child is

presumably less susceptible to influence and the demonstration effect will be correspondingly

weaker. (iii) If the couple married when the child was 39, so the child spent none of her childhood

with her stepmother, then the child might be immune to influence by the behavior of her stepmother.

        The punishment effect, like the demonstration effect, depends on the behavior of the

nondisabled spouse affecting the probability that the child will provide care for her when she

becomes disabled. The punishment effect depends on the stepmother comparing two probabilities:

the probability that the stepdaughter will provide care if the stepmother provides care for her

disabled husband, and the probability that the stepdaughter will provide care if the stepmother does

not provide care. Thus, the punishment effect is potent only if these two probabilities differ (i.e.,

only if the probability that the stepdaughter will provide care for her stepmother depends on whether

her stepmother provides cares.)

        The punishment effect differs in the three cases. (i) If the couple marred when the child was

an infant and the child spent her entire childhood with the stepmother, then her willingness to care

                                                    7
for the stepmother might depend on whether her stepmother took care of her father. In this subcase,

the threat of altruistic punishment has some credibility. (ii) If the couple married when the child was

nine and the child spent about half her childhood with her stepmother, then the stepdaughter is

presumably less inclined to care for her stepmother than in the previous subcase. (iii) If the couple

married when the child was 39, so the child spent none of her childhood with her stepmother, then

the stepdaughter would be unlikely to care for her stepmother, regardless of whether her stepmother

provides care for her disabled husband. Hence, in this subcase the punishment effect is impotent.



2.3. The child has weak attachment to the biological parent

       We now relax our assumption that children have strong attachments to their biological

parents. We consider first the case in which the husband–the disabled spouse--has children from a

prior marriage -- children who never lived with him after that marriage ended — and then the case

in which the wife has such children.6 The attachment of these children to their biological parent

depends on the age of the child when the prior marriage ended and on the subsequent contact

between the child and the parent. To consider systematically the likelihood that such children affect

the spouses' incentives to provide care for each other, we consider three subcases: (iv) The prior

marriage ended when the child was an infant. (v) The prior marriage ended when the child was nine

(vi) The prior marriage ended when the child was 39.



2.3.a. The child is the husband's by a previous marriage

       Both the demonstration effect and the punishment effect are weak or nonexistent when the


6
   We describe the child as the offspring of a prior marriage regardless of whether the husband
was legally married to the child’s mother.

                                                  8
child is the husband's from a prior marriage and never lived with the focal couple. The

demonstration effect depends on the child's susceptibility to influence by her stepmother's example,

and on the stepmother recognizing this susceptibility. The stepmother behaves strategically: to

induce the stepchild to provide care for her, she provides more care for her husband than she

otherwise would. But unless there is an affective relationship between the child and her stepmother,

the stepchild is unlikely to be responsive to the example set by her stepmother.

       The punishment effect is also weak or nonexistent in this case. The punishment effect

requires that the likelihood that the child will provide care for the stepmother depend on whether the

stepmother provides care for her disabled husband. But the child is unlikely to provide care for the

stepmother regardless of whether the stepmother provides care for her disabled husband, so the

stepmother has no incentive to provide more care for her husband than she otherwise would.



2.3.b. The child is the wife's by a previous marriage

Maintaining our convention that the husband is the disabled spouse, we now consider the case in

which the child is the wife's from a prior marriage. In this case, the demonstration effect depends on

the child's susceptibility to the example set by her mother when her stepfather requires care. The

child's susceptibility presumably depends on the strength of her attachment to her mother, and this

differs from one subcase to another. If the prior marriage ended when the child was an infant, or

even when the child was nine, and if the child had no subsequent contact with her mother, then the

child is unlikely to be influenced by her mother's example. If the prior marriage ended when the

child was 39, then the subsequent relationship between the child and the mother might depend on

how and why the marriage ended. If the marriage ended because of divorce and the child blamed

the mother for the divorce, then the subsequent relationship between the child and her mother might

                                                  9
be cold. If the child did not blame the mother for the divorce, then the subsequent relationship

between the child and the mother might be warm. If the marriage ended because of the death of the

child's father, then the subsequent relationship between the child and her mother might be warm,

especially if the adult child approves of her mother's remarriage.

        The punishment effect depends on the mother's perception that the child will condition her

willingness to provide care on whether the mother provides care for her disabled husband. It seems

unlikely that her mother's failure to provide care for her disabled husband (i.e., a stepfather with

whom the child never lived) would affect the child's willingness to provide care for her mother.



2.4. Summary

        Our analysis suggests that the demonstration and punishment effects will be strongest when

there are joint children and nonexistent when there are no children. In the cases where there are

stepchildren only, we expect the demonstration and punishment effects to be strong (approaching

the effects for joint children) when there is high attachment to the stepparent, regardless of whether

the stepparent is the disabled or nondisabled parent. When there is low attachment to the disabled

stepparent we expect the demonstration effect to remain strong but the punishment effect to be

nonexistent. When there is low attachment to the nondisabled parent, the demonstration and

punishment effects should be weak or nonexistent since it is unlikely that the child intends to

provide care to the stepparent in the future. On net, the theory suggests that children affect spousal

care, and that the strength of this effect will depend on the degree of attachment of the child to the

parents. In the remainder of the paper we describe the empirical approach we use to test these

hypotheses.



                                                  10
3. Data and Methods

       Data from the 2000 and 2002 waves of the Assets and Health Dynamics of the Elderly

(AHEAD) and the Children of Depression (CODA) are used to examine empirically the extent to

which children act as a commitment mechanism. The AHEAD survey, now part of the Health

and Retirement Surveys (HRS), is an ongoing stratified panel survey that began with a

nationally-representative sample of community-based persons aged 70 and older in 1993 from

the United States. The CODA cohort, also part of the HRS, is an ongoing stratified survey of

persons born between 1924 and 1930, that began in 1998. For both cohorts, respondents are

followed longitudinally roughly every two years.7 Along with basic demographic data,

information is collected on each elderly respondent's health status, family characteristics, and

economic resources, as well as hours of formal (paid) and informal (unpaid) care.

       For the purpose of our analysis, we limit our sample to community-dwelling married

couples in which one of the respondents is disabled and the other is not. A respondent is defined

as disabled if he or she reports difficulty with at least one basic activity of daily living (ADL) —

transferring, dressing, bathing, toileting, eating, or walking across a room — or at least one

instrumental activity of daily living (IADL) — grocery shopping, preparing meals, taking

medications, using a telephone, or managing household finances. Overall, 771 couples met our

inclusion criteria and were used to assess the likelihood that the presence (and type) of children

affect the care that elderly spouses provide for one another.8


7
 Our focus on the 2000 and 2002 (fourth and fifth) waves of AHEAD is due to data limitations:
although receipt of informal care is ascertained consistently since Wave 2 of the AHEAD
survey (1995), spouses are not explicitly identified as caregivers except in Waves 4 and 5. Data
collected from the significantly smaller CODA cohort suffer from the same limitation.
8
 We treat cohabiting couples as married. Of the 3,895 households in the relevant waves of
AHEAD, 988 were married couples with both partners living in the community. Of those, 522
                                                 11
        We estimate spousal care received by three groups of married disabled elderly persons :

those with joint children; those with stepchildren but no joint children; and those without

children. In particular, we focus on hours (intensity) of spousal care and on the proportion of

total care (i.e., care received from all sources, including paid formal care) provided by spouses.

In both cases, our measure of care is the number of hours per month provided by spouses (and

spouses plus all other sources) to the disabled respondent for ADL or IADL assistance.

        Our indicators of attachment between a stepchild and her disabled and nondisabled

parents are based on the number of childhood years spent with the parent. Our assumption is

that physical proximity to a stepparent promotes emotional closeness, and that closeness may

influence the nondisabled spouse’s incentive to provide care to the disabled spouse in

anticipation of having the child provide care for her in the future if needed. A parent j in couple

i is defined to have low attachment to his or her children if none of the children have lived more

than 50% of their childhood years (that is, no child ki has “coresided” with the index parent j for

at least 9 of that child’s first 18 years of life), Lowij = 1. A parent is defined to have high

attachment to his or her children if at least one of the children spent more than 50% of her

childhood years coresiding with the index parent, Highij=1.9 The two indicators are constructed

with respect to both the disabled and nondisabled parent and used to identify differences in

spousal care among stepparents with differing levels of attachment to their children relative to

couples with no children or joint children.




met our inclusion criteria (i.e., one spouse was disabled while the other spouse was not). The
corresponding numbers for the CODA survey are 1,490, 623 and 249.
9
  Unfortunately, the AHEAD/CODA data do not contain detailed residence histories for
respondent’s children. Our approach to calculating years of childhood spent with a parent,
therefore, are based on the child’s age and the parent’s marriage length.
                                                   12
        Consistent with the framework presented above, the intensity of informal care (S) and the

proportion of total care provided by the spouse (S/T) to each disabled elderly respondent j in

family i are empirically modeled as:



                       S ji = X i β + Y ji γ + Z k δ + ε ji
                       ( S ji / T ji ) = X i β '+ Y ji γ ′ + Z k δ ′ + ε ′ji

where Xi represents the family characteristics of the ith couple, Yji a vector of care recipient-

specific characteristics for the jth person in couple i, and Zi the family structure of the ith couple

(i.e., whether the couple has no children, joint children, or stepchildren but no joint children).

        Since our main interest is explaining differences in the intensity of spousal caregiving as a

function of family structure and parent-stepchild attachment, our strategy is to estimate Tobit

models applied to monthly hours of care. In order to examine the effect of family structure on the

proportion of total care provided by the nondisabled spouse, we estimate regression models with the

dependent variable ranging from 0 to 100. Each equation is estimated independently and produces

estimates of the parameter vectors, $, $N, (, (N, * , *N and, for the Tobit models, the standard

deviation of the error terms.

        In addition to the main variables of interest for our analysis—whether the couple has no

children; has joint children; or stepchildren but no joint children (by level of attachment) — we

include a variety of independent variables in our specifications to control for person- and family-

specific attributes that may affect caregiving. A glossary of all variables and summary statistics for

our sample is provided in Table 2.




                                                         13
4. Results

       Table 3 provides descriptive information on the dependent variables by the couple’s family

structure. The bivariate associations suggest that children do act as a commitment mechanism for

provision of spousal care. Regardless of the nature of the relationship between children and parents

(either joint or step), the intensity of spousal care provision was significantly higher among couples

with joint or stepchildren relative to those with no children (22.5 and 26.0 versus 15.4, respectively,

p < .10). Striking differences are also observed in children’s provision of parental care by

relationship: care received by a married disabled parent with joint children were approximately three

times as large as that of care received by disabled parents with stepchildren but no joint children (1.8

versus .6, p < 0.10). The results show no significant differences in the proportion of total care

provided by the nondisabled spouse across the three groups. The finding of higher levels of child-

provided care for disabled persons with biological children relative to those with stepchildren only is

consistent with findings by Pezzin and Schone (1999b) for unpartnered elderly persons.

       Of course, the patterns in Table 3 are far from conclusive on the issue of how the presence of

children affects the decision to provide care to a disabled spouse or whether the relationship is

influenced by differing degrees of child attachment because these bivariate associations may simply

reflect heterogeneity among sampled families. These results do suggest, however, that the presence

of children, whether joint or not, influences spousal behavior. We explore these issues in further

detail in our multivariate results described below.

       Table 4 presents the predicted hours and predicted probabilities derived from multivariate

models of overall spousal caregiving efforts and the proportion of total care provided by spouses.

We present results from four models: Model A, the simplest test of the hypothesis that children act

as a commitment mechanism for spouses, contrasts spousal care provided to disabled persons with

and without children. Both the demonstration effect and the punishment effect predict that care

provision by spouses will be greater if there are children. Model B goes a step further distinguishing

between couples with joint children and couples with stepchildren but no joint children. Thus,

                                                  14
Model B allows us to assess the role of family structure and how it affects spouses’ caregiving

behavior. Finally, Models C and D further disaggregate the effect of stepchildren by degree of

attachment to the disabled parent (DP) and the nondisabled parent (NDP). In particular, Model C

characterizes families witp with stepchildren only by the level of attachment of those stepchildren;

this allows us to investigate how spousal care provision varies from the most attached children (i.e.,

families with joint children) to families with only stepchildren where there is weak attachment and

to couples who have no children. Model D, which is the most elaborate model, further analyzes the

role of attachment by distinguishing between attachment to the nondisabled spouse and attachment

to the disabled spouse. As argued above and as shown in Table 1, the role of the demonstration and

punishment effects will differ depending on whether the stepparent is the disabled or nondisabled

spouse.

          The results of Model A suggest sizable differences in the intensity of spousal caregiving by

the presence or absence of children. On average, care by nondisabled spouses was 9.6 hours (or

72%) higher among couples with children relative to childless couples, even after controlling for

disability and other factors affecting the disabled spouse’s need for assistance. The propensity to

provide care and the proportion of total care provided by spouses did not differ, however, across the

two groups.

          Contrary to expectations, joint children do not appear to provide a stronger commitment

mechanism to spouses than stepchildren. The second panel of Table 4 (Model B), shows that
spouses who do not share joint children with their disabled elderly partners provide more hours of

care to their disabled spouses than their counterparts with joint children (27.1 versus 22.2, p=.44),
although the difference is not statistically significant at any conventional level.

          The predictions presented in the third and fourth panels of Table 4 show differences in
caregiving efforts by the nondisabled spouse by family structure and parent-(non joint)child

attachment and provide insights into potential operating motives for spousal care. For the

punishment effect to be credible among couples with no joint children, nonjoint children must share

                                                   15
a high degree of attachment to both their disabled (e.g. stepfather) and nondisabled (e.g., biological

mother) parent.10 Caregiving efforts by the nondisabled spouse, in that case, are expected to be

similar to that of spouses with joint children. Results from Model C and D are consistent with this

prediction: in fact, in both models, hours of spousal care are higher among families with

stepchildren that have high attachment than among families with joint children (28.5 versus 22.3 in

Model C and 28.1 versus 22.4, in Model D), although the relatively small sample sizes resulted in

lack of statistical significance at conventional levels. Also as expected, intensity of spousal

caregiving efforts is considerably higher among the two groups when compared to hours of care

provided by spouses of disabled elderly persons with no children.

        As noted above, in the case of stepfamilies where children’s attachment to their parents is

low, the punishment effect is not operative. When the disabled parent (e.g., the father) is the

stepparent, then children have no incentive to punish the (biological) mother if she does not provide

care. If the nondisabled parent (e.g., the mother) is the stepparent, the child has no intention to

provide care anyway when there is low attachment. Therefore, there is no role for the punishment

effect if children are not emotionally bound to their parents. On the other hand, the demonstration

effect predicts different outcomes depending on whether the child has low attachment to her

disabled parent versus her nondisabled parent. In fact, the demonstration effect is not operational

when children have low attachment to their nondisabled parent because the nondisabled parent has

no expectations of influencing the child’s future behavior. Spouses in this case would be expected

to behave similarly to spouses with no children, and provide significantly fewer hours of care to

their spouses than their counterparts with joint children (or with nonjoint children with high

attachment to the disabled parent). When children have low attachment to their disabled parent, the

nondisabled parent may still benefit by providing care to her spouse. The demonstration effect in




10
  As discussed earlier, the threat of punishment is empty in cases where the nondisabled parent
has no expectations of receiving care from her stepchild in the future due to low attachment.
                                                   16
this case suggests that the spouse will provide more care in anticipation of influencing the level of

care that her child would subsequently provide.

        Our findings in Model D suggest a hierarchy in spousal caregiving patterns by family

structure that generally supports this expectation. Among couples with children, nondisabled

spouses whose children have low attachment to them provide the fewest hours of care. Caregiving

efforts by this group are less than half that of nondisabled spouses with joint children (8.9 hours

versus 22.4 hours, p=.08). Somewhat surprisingly, spouses with joint children provide fewer hours

of care per month to their disabled spouses than those whose children have low attachment to the

disabled parent, although the difference was much smaller in magnitude and not statistically

significant (-5.4, or -25%, monthly hours). Nondisabled spouses whose children have high

attachment either to the nondisabled or the disabled parent provided the most care (28.1 monthly

hours). One possible reason that we observe greater hours provided by the spouse when there are

stepchildren with low attachment to the disabled parent relative to spouses in which there are joint

children may be a stronger demonstration effect. Stepfamilies in which there is low attachment may

have had less opportunity to model the caring role that family members play for one another. The

nondisabled spouse (who is the biological parent) may try to counter this by providing even more

care to her spouse to show her child that caring for a family member is expected behavior.

        Examining the differential levels of hours of care between stepchildren with low attachment

to the disabled parent relative to the nondisabled parent (27.8 versus 8.9 hours, respectively), it is
evident that the gap cannot be driven by the punishment effect. Instead, it appears that the

differences are driven by the demonstration effect: a nondisabled parent with low attachment has no
incentive to increase care to the spouse to demonstrate care to the child since the child is unlikely to

provide care anyway; when it is the disabled parent with low attachment, the nondisabled spouse
still potentially benefits by demonstrating caregiving. Surprisingly, caregiving efforts of

nondisabled spouses with low attachment to their children was even lower than that of spouses with

no children. One possible explanation for the difference in spousal behavior across these two

                                                   17
groups may be unobserved differences in the demand for assistance by disabled elderly persons in

each group (i.e., those with no children and those with children who are not attached to them). Our

casemix adjustment, which includes controls for a wide array of disability and functional measures,

makes it unlikely that underlying health status could explain such differences.11 Another possibility,

of course, is self-selection and heterogeneity in spouses’ willingness to act as caregivers in shorter

duration, later life marriages. We cannot rule out this possibility although our specifications control

for years of marriage.

        Finally, the predictions of the likelihood of the spouse providing care and the predicted

proportion of the total care provided by the spouse are not consistent with our theoretical

expectations. These findings may suggest that parents alter their caregiving behavior on the margin

and not the decision to provide care altogether. As described above, the differences observed here

may reflect other differences in the characteristics (i.e., attitudes towards caregiving in general) of

late marriages relative to a long-term, traditional nuclear family.



5. Conclusion

        Most caregiving research has focused on the case in which a single elderly parent requires

care and where there is at least one adult child who is a potential caregiver. In this paper we focus

on the case in which there are two elderly parents — one who is disabled and requires care and the

other who potentially provides care. The model we develop highlights the important role of

children for influencing the level of care provided by the nondisabled parent. In essence, children

serve as a commitment mechanism that encourages the nondisabled spouse to provide more care


11
   We also examined whether differences in the underlying probability of nursing home entry
across the groups might account for differences in the long-term care needs of community-
dwelling married disabled elderly persons, the population on whom the analysis is based. We
found no marked differences across groups in the likelihood that wave 1 disabled elderly persons
with joint and nonjoint children had entered a nursing home by wave 3. Childless married
persons, on the other hand, were twice as likely as those with children to be institutionalized,
although small cell sizes precluded any of the comparisons from being statistically significant at
conventional levels.
                                                   18
than she otherwise would. Our empirical work is formulated to test the main implications of the

theory in several different contexts. In general, we find that the presence of children does increase

the intensity of care provision. Moreover, we find some evidence that the degree of attachment

between a child and the parents also affects spousal caregiving.

        Two important limitations are worth mentioning. As described here, the theoretical models

do not formally account for the effect of multiple children with potentially differing degrees of

attachment to their parents. To extend our analysis from one child to two or more children requires

specifying aspects of the model that we were able to leave unspecified with only one child. A

threshold modeling issue is whether care can be provided by at most one child (i.e., the primary

caregiver) or, alternatively, whether more than one child can participate in or contribute to care. If

care is provided by at most one child, then we can model the children's behavior as a game in which

each child decides whether to offer to provide care and the wife, now a widow, decides which offer

to accept (if she has multiple offers). If care is provided by at most one child, and if side payments

between the children are not allowed, then the wife must be concerned that her actions will affect

which of the children, if any, will offer to provide care.

        Preference heterogeneity is another potential concern. If couples with children are more

“caring” than couples without children, then we might expect to observe the patterns we find (i.e.,

more spousal care when there are children than when there are not children). Thus, if such

preference heterogeneity exists, then these differences could be driven by it rather than the
demonstration and punishment effects. If family heterogeneity is driving our findings, then it must

also be the case that families with stepchildren only are less caring than families that include joint
children. More remains to be learned about the caring disposition of couples without children, with

joint children and those with stepchildren only.
        Overall, our work has important implications for forecasting the supply of family-provided

long-term care. Understanding the factors that affect family caregiving is important from the

perspective of determining the likely demands on public programs and the cost of administering

                                                   19
different levels of benefits. The theory developed here and the corresponding empirical results

suggest that it is important to understand family composition and the effects of family structure on

caregiving decisions.




                                                 20
References

         Carpenter, Jeffrey P., "Punishing Free-Riders: How Group Size Affects Mutual Monitoring

and the Provision of Public Goods” Games and Economic Behavior vol.60, no.1 (July 2007), 31-51.

         Checkovich, Tenille and Steven Stern, “Shared Caregiving Responsibilities of Adult

Siblings with Elderly Parents.” The Journal of Human Resources, vol.37, no.3 (summer 2002):441-

478.

         Cox, Donald and Oded Stark, “On the Demand for Grandchildren: Tied Transfers and the

Demonstration Effect” Journal of Public Economics, vol.89, no9. (September 2005):1665-97.

         de Quervain, Dominici J.-F., Urs Fischbacher, Valerie Treyer, Melanie Schellhammer,

Ulrich Schnyder, Alfred Buck, Ernst Fehr, "The Neural Basis of Altruistic Punishment" Science,

Vol. 305, No. 5688 (August 2004), 1254-1258.

         Engers, Maxim and Steven Stern, "Long-Term Care and Family Bargaining" International

Economic Review, Vol. 43, No. 1, (February 2002), 73-114.

         Heidemann, Bridget and Steven Stern, “Strategic Play Among Family Members with

Making Long-Term Care Decisions.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization vol.40

(September 1999):29-57

         McGarry, Kathleen and Robert F. Schoeni, Transfer Behavior Within the Family: Results

from the Asset and Health Dynamics Survey. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 52B (1997):

82-92.
         Pezzin, Liliana E., Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara Steinberg Schone, "Bargaining Power and

Intergenerational Coresidence: Adult Children and Their Disabled Elderly Parents” AHRQ working
paper, 2006.

         Pezzin, Liliana E., Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara Steinberg Schone, "Efficiency in Family
Bargaining: Living Arrangements and Caregiving Decisions of Adult Children and Disabled Elderly

Parents” CESifo Economic Studies vol. 53, no.1, (March 2007) :69-96.



                                                 21
        Pezzin, Liliana E., Robert A. Pollak, and Barbara Steinberg Schone, "Family Bargaining

and Long-Term Care of the Disabled Elderly” in Intergenerational Caregiving, edited by Alan

Booth, Ann C. Crouter, Suzanne M. Bianchi, and Judith A. Seltzer. Washington, DC: Urban

Institute Press, 2008.

        Pezzin, Liliana.E. and Barbara.S. Schone. "The Allocation of Resources in Intergenerational

Households: Adult Children and Their Elderly Parents.”American Economic Review, vol 87, no.2,

(May 1997):460-64.

        Pezzin, Liliana E. and Barbara Steinberg Schone, "Intergenerational Household Formation,

Female Labor Supply, and Informal Caregiving," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 34, no. 3,

(summer 1999a), 475-503.

                Pezzin, Liliana .E. and Barbara S. Schone. "Parental Marital Disruption and

Intergenerational Transfers: An Analysis of Lone Elderly Parents and their Adult Children."

Demography, vol 36, no.3, (August 1999b):287-298.

        Roth, Alvin E., "Bargaining Experiments." In The Handbook of Experimental Economics,

edited by John H. Kagel and Alvin E. Roth, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995, 253-348.

        Spillman, Brenda and Liliana Pezzin, “Potential and Active Family Caregivers: Changing

Networks and the “Sandwich” Generation." Milbank Quarterly Vol. 78, No. 3, (Fall 2000), 347-374.

        Stark, Oded Altruism and Beyond: An Economic Analysis of Transfers and Exchanges

within Families and Groups, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.




                                                 22
Table 2. Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics


   Independent Variables                         Definition                        Mean   Standard
                                                                                            Error
 Family Structure
 No children                  Neither respondent in couple has children            0.06      -
 Joint children               Couple has joint children                            0.79      -
 Stepchildren,                Couple has children but no joint children
 no joint children                                                                 0.15      -

 Attachment
                             =1 if no child in family i has “coresided” with
                             Disabled Parent for at least 9 of the child’s first
                             18 years of life (based on child’s age and length
 Low attachment to DPa       of parent’s marriage); 0 otherwise                    0.16      -
                             = 1 if no child in family i has “coresided” with
                             Non- Disabled Parent for at least 9 of the child’s
                             first 18 years of life (based on child’s age and
 Low attachment to NDPa      length of parent’s marriage); 0 otherwise             0.15      -
                             =1 if at least one child in family i “coresided” 9
                             or more years of the child’s first 18 years of life
                             with Disabled Parent (based on child’s age and
 High attachment to DPa      length of parent’s marriage); 0 otherwise             0.84      -
                             =1 if at least one child in couple i “coresided” 9
                             or more years of the child’s first 18 years of life
                             with Non-Disabled Parent (based on child’s age
 High attachment to NDPa     and length of parent’s marriage); 0 otherwise         0.85      -

 Demographic characteristics of Disabled Respondent
 Gender                    =1 if disabled respondent is male; 0 otherwise          0.54      -
 Age                       Age of disabled respondent                              77.9     6.1
 White                     =1 if Disabled Person is White; 0 otherwise             0.86      -
                           =1 if disabled respondent has 12 years of
 High School Graduate      education; 0 otherwise                                  0.29      -
                           =1 if disabled respondent has more than 12
 Some College              years of education; 0 otherwise                         0.36       -
 Number of Children        Couple’s number of children                              3.2      2.2
 Number of years married   Length of couple’s current marriage                     49.5     13.2
                           Disabled person experienced at least one
 Ever divorced             divorce=1; 0 otherwise                                  0.21      -

 Health and Functional Status
                            = 1 if Disabled Person has 1-2 ADL difficulties;
 1-2 ADL difficulties       0 otherwise                                            0.51      -
                            =1 if Parent has 3 or more ADL difficulties; 0
 3+ ADL difficulties        otherwise                                              0.20      -
                                                   23
      Independent Variables                        Definition                       Mean   Standard
                                                                                             Error
    Incontinence                =1 if Disabled Person is incontinent; 0 otherwise   0.31       -
    Disabled Person’s General   Parent’s general cognition score (0-5); greater
    Cognition Score             scores indicate increased impairment                3.4      1.1

    Economic Status
    Couple’s Net Worth          Couple’s net worth ÷ 10,000                         40.1     98.5

    Couple’s Income             Social Security and pension income ÷ 10,000         1.3      1.5



Notes: Unit of observation is a married person who has at least one ADL difficulty (difficulty in
transferring, dressing, bathing, toileting, eating, or walking across a room) or one IADL
difficulty (difficulty with grocery shopping, preparing meals, taking medications, using a
telephone, or managing household finances) and who has a nondisabled spouse. Sample size is
771.
a
    Among couples with stepchildren only.




                                                     24
Table 3: Care Receipt by Married Disabled Elderly Persons by Source of Care and Family Structure


                                                No children            Joint children       Stepchildren only
  Hours of Care by                              (N = 50)               (N = 607)            (N = 114)


  Nondisabled Spouse                            15.4 (29.0)¶§          22.5 (41.5)          26.0 (47.6)
  Children                                      0 ¶§                   1.81 (10.25)§        0.61 (2.74)
  All Sources                                   17.2 (29.8) ¶§         27.3 (47.9)          29.1 (50.8)
  Spouse as a Proportion of All Sources a       .92 (.22)              .88 (.28)            .90 (.24)

a Among persons receiving positive total hours.
¶ Statistically different from joint children at least at p<.10.
§ Statistically different from no joint children at least at p<.10.




                                                                  25
 Table 4: Predicted Effects of Family Structure on Caregiving Efforts of Non-disabled Spouse
 Model A                                     No Children           Any Children
 Hours of Spousal Care                          13.4                  23.0**
 Proportion of total care by spouse            93.0%                  89.4%

 Model B                                    No Children           Joint Children          Stepchildren Only
 Hours of Spousal Care                         13.6*                   22.2                      27.1
 Proportion of total care by spouse           93.0%                   90.1%                    89.3%


 Model C                                    No Children           Joint Children               Step high              Step low
                                                                                              attachment             attachment
 Hours of Spousal Care                           13.3*                  22.3                      28.5                   17.4
 Proportion of total care by spouse             92.9%                  89.3%                     90.7%                  87.2%


 Model D                                    No Children           Joint Children               Step high              Step low  Step low
                                                                                              attachment             attachment attachment
                                                                                                                        to DP   NDP
 Hours of Spousal Care                           13.2*                 22.4                      28.1                    27.8         8.9*
 Proportion of total care by spouse             92.9%                 89.3%                     90.7%                  87.1%         87.2%
Notes: Italic bold headings indicate the reference category. A ** denotes differences from reference category that are statistically significant at p#0.10; *
at 0.10>p#0.15 level.




                                                                             26
