NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN POLICY INTERACT WITH CULTURE? MINIMUM WAGE AND THE QUALITY
OF LABOR RELATIONS
Philippe Aghion
Yann Algan
Pierre Cahuc
Working Paper 14327
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14327

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

The authors thank for their very useful comments Daron Acemoglu, Marios Angeletos, Philippe Askenazy,
Olivier Blanchard, Daniel Cohen, Jean-Michel Grandmont, Guy Laroque, Etienne Lehmann, Torsten
Persson, Thomas Piketty, Guido Tabellini and Andrei Shleifer. We have benefited from many helpful
comments from seminar participants at Bocconi, Boston College, CREST, Hebrew University, Mannheim
University, MIT, Paris School of Economics, University of Florida and the IOG (Institution, Organization
and Growth) group at the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Philippe Aghion, Yann Algan, and Pierre Cahuc. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Policy Interact with Culture? Minimum Wage and the Quality of Labor Relations
Philippe Aghion, Yann Algan, and Pierre Cahuc
NBER Working Paper No. 14327
September 2008
JEL No. J01,J3
ABSTRACT
Can public policy interfere with culture, such as beliefs and norms of cooperation? We investigate
this question by evaluating the interactions between the State and the Civil Society, focusing on the
labor market. International data shows a negative correlation between union density and the quality
of labor relations on one hand, and state regulation of the minimum wage on the other hand. To explain
this relation, we develop a model of learning of the quality of labor relations. State regulation crowds
out the possibility for workers to experiment negotiation and learn about the true cooperative nature
of participants in the labor market. This crowding out effect can give rise to multiple equilibria: a "good"
equilibrium characterized by strong beliefs in cooperation, leading to high union density and low state
regulation; and a "bad" equilibrium, characterized by distrustful labor relations, low union density
and strong state regulation of the minimum wage. We then use surveys on social attitudes and unionization
behavior to document the relation between minimum wage legislation and the beliefs about the scope
of cooperation in the labor market.

Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Yann Algan
Sciences Po, OFCE
27 Rue Saint-Guillaume
75007 Paris, France
yann.algan@sciences-po.org

Pierre Cahuc
École Polytechnique
91128 Palaiseau Cedex, France
cahuc@ensae.fr

1

Introduction

The role of social capital in explaining economic outcomes is gaining wider acceptance among
economists. Defined by Putnam (2000), one of the founding father of this concept, as “the
collective values of all social networks and the inclinations that arise from these networks to
do things for each other”, social capital has been found to have a significant eﬀect on growth
(Knack and Keefer, 1997, Tabellini, 2005, Algan and Cahuc, 2007), employment (Blanchard
and Philippon, 2006), financial development (Guiso et al., 2004) or institutions (La Porta et
al., 1997, Algan and Cahuc, 2006, Tabellini, 2007a).1 If social capital does play a key role in
the economy, it is important to understand how it can be aﬀected by public policies. From this
perspective, our paper aims at explaining the interaction between state regulation and social
capital, focusing on the labor market.
More specifically, we provide evidence for and then rationalize the existence of a negative
relationship between state regulation of minimum wages on the one hand, and both unionization
rates and the quality of labor relations, which, as we argue, reflects two-sided causality links
between state intervention and investment in social capital. Namely, stringent minimum wage
regulations discourage social investments in labor relations and unionization. At the same
time low investments in labor relations and/or the resulting low unionization rates, encourage
democratic governments to set more stringent minimum wage policies to protect the median
voter.
Figure 1 illustrates the negative correlation between the stringency of minimum wage regulations and the level of trust in labor relationships. Figure 2 shows the strong positive correlation
between unionization rates and the the level of trust in labor relationships. The index of perceived cooperation on the labor market is constructed using the 1999 Global Competitiveness
Reports, a survey sent out to thousands of executives each year with the following question:
“Do you think that labor/employer relations are generally cooperative”. Responses may vary
from 1 for strong disagreement to 7 for strong agreement.2 State intervention is then measured
by the state’s propensity to directly regulate minimum wages instead of letting wage floors be
negotiated between employers and employees’ unions. The index of state regulation of wage
encapsulates : (i) a dummy for the existence of a legal statutory minimum wage in the country; (ii) the ratio of the minimum wage to the median wage; (iii) a dummy for the existence
of potential derogations from the law, such as the provision of sub-minimum wages for certain
categories; (iv) and a dummy for the existence of legal extensions of minimum wages set by
1

For a synthesis, see Guiso et al. (2006).
Evidence about the perceptions of the quality of labor relations across OECD countries are given each year
by the Global Competitiveness Reports. This index is presented more precisely in Section 3.
2

1

collective agreements. The data on minimum wages and unionization rates are country average
over the period 1980-2003.

3

Figure 1 and 2 show that Scandinavian countries are characterized by a low level of state
intervention in the regulation of minimum wage. Wage floors are directly negotiated between
unions and no statutory legal minimum wage exists. This characteristic is associated with
highly cooperative labor relations. At the other extreme, state intervention is high in countries
(in particular, France) where labor relations are distrustful. Another interesting fact about
labor markets comes out of Figure 2. Indeed this figure reports a strong positive correlation
between the executives’ beliefs in cooperative labor relations and union membership. This
directly contradicts a common wisdom whereby anything that strengthens employees’ bargaining
power in firms, in particular higher rates of unionization, should be negatively perceived by
employers and therefore increase their distrust vis-a-vis workers. Countries with low union
density, such as France, are characterized by distrustful labor relations, whereas Nordic countries
with their high unionization rates show widespread beliefs in cooperative labor relations.
To rationalize these facts and understand the causal relationships between minimum wage
regulations and cooperation in labor markets, we develop a model of the labor market where
employees can learn about the scope for cooperation with firms through social experimentation.4
The eﬀects of state regulation of minimum wages on social capital in our model are similar to
those identified by the political science literature on centralized rules regulating the civil society
(Ostrom, 2005). First, high legal minimum wage directly reduces the incentives to become a
union member: it is not worth paying the cost of union membership when the worker can rely on
state regulation (Checchi and Lucifora, 2002). Second, a high legal minimum wage policy erodes
social capital in the future: by discouraging individual agents from experimenting collective
action and social dialogue, it makes it more diﬃcult for them to learn over time about the scope
for cooperation. This in turn crowds out investment in social capital.
Our theoretical argument goes beyond unions and wage regulations. Spending time in associations, investing in negotiation and cooperation, makes it possible for individuals to gather
information about the true cooperative nature of other participants in the labor market. This
view of learning and cooperation-building is quite in line with Tocqueville’s description of associations5 as small social laboratories for experimenting cooperation and building up democracy.
This representation is also similar to the idea conveyed by Freeman and Medoﬀ (1984) that
unions might improve the quality of labor relation by fostering voice rather than exit in in3

This index and the definition of union density are presented more precisely in section 3.
Our model builds on seminal contributions by Piketty (1995), Benabou and Tirole (2006) and Alesina and
Angeletos (2005) who use a Bayesian setting to explore the interactions between public policies and beliefs.
5
See Tocqueville, Democracy in America (1835).
4

2

State regulation of minimum wage
.2
.4

.6

Fra

Gre

Pt

Aut

UkUsa

Sp

Nth

Ita
Bg
Aus
Cd

Jp
Ire
Ger

0

Fin

3

Nw Swd
Dk

4
5
6
Cooperative Labor Relations: Executives

R²=0.46
7

Figure 1: Correlation between State regulation of minimum wages and Executives’ beliefs in
Cooperative labor relations. Source: ILO, OECD, and GRC 1999 database.

3

80

Swd
Dk

60

Fin

Nw

Union density
40

Bg
Ire
Aut

Aus
Ita
Cd
Gre

Uk
Ger

Pt

20

Jp
Sp

Usa

Fra

0

R²=0.34
3

4
5
6
Cooperative Labor Relations: Executives

7

Figure 2: Correlation between Union density and Executives’ beliefs in Cooperative labor relations. Source: OECD and GRC 1999 database.

4

dustrial relations, a distinction first proposed by Hirshman (1970) and confirmed by Figure 2.
By showing that more stringent minimum wages increase the probability that the economy will
fall in a low trust/low unionization trap, our model predicts a negative causality from wage
regulation to unionization and trust in labor markets.
To account for the reverse causality from weak cooperation and unionization rates to high
minimum wage regulations, we close the model by letting the minimum wage be set by an elected
government that maximizes social welfare each period. In countries where beliefs in cooperation
are too low to sustain involvement in trade unions, there is a strong demand for active state
interventions in minimum wage regulation, which in turn results in a higher minimum wage
being set by the government in equilibrium.
This two-way negative relationship between state regulation of wages and cooperative beliefs
can give rise to multiple equilibria, which in turn can explain the polarization of countries
reported in Figure 2 and Figure 1. In particular, countries can be stuck in an equilibrium with
high minimum wage and low union density. At the other extreme, in countries where beliefs
about cooperation are optimistic enough to sustain unions and negotiations, the demand for
the legal minimum wage is lower. The low stringency of the minimum wage legislation provides
incentives to experiment social dialogue by joining unions and thereby learning to implement
cooperative labor relations. This experimentation in turn makes it possible for such countries to
converge towards an equilibrium with low minimum wage, cooperative labor relations and high
union density.
Our learning model also predicts that the joint dynamics of the legal minimum wage and
union density is history-dependent: countries starting with low social capital will typically converge toward equilibria with low union density and high minimum wage, whereas countries starting with high social capital will converge to high unionization and low minimum wage steady
states. This representation of the building-up of social capital as resulting from experimentation
in collective action can explain the high degree of persistence in cooperative values found by
Putnam (1993) and confirmed by Guiso et al. (2007a). In particular, if initial beliefs about
cooperation are too pessimistic, a country can be persistently trapped in a no-experimentation
equilibrium characterized by strong state regulation of the minimum wage, low union rates and
distrustful labor relations. This explanation is complementary to the one proposed by Tabellini
(2007b) where parents rationally choose which values to transmit to their oﬀspring, and this
choice is in turn influenced by the quality of external enforcement of values. In Tabellini’s
framework, values evolve gradually over time and if the quality of external enforcement is chosen under majority rule, there is hysteresis in the dynamics of values: adverse initial conditions,
with weak enforcement, may lead to an equilibrium path where external enforcement remains
5

weak and individual values discourage cooperation.

6

This paper has also some connections with the litterature stressing the co-evolution of policies
and beliefs, along the lines of Piketty (1995), Alesina and Angeletos (2005) and Benabou and
Tirole (2006). In Piketty (1995), multiple equilibria in beliefs and redistributive policies can
originate from the heterogeneity in initial beliefs and the diﬃculty for indviduals to learn the
true cost and benefits of redistribution. Benabou and Tirole (2006) suggest that agents can
deliberately bias their own perception of the truth. In Alesina and Angeletos (2005), multiplicy
originates in the preference for fair economic outcomes.
The contribution of our paper is to focus on the interplay betwen policy and social capital.
We assess the interaction between the State and the Civil Society. Moreover we provide a new
rationale for multipe equilibria in institutions and beliefs that do not rely on initial heterogenity.
Countries starting with the same beliefs in cooperation can diverge, and some of them fall into
a no-investment in social capital trap, depending on historical idiosyncracies.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present our model of social experimentation
and minimum wage policy and use it to identify a two-way negative relationship between the
quality of labor relations and the extent of state regulation of wages. In Section 3 we present
the data used to test the predictions of the model. Section 4 provides evidence on the twoway relationship between the quality of labor relations and the extent of state regulation of
wages. Section 5 documents the negative correlation between minimum wage regulation and
union density. Section 6 concludes.

2

The model

2.1

Basic framework

We consider an infinite horizon economy populated by a continuum of measure one of risk neutral
individuals, each of whom lives for one period. There are two non storable goods in the economy:
a numeraire good and labor. Each individual is endowed with one unit of labor. Individuals get
utility from their consumption of the numeraire good and they diﬀer in productive ability. In
each period t, the proportion of individuals who produce less than y, y ≥ 0, with one unit of

labor, is defined by the cumulative distribution function G(y). For simplicity, we shall take the
G distribution to be uniform on the interval [0, 1].
Individuals may decide to join a trade union. The utility of an individual paid wage wt in
6

See also Bisin and Verdier (2000), Lindbeck and Nyberg (2006) and Guiso et al. (2007b) for alternative
formulation of transmission of beliefs and norms from parents to children.

6

period t, is just equal to wt if the individual is not unionized and to
vt = wt − c
if she is unionized, where c ∈ (0, 1) denotes the cost of unionization.

Workers face a monopsonistic representative firm. First, the firm makes take-it-or-leave-it

oﬀers to non unionized workers. Consequently, non unionized workers cannot get more than the
minimum wage w̄t ≥ 0 set by the government if their productivity y is higher than the minimum
wage, and they get no job oﬀer from the firm otherwise (we implicitly assume that workers’
productivity characteristics are publicly observable).
Unionization allows workers to negotiate and obtain a share of output provided labor relations
are suﬃciently “cooperative”. We model the negotiation between the union and the firm as an
ultimatum game: first, the union makes an investment in its relationship with the firm; then
the firm either responds to that investment by paying unionized workers their full marginal
productivity (in this case the quality of labor relation is high) or the firm does not reciprocate
(in which case the quality of labor relation is low). Thus, the cooperative nature (or quality)
of labor relations depends upon two factors. First, the investment by unions in social capital
relation.7 Second, the firm responses to the union’s investment. Note that our modeling of the
negotiation between union and firm, departs from traditional bargaining models. It would be
easy to add bargaining considerations to the framework, although we believe that this would not
add much to our interpretation and understanding of the observed negative relationship between
minimum wage regulations and trust.
The true cooperative nature of labor relations is not observable. Workers only observe the
outcome of their bargaining with the firm.8 In every period, the bargaining can either be: (i)
a success, in which case all type-y unionized workers get a wage equal to their productivity
wt (y) = y;9 (ii) or a failure, in which case workers obtain the minimum wage wt (y) = w̄t .10
7
In Appendix B we provide evidence to the eﬀect that union investment matters for trust in labor relations.
There, we measure the union’s investment in cooperation in two ways, following Checchi and Lucifora (2002).
First, by the degree of workplace presence of unions. Second, by the degree to which unions coordinate and
centralize their decisions. Figure 12 reports the correlation between the indicator of workplace presence of unions
and the perceived quality of labor relations measured by the Global Competitiveness Reports 1999. Figure 13
reports the same correlation pattern between the quality of labor relations and the degree of coordination and
centralization of negotiations between trade unions. In both cases, steady positive correlations show up, suggesting
that the quality of labor cooperation is strongly associated with investment in cooperation by unions.
8
For the sake of simplicity, it is assumed that workers are able to extract the same information about the
outcome of negotiation independently of the number of employees whose wage is bargained over by the trade
union. Alternatively, one could assume that workers observe the outcome of negotiation with a probability that
increases with the number of employees whose wage is bargained over in the period. Our results are robust to
introducing this additional feature to the model.
9
The assumption that workers obtain the whole surplus if bargaining succeeds, is made for notational simplicity.
Assuming that the worker get a share β ∈ [0, 1] of the surplus would lead to similar results.
10
Note that the wages negotiated by the trade union depend upon workers’ productivity, whereas the minimum

7

In each period t, bargaining between workers and the firm succeeds with a probability that
depends upon the quality of labor relations:11
½
1 − ε if quality of labor relations is high
Pr (bargaining succeeds) =
ε
if quality of labor relations is low,
Pr (bargaining fails) =

½

1 − ε if quality of labor relation is low,
ε
if quality of labor relation is high

where ε < 1/2.

Investment in cooperation and the dynamics of beliefs
The union can invest to improve the quality of labor relations. We denote the union’s specific
investment by it . For simplicity, assume that it can take only two values: zero or I > 0. The
investment is publicly observable. When it = 0, the quality of labor relations is necessarily low.
When it = I, the quality of labor relations is high with probability qt , and it remains low with
the complementary probability 1 − qt .

Upon deciding whether or not to invest in the quality of labor relations, unionized workers do

not know whether they live in a cooperative economy where the investment will indeed lead to
high quality of labor relations or if they live in a non-cooperative economy where such investment
is pointless. In other words, the investment decision can be seen as a costly experimentation to
improve labor relations and discover the true cooperative nature of the economy.
Let e ∈ {C, N } denote the type of the economy: C if the economy is cooperative and N if it

is non cooperative. We let

Pr (e = C) = q0

t=0

denote workers’ prior beliefs as to the cooperative nature of the economy at date zero.
A history ht (n, s) at the beginning of period t consists in n ≤ t past negotiations (between

date 0 and date t − 1) over which unions have invested in cooperation, s ≤ n of which have

been successful, and n − s have been unsuccessful. The number n of periods with negotiation

and positive investment, may be smaller than t for two reasons. First, the trade union does not

necessarily invest in every period. Second, there is no negotiation in the periods where nobody
is unionized.
wage is independent of productivity. Here we simply capture the idea that trade unions have a better information
about workers’ productivity than the government.
11
That bargaining does not succeed with probability one if the quality of labor relation is high, reflects the fact
that the quality of labor relation is not perfect. That it may succeed with positive probability ε when the quality
of labor relation is low, reflects the fact that workers may sometime overcome the non-cooperative nature of the
employer and still manage to strike a good deal.

8

From Bayes’ rule, we have:
qt = Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] =

(1 − ε)s εn−s q0
.
(1 − ε)s εn−s q0 + (1 − ε)n−s εs (1 − q0 )

(1)

Finally, using the fact that Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] = 1 − Pr [e = N |ht (n, s)] , we can compute the

probability that bargaining succeeds in period t when there have been n previous periods with
investment and negotiations, s of which have been successful, namely:
½
ε + (1 − 2ε)qt if it = I
p(qt , it ) =
ε
if it = 0.

(2)

In this framework, by unionizing and by investing in the quality of labor relations, workers
manage both to obtain wage increases and also to generate information about the possibility
to increase the quality of labor relations. In periods in which the trade union invests and some
workers are unionized, the outcome of the negotiation reveals information on the type of economy.
This in turn enables workers of the future generation to update their beliefs. When there is no
investment or when nobody is unionized in period t, workers of generation t + 1 cannot update
their beliefs.
Bayes’ rule immediately implies a positive correlation between beliefs in successive periods
as stated by:
Lemma 1: In periods where the trade union invests I, the belief p(qt , I) that bargaining succeeds
in period t is non-decreasing with p(qt−1 , it−1 ).
Proof : From the definition (19) of beliefs we know that p(qt , I) increases with qt = Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] .
Let

£
¤
a = Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] ; b = Pr e = C|ht−1 (n0 , s0 )

where n0 = n, or n0 = n − 1, and s0 = s or s0 = s − 1.We have:

1 − q0 1 − ε n−2s
)
)(
;
q0
ε
1 − q0 1 − ε n0 −2s0
)
1/b = 1 + (
)(
.
q0
ε

1/a = 1 + (

Thus
1/a = (1/b)

µ

1−ε
ε

¶n−n0 −2(s−s0 )

+1−

µ

1−ε
ε

¶n−n0 −2(s−s0 )

.

In particular (1/a) and (1/b) are positively correlated, and thus so are a and b. QED.
Timing

9

At the beginning of period t = 0, nature determines once for all the type of economy e ∈

{C, N } which is not observable. Then, in each period t ≥ 0, the sequence of decisions can be
described as follows:12

1. The trade union decides whether or not to invest in the quality of labor relations.
2. Individuals vote to elect a government that sets a minimum wage w̄t ≥ 0.
3. Workers decide whether or not to join the trade union.
4. Wages are set by employers for non unionized workers and by wage negotiation for unionized workers.
We first analyze the outcome of the wage negotiation and the decision to invest in labor
relations and to unionize when the minimum wage is exogenous. This first step will allow us to
shed light on the relations between the minimum wage, unionization and investment behaviors
and beliefs. Then, we endogeneize the minimum wage by making it a choice variable by the
elected government.

2.2

The eﬀect of minimum wage on the dynamics of cooperation and beliefs

Unionization behavior and investment in labor relations are influenced by beliefs about the
eﬃciency of the investment and by the minimum wage. Beliefs are themselves influenced by past
unionization and investment experience. In this section, we first analyze how the minimum wage
influences unionization and investment behavior within each period t, taking beliefs are given.
Then, we proceed to analyze the impact of the minimum wage on the dynamics of beliefs and
unionization.
2.2.1

Short run equilibrium

Here we analyze unionization and investment in labor relations within any period t, with given
belief qt = Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] and given minimum wage w̄t . All workers whose productivity is
lower than the minimum wage w̄t are unemployed. Non unionized workers with productivity
y ≥ w̄t obtain the minimum wage w̄t ≥ 0. Unionized workers with productivity y ≥ w̄t expect

to get the wage wt (y) = y with probability p(qt , it ) and the minimum wage with probability
1 − p(qt , it ).
12

Here it is assumed that the trade union invests before the government sets the wage. This assumption has been
chosen because investment in the quality of labor relations can be interpreted as a commitment device. However,
it should be noticed that our main result of multiplicity of steady states, some with investment, others without,
also holds when the wage is set before investment and when investment and wage are chosen simultaneously.

10

Unionization decision
Workers decide to join unions in period t if and only if the utility derived from union membership, equal to p(qt , it )y +[1 − p(qt , it )] w̄t − c, is larger than the utility obtained without union
membership, equal to the minimum wage w̄t .13 Therefore, all workers whose productivity lies
above the threshold
ŷt = w̄t +

c
p(qt , it )

(3)

decide to become union member. The share of workers who decide to join a union in period t is
therefore equal to:

µ
π t = 1 − G w̄t +

c
p(qt , it )

¶

.

(4)

In particular the share of unionized workers decreases with the minimum wage, the reason
simply being that the gains from unionization are lower when the minimum wage is higher. More
pessimistic beliefs about the chance of success of bargaining also lead to lower union density.
Investment/experimentation decision
The trade union’s objective is to maximize the sum of the rents of its members, equal to the
diﬀerence between what they get when they are unionized and the minimum wage they get for
sure when not unionized, namely:
Z 1

w̄t + p(q c,i

t t)

[p(qt , it )(y − w̄t ) − c] dG(y).

(5)

Recall that if there is investment in the quality of labor relations (i.e. if it = I), the
negotiation succeeds with probability p(qt , I) equal to ε + (1 − 2ε)qt , whereas the probability of
success falls down to p(qt , 0) = ε in the absence of investment.

Let ∆(w̄t , qt ) denote the diﬀerence between the value of the rents when investment takes
place and the value of the rents when there is no investment.14 There is investment in labor
relations if and only if
∆(w̄t , qt ) > I.

(6)

13

Note that the decision to join the trade union is motivated here by individual gains only and not by social
custom as in the approach developed by Akerlof (1980), Booth (1985), Booth and Chatterji (1993), Corneo (1995),
Naylor (1989) and Naylor and Crips (1993) and Naylor and Raaum (1993).
14
Simple calculation shows that
] 1
] 1
∆(w̄t , qt ) =
{[qt (1 − 2ε) + ε] (y − w̄t ) − c} dG(y) −
[ε(y − w̄t ) − c] dG(y)
c
w̄t + q (1−2ε)+ε
t

c
w̄t + ε

11

It is easily checked that ∆ is increasing in qt and decreasing in the minimum wage w̄t . More
precisely, we get
∂∆(w̄t , qt )
∂ w̄t
∂∆(w̄t , qt )
∂qt

= −qt (1 − w̄t )(1 − 2ε) < 0,
Z 1
= (1 − 2ε)
(y − w̄t )dG(y) > 0.

(7)
(8)

c
t (1−2ε)+ε

w̄t + q

Thus the trade union is more likely to invest when the minimum wage is lower and when
workers are more optimistic about the returns of the investment. In particular investment will
never occur if the investment cost I is higher than the maximum expected gains which arise
when the minimum wage is equal to zero and people are the most optimistic, i.e. when qt = 1.
In order to avoid such situations we assume henceforth that
∆(0, 1) > I,
or equivalently I <

1
2

³

1−ε+c2
1−ε

´

(9)

− ε.

The minimum wage policy and the no experimentation trap
Investment and unionization decisions depend upon beliefs and the minimum wage. Workers
unionize more when they are more optimistic about the chance of success of negotiation and
when the minimum wage is lower. And the trade union invests more to improve labor relations
when workers are more optimistic about the returns to the investment and when the minimum
wage is lower.
Figure 3 describes the short-run equilibrium for investment and unionization given (qt , w̄t )
(the details underlying Figure 3 are presented in the appendix). Three regions, corresponding
to three diﬀerent type of equilibria, show up:
i) when workers are optimistic and the minimum wage is low, then there is positive union
density and positive investment;
ii) when the minimum wage is low and workers are pessimistic, there is no investment to
improve labor relations, but there is positive union density, albeit lower than in the previous
situation;
iii) when the minimum wage is high, there is no investment and union density is nil.
Figure 3 illustrates that a high minimum wage can prevent the trade union from investing
in the quality of labor relations. This is more likely to occur when workers are more pessimistic
about the potential payoﬀ from such investment, i.e on the cooperative nature of the environment.

12

qt
1
it =I

πt > 0
πt = 0
πt > 0

it =0

it =0
1-c/ε

1

wt

Figure 3: Experimentation and unionization in the (qt , w̄t ) plane.
2.2.2

The dynamics of beliefs, unionization and experimentation

We now proceed to analyze the dynamics of beliefs, investment and unionization when the
minimum wage is exogenously fixed at some level w, for all periods t ≥ 0. According to figure
3, there are potentially three diﬀerent possible steady states:
i) A steady state where i = I and π > 0,
ii) A steady state where i = 0 and π > 0,
iii) A steady state where i = π = 0.
Suppose first that there is no investment in period t = 0. In this case, the economy reaches
its steady state immediately since beliefs are never revised thereafter. This case occurs if the
initial value of the belief, q0 , is such that the net gain of investment is negative in period zero,
i.e. if ∆(w̄, q0 ) ≤ I, or equivalently if
q0 < q̄ = {q|∆(w̄, q) = I}
since ∆(w̄, q) is increasing in q. As shown in figure 3, two possible steady states are possible
in this situation, corresponding to cases i) and ii). If the minimum wage is suﬃciently low, i.e.
if w̄ < 1 − εc , the economy is stuck in a steady state where the share of unionized workers is

positive, equal to 1 −

c
ε

− w̄. If the minimum wage is above 1 − εc , the economy is stuck in a

steady state with zero union density.

13

Now suppose that
q0 > q̄.
and that the minimum wage is suﬃciently low that experimentation occurs in period t = 0. In
this case, the dynamics of experimentation may lead the economy to converge towards a steady
state with positive union density and investment. However, such optimistic beliefs in period zero
are not suﬃcient to insure that the steady state with positive investment will indeed be reached.
More specifically, when q0 > q̄, the economy converges toward such steady state with a
positive probability, which will shown below to depend both upon the minimum wage w̄ and
upon q0 .
Note first that if negotiation succeeds in period zero, then we must have: q1 = Prt=1 (e = C) >
0 and p1 (1, 1) > p0 . This implies that the expected return from investment at date 1, ∆(w̄, q1 ),
is higher than in period zero. Thus
q1 > q0 .
The same increase in workers’ optimism occurs between periods t and t + 1 occurs when negotiation succeeds in period t.
Overall, the dynamics of beliefs when there is investment, is fully described by:
⎧
if qt ≤ q̄
⎪
⎨ qt
(1−ε)qt
with probability 1 − ε if qt > q̄
qt+1 =
(1−ε)qt +ε(1−qt ) > qt
⎪
εqt
⎩
< q with probability ε
if q > q̄,
εqt +(1−ε)(1−qt )

t

if the economy is type-C, and
⎧
⎪
⎨ qt
(1−ε)qt
qt+1 =
(1−ε)qt +ε(1−qt ) > qt
⎪
εqt
⎩
εqt +(1−ε)(1−qt ) < qt

(10)

t

with probability ε
with probability 1 − ε

if qt ≤ q̄
if qt > q̄
if qt > q̄,

(11)

if the economy is type-N.

A first implication of the updating equation (10) is that as the experimentation history
expands, the reference type ends up being learned with probability 1. More formally, the continuous mapping theorem (see Acemoglu et al, 2007) implies that s → (1 − ε)t as t → ∞ when
experimentation occurred in all periods 0, 1, ..., t − 1,which in turn implies that
q0
ε
t(1−2ε)
t−→∞ q0 + (
(1 − q0 )
1−ε )

lim Pr [e = C|ht (t, s)] = lim

t−→∞

= 1.

However, as we shall see below, experimentation may not occur in all periods even when the
economy is cooperative (e = C). And as a result the economy will not avoid falling into a no
investment/ no experimentation trap with probability one. The continuous mapping theorem
14

also yields that limt−→∞ Pr [e = C|ht (t, s)] = 0 if e = N, which this time will imply that with
probability one the economy falls into a no experimentation/no investment trap. From now on
we shall concentrate on the case where the economy is truly cooperative (type-C).
A second implication of the updating equation (10), is that the probability of uninterrupted
experimentation (and therefore of convergence toward full learning) increases with the value of
the initial beliefs q0 . For example, if q0 is larger than the threshold value q̄ below which there is
no investment, but close enough to q̄, the probability that there is investment in period zero, but
then no investment in subsequent periods, can be high. To see this, imagine that q0 > q̄ but that
negotiation fails in period zero (this occurs with probability ε). Then, equation (10) implies that
q1 < q0 . If q1 is smaller than q̄, which will occur if q0 is close enough to q̄, investment is equal to
zero in period one. In that case, the economy falls in a no-investment/no-experimentation trap
in period 1, after one period of experimentation, and from period zero this case is perceived to
occur with probability ε.
For higher values of q0 it will take more than one failure to bring the economy to a noinvestment/no-experimentation trap. Such a scenario can occur after period 1 when there are
successive failures for higher values of q0 . More precisely, we can show:
Proposition 1: If the economy is of the cooperative type (e = C) and if q0 > q̄, then the
economy avoids the no-investment/ no-experimentation trap with probability Q(q0 , w) which is
increasing in q0 and decreasing in w.
Proof: Let T (q0 , q̄) be defined by
ϕ(T, qo ) = q̄,
where:
ϕ(T, qo ) =

1
1−ε T
0
1 + ( 1−q
q0 )( ε )

.

Since ϕ is decreasing in T and increasing in q0 , then T (q0 , q̄) is increasing in q0 and decreasing
in q̄.
Now the ex ante expected probability that qt will eventually fall below q̄, which in turn will
lead to a no-investment/no-experimentation trap, is equal to15 :
¡n¢
P
P
s n−s
n−T (q0 ,q̄)
n≥0
s (1 − ε) ε
s≤
2
¡n¢
P
P
.
P̄ (q0 , q̄) =
s n−s
n≥0
s≤n s (1 − ε) ε
15

Here we use the fact that

qt = Pr [e = C|ht (n, s)] =

15

1
.
1−ε n−2s
0
1 + ( 1−q
)(
)
q0
ε

In particular it is easy to see that P̄ (q0 , q̄) is decreasing in T, and therefore decreasing in q0 and
increasing in q̄, and therefore
Q(q0 , w) = 1 − P̄ (q0 , q̄)
is increasing in q0 and decreasing in q and therefore in the minimum wage w. QED.
Thus, when the economy is truly cooperative, the economy is more likely to converge toward a steady state equilibrium with positive investment and union density if initial beliefs are
suﬃciently optimistic and the minimum wage is suﬃciently low. Moreover, we can state that:
Result 1: In steady state, aggregate welfare of workers is higher in the equilibrium with positive
investment in the quality of labor relations than in the equilibrium without investment.
Proof:
Aggregate welfare of workers in period t is equal to the sum of wages minus the unionization
costs and the investment costs in the quality of labor relations:
∙ µ
Wt = G w̄ +
When w̄ +

c
p(qt ,it )

c
p(qt , it )

¶

¸
Z
− G(w̄) w̄ +

1

w̄+ p(q c,i

t t)

[p(qt , it )y + [1 − p(qt , it )] w̄ − c] dG(y) − it .

is greater than 1, then aggregate welfare is equal to:
Wt = [1 − G(w̄)]w̄ − it .

(12)

A steady state equilibrium with positive investment in the quality of labor relations can exist
c
< 1. Assuming that these two conditions
only if the economy is truly cooperative and if w̄ + 1−ε

are fulfilled, the probability p(qt , it ) that bargaining succeeds at date t, is equal to 1 − ε if there
is investment in the quality of labor relations. Then, steady state welfare is
∙ µ
¶
¸
Z 1
c
[(1 − ε)y + εw̄ − c] dG(y) − I.
W I = G w̄ +
− G(w̄) w̄ +
1−ε
w̄+ c
1−ε

If there is no investment, then p(qt , it ) is equal to ε and steady state welfare amounts to
( £ ¡
¢
¤
R1
G w̄ + εc − G(w̄) w̄ + w̄+ c [εy + (1 − ε)w̄ − c]dG(y)
ε
¢
¤
W =
£ ¡
G w̄ + εc − G(w̄) w̄
0

when w̄ + εc < 1
otherwise.

.

Using the two last equations and the definition of ∆(w̄, q) given in footnote 14 it can easily be
checked that W I > W 0 since ∆(w̄, 1) > I. QED.

16

2.3

Optimal minimum wage and the multiplicity of steady-state social regimes

In this section we analyze the reverse causality from current beliefs about cooperation to the
minimum wage optimally chosen by a utilitarian government. We begin to define the optimal
minimum wage set by the government in every period. Then, we proceed to analyze the shortrun equilibrium, when the belief about the eﬃciency of the investment in labor relations is taken
as given. Finally, we study the dynamics of beliefs and investment and we show that the model
generates multiple (long-term) social regimes.
2.3.1

The ex-ante social welfare function and the optimal minimum wage

It is assumed that the government, contrary to the trade union, does not observe the productivity
of each individual. This assumption is meant to capture in a simple way the fact that trade unions
gather information, thanks to the bargaining process, that is not available to the government.
The cost of unionization, c, and/or the cost of investment in labor relations, I, can be interpreted
as the cost of information obtained by the trade union.
Since the government does not observe productivity, the minimum wage can only be the
lowest bound of the wage distribution. The election process is represented by a probabilistic
voting model which implies, under some assumptions assumed to be fulfilled, that the elected
government maximizes the sum of the utilities of the workers.16
We assume that the government chooses the minimum wage after the union has chosen its
investment it . As shown previously, the trade union’s investment choice satisfies:
½
I if ∆(w̄t , qt ) > I
it =
,
0 if ∆(w̄t , qt ) ≤ I.

where w̄t is the minimum wage the union anticipates to be set by the government in period t.
Given qt and it , the government chooses the minimum wage w̄t = w̄(qt , it ) ≥ 0 that maximizes

the social welfare function equal to the sum of the gains of the workers minus the investment
costs:

∙ µ
Wt = G w̄t +

c
p(qt , it )

¶

¸
Z
− G(w̄t ) w̄t +

1

w̄t + p(q c,i

where p(qt , it ) is given by
p(qt , it ) =

½

t t)

[p(qt , it )y + [1 − p(qt , it )] w̄t − c] dG(y),
(13)

ε + (1 − 2ε)qt if it = I
ε
if it = 0.

16

This outcome can be derived from the simple case in which individuals are heterogeneous with respect to
ideological biases towards the candidates. Then, following Persson and Tabellini (2000) it turns out that the
outcome of the elections maximizes the utilitarian criterion if the ideological bias is represented by an additive
term in the utility function and is distributed with a uniform distribution independent of the distribution of
productivities.

17

When w̄t +

c
p(qt ,it )

is greater than 1, then social welfare is equal to:
Wt = [1 − G(w̄t )]w̄t − it .

(14)

Maximizing welfare over the choice of minimum wage wt , we can establish the following
Proposition 2: The optimal minimum wage w(qt , it ) at date t is equal to:
(
c+1−p(qt ,it )
if p(qt , it ) ≥ 2c
2−p(qt ,it )
w̄(qt , it ) =
1/2
if p(qt , it ) ≤ 2c.

(15)

Proof : Consider first the case when the welfare maximization program has an interior solution
w̄t > 0 such that
w̄t +

c
< 1.
p(qt , it )

Then the optimal minimum wage satisfies the first order condition:
∂Wt
c + 1 − p(qt , it )
.
= 0, or equivalently: w̄t =
∂ w̄t
2 − p(qt , it )

(16)

The solution w̄t is truly interior if
c + 1 − p(qt , it )
c
+
< 1,
2 − p(qt , it )
p(qt , it )
or equivalently
p(qt , it ) > 2c.
Now suppose that
p(qt , it ) ≤ 2c,
then the optimal minimum wage w̄t maximizes
Wt = [1 − G(w̄t )]w̄t .
Note that in this case
∂Wt
= 1 − 2w̄t ,
∂ w̄t
which is positive if w̄t < 1/2 and negative otherwise. Thus in this case the optimal minimum
wage is simply
1
w̄t = ,
2
which establishes the proposition. QED.

18

2.3.2

Short run equilibrium, for given current beliefs about cooperation

We now proceed by backward induction. Consider first the government’s choice of minimum
wage for given beliefs and union investment. Proposition 2 gives us the answer, namely:
If it = 0, then the probability that bargaining succeeds is p(qt , 0) = ε and the government
sets
w̄(qt , 0) =
If it = I, the government will choose
(
w̄(qt , I) =

½

c+1−ε
2−ε

1/2

c+1−[ε+(1−2ε)qt ]
2−[ε+(1−2ε)qt ]

1/2

if ε ≥ 2c
if ε ≤ 2c.
if ε + (1 − 2ε)qt ≥ 2c
if ε + (1 − 2ε)qt ≤ 2c.

(17)

which is decreasing in qt since c < 1.
Now, moving back one step, the union will choose to invest, i.e it = I, whenever
D(qt ) > I;
where
D(q) =

Z

1

c
w̄(q,I)+ q(1−2ε)+ε

−

(18)

Z

{[q(1 − 2ε) + ε] [y − w̄(q, I)] − c} dG(y)

1

w̄(q,0)+ εc

{ε [y − w̄(q, 0)] − c} dG(y).

Using the fact that D(q) is increasing in q, the above inequality defines a lower bound
q̃ = {q|D(q) = I}
on beliefs,17 below which the union does not invest and therefore does not experiment. Obviously,
an equilibrium with positive investment cannot exist if the investment cost is higher than the
expected gains from investment when people are most optimistic, i.e. when qt = 1. To avoid this
possibility, we henceforth assume that
D(1) > I.
Then, either qt < q̃, in which case the union does not invest and therefore the government sets
minimum wage w̄t = min{1/2, c+1−ε
2−ε }, or qt > q̃ in which case the union invests, the government

sets

c + 1 − [ε + (1 − 2ε)qt ]
< 1/2,
2 − [ε + (1 − 2ε)qt ]
and the union experiments at date t. Since the minimum wage is lower in the second case, union
w̄t =

density is higher in that case.
17

It can be checked that q̃ is larger than the threshold value of q below which the wage w̄(qt , I) = 1/2. This
is because nobody is unionized if the wage is equal to 1/2 and it is then never worth investing in the quality of
labor relations.

19

2.3.3

Comparative static results

Using Proposition 2 and plugging the equilibrium value of the minimum wage back into the
expressions for welfare, employment and output, we can establish interesting comparative static
results on how these three measures of aggregate performance vary with workers’ belief on the
type of the economy.
.
Result 2: Employment and aggregate output are non-decreasing with the previous period’s belief
in the cooperative nature of the economy.
Proof : Note that aggregate employment is simply given by
½
1−c
if p(qt , it ) ≥ 2c
1 − G(w̄t ) = 2−p(q
t ,it )
Et =
1
otherwise.
2
Thus Et is non-decreasing in p(qt , it ) and thus in p(qt−1 , it−1 ) according to Lemma 1 and to
Corollary 1. Similarly, aggregate output
Yt =

Z

1

ydG(y)

w̄t

is non-decreasing in p(qt−1 , it−1 ) since w̄t is non-increasing in p(qt−1 , it−1 ). QED.
When many workers were unionized in the previous generation and when the trade union has
just invested to improve the quality of labor relations, the government can set a low minimum
wage because current expected gains of unionization are high. This situation, which is favorable
to employment and output, is also good for aggregate welfare which is equal to total wages net
of total unionization and investment costs if the true nature of the economy is cooperative:
Result 3: When the economy is type-C, aggregate workers’ welfare is non-decreasing with the
previous generation’s belief.
Proof : Past belief has no impact on current welfare if qt is such that there is no investment
in the current period, i.e. if qt ≤ q̃. Let us now suppose that qt > q̃ and that there is an

equilibrium with positive investment in period t. Then, using the envelop theorem the derivative
of Wt (defined equation (13)) at the optimal value of w̄t reads
( R1
dWt
w̄t + p(q c,i ) (y − w̄t )dG(y) > 0 if p(qt , it ) ≥ 2c
=
t t
dp(qt , it )
0
otherwise.
Since from Lemma 1 p(qt , it ) increases with p(qt−1 , it−1 ) when the trade union invests, Wt also
increases with p(qt−1 , it−1 ) if p(qt , it ) ≥ 2c. QED.

Thus, when the true nature of the economy is cooperative, more optimistic past beliefs about

the cooperative nature of the economy and the eﬃciency of investment, favor current involvement
in collective action, and leads to higher social welfare because the action of trade unions is more
eﬃcient than the minimum wage to fight against the monopsony power of employers.
20

2.3.4

The dynamics of union density, minimum wage and investment in cooperation

This section analyzes the joint dynamics of union density, minimum wages and investment in
the quality of labor relations. We are particularly interested in the existence of multiplicity of
steady-state equilibria: equilibria with positive investment in the quality of labor relations, low
minimum wage and high unionization (a “Scandinavian” equilibrium) and equilibria without
investment in the quality of labor relation, and with low unionization and high minimum wage
(“French” equilibrium).
“French” equilibrium
When initial beliefs about the nature of the economy, q0 = Prt=0 (e = C) , are pessimistic,
the economy can be stuck in a situation with zero investment. This occurs for sure if q0 ≤ q̃.

This situation persists over time since the absence of experimentation in period t = 0 prevents
the updating of beliefs in period 1, and then in the subsequent periods 2, .., ∞. The minimum

wage remains high, equal to

w̄ = min{1/2,
and union density is equal to18
π = max{0,
“Scandinavian” equilibria

c+1−ε
},
2−ε
ε − 2c
}.
ε(2 − ε)

When initial beliefs are suﬃciently optimistic, i.e. when q0 > q̃, investment in period zero is
positive. Then, social experimentation takes place. From our analysis in the previous subsection,
we know that with ex-ante probability
P
P̄ (q0 , q̃) =

n≥0

P

P

s≤

n−T (q0 ,q̃)
2

¡n¢
s

¡n¢
s≤n s (1

P

(1 − ε)s εn−s

,
− ε)s εn−s
¤
£
the economy will end up in a “French” trap, but with probability 1 − P̄ (q0 , q̃) it will converge
n≥0

toward the “Scandinavian” steady state.

If the economy reaches the “Scandinavian” steady state, the economy had to be of a cooperative type (otherwise, the economy could not have converged toward this steady state by the
18
By using the value of w̄t defined in equation (15) into equation (4), we see that the unionization ragte at date
t in equilibrium is given by:
+
p(qt ,it )−2c
if p(qt , it ) ≥ 2c
p(qt ,it )[2−p(qt ,it )]
πt =
;
(19)
0
if p(qt , it ) ≤ 2c.

In particular we see that:
∂π t /∂pt ≥ 0.

In other words, the more optimistic workers are about the quality of labor relations at date t, the more they
unionize at that date.

21

Continuous Mapping Theorem). The probability of success of negotiation is then equal to 1 − ε.

The minimum wage and the trade union density are consequently given by
w̄∗ =

1
c+ε
1 − ε − 2c
< , π∗ =
> π ≥ 0.
1+ε
2
(1 − ε)2

Welfare comparison
Consider a type-C economy so that the steady state with positive investment can be reached
when the initial beliefs satisfy q0 > q̃. Then, we know from Result 2 that aggregate welfare
is increasing with p(qt , it ). Since p(qt , it ) is higher in the equilibrium with positive investment
than in the equilibrium with zero investment, aggregate welfare is higher in the “Scandinavian”
steady state equilibrium than in a “French” one.
The following proposition summarizes the above discussion:
Proposition 3: Assume a type-C economy. Then, there exists a steady state equilibrium
with positive investment in the quality of labor relations, high unionization rate and low minimum
wage. There also exist steady state equilibria with zero investment, low union density and high
minimum wage. In the steady state with positive investment, welfare is higher than in the
steady-state without investment.
If initial beliefs q0 that the environment is cooperative are lower than q̃, the economy is stuck
in a bad equilibrium with higher minimum wage w̄t = min{1/2, c+1−ε
2−ε }, lower unionization rate,

and no investment in the quality of labor relations.

If q0 > q̃, the economy converges towards the equilibrium with positive investment in the quality of labor relations, lower minimum wage w̄∗ =

c+ε
1+ε ,

higher unionization rate,with probability

1 − P̄ (q0 , q̃) that increases with q0 .
It is worth stressing that the dynamics of investment in cooperation, of unionization and
of the minimum wage, are all driven by the updating of workers’ beliefs. A high current minimum wage policy favors convergence towards the “low” equilibrium with no unionization and
investment, as it deters experimentation and thereby leads to future minimum wage increases.

3
3.1

Data and measurement
Measuring the state regulation of minimum wages

To measure the stringency of state regulation of minimum wages we construct a composite index.
A first component of this index is the stringency of the minimum wage legislation, including the
22

existence of legal minimum wages and the extent of potential derogations. A second component
is the level of the minimum wage. Data are borrowed from the International Labor Organization
(ILO) and from the OECD database. The ILO database provides detailed description of the
diﬀerent legal procedures to set minimum wages. The OECD database provides information
concerning the level of real minimum wages and the ratio of minimum wages relatively to average wages and median wages. The indicators are briefly described below, the full description
being reported in Appendix C. The overall regulation index is simply the product of these two
components.
Minimum wage legislation
We start by looking at the stringency of minimum wage legislations. This is measured by
two main indicators: i◦ ) minwage_legal measures the existence of a legal statutory minimum
wage, and if not, the degree of coverage of the minimum wage set by collective bargaining; 2◦ )
minwage_dispersion measures the degree of dispersion in minimum wages across ages, qualifications, regions, sectors or occupations. We scale each of these two indicators between zero and
one, a higher value indicating more stringent law enforcement.
Figure 4 shows the first indicator, minwage_legal, which captures the existence of a legal
statutory minimum wage and the extent to which minimum wages negotiated in collective bargaining are extended to all workers. The indicator minwage_legal equal to 1 if a statutory
minimum wage exists, 0.5 if instead the wage floor is directly bargained over by unions and
then extended, and 0 otherwise. We report the average value of this indicator for the period
1980-2003. A high degree of cross-country variation shows up along this dimension. A first
group of countries, namely Scandinavian countries, do not have any legal minimum wage, and
no legal automatic extension of the negotiated wage floors. Wage floors are determined as part
of the collective agreements between unions, and then they apply to workers covered by these
collective agreements only. A similar group of countries, made up of Austria, Germany and
Italy, do not have any legal statutory minimum wages. But legal dispositions stipulate to what
extent the negotiated wage floors should be extended to all other workers. Lastly, a legal statutory minimum wage is implemented by most Mediterranean and Anglo-Saxon countries. In the
United States, this tradition dates back at least to the 1938 Fair Act while it is more recent in
United Kingdom which established a legal minimum wage in 1999.
Figure 5 shows the indicator minwage_dispersion which measures the extent of dispersion
and derogations in minimum wage setting. Minimum wage can diﬀer by ages, qualifications,
regions, sectors or occupations. A more constraining minimum wage legislation is one that
leaves little room for derogations and dispersion. We measure this characteristic by constructing
two sub-indexes for age dispersion and other kind of derogations. The sub-indexes are ranked
23

between 0 and 1, a higher score indicating that the country provides little derogation. The subindex of dispersion across ages is constructed as follows. The score is equal to 1 if there is no
provision at all for sub-minimum wages. It is equal to 0.5 if derogations are restricted to workers
younger than 18 years old or if the derogation is less than half the oﬃcial minimum wage. And
it takes on the value 0 if the derogations can be extended to people older than 18 years or/and
if the sub-minimum wages are lower than half the standard wage floor. The sub-index for other
derogations equal 0 if the minimum wage is allowed to diﬀer along at least the three dimensions
of regions, sectors and occupations, 0.33 if there are two types of distinctions, 0.67 for one type
of distinction, and 1 if no dispersion at all is allowed. The indicator minwage_dispersion is the
average of these two sub-indexes.
Figure 5 shows a great deal of cross-country heterogeneity in the minwage_dispersion indicator over the period 1980-2003. Countries like France leaves no scope for derogations based on
age, occupation, or industry. Other countries allow for subminimum wages. Thus, special wage
floors extend up to age 24 in Sweden and to age 22 years in the Netherlands. The Netherlands
accepts a reduction up to 40 percent of standard minimum wage at 17 years old. Nordic countries let unions negotiate the wage floor at the industry level, without any automatic extension
to other parts of the economy.
Henceforth, we measure the stringency of the overall minimum wage legislation using the
composite indicator minwage_legislation, obtained by multiplying the indicator of legal determination of the minimum wage, minwage_legal, by the indicator of potential dispersion,
minwage_dispersion.
Minimum wage levels
We measure the minimum wage level by the index minwage_level defined as the ratio of the
minimum wage over the median wage in the economy. Minimum wage levels are provided by the
OECD database for all years since the mid-1970s. The OECD only reports countries which have
a legal statutory minimum wage. We thus complete these data by using Neumark and Wascher
(2004)’s indicators for other countries. These data cover two time periods, the late 1970s and
the 2000s. The exact definition of the minimum wage variables used to calculate the real
value of national minimum wages, is reported in the Appendix. As mentioned above, minimum
wage levels display some degree of dispersion within most countries. The OECD database and
Neumark and Washer reports the average value for full-time minimum wage workers who are
not subject to any derogations, as a percentage of average wages of full-time workers in the
corresponding sector (see Immervoll, 2007, and Neumark and Washer, 2004).
Overall minimum wage regulation index

24

1
Legal versus negociated wage floors
.2
.4
.6
.8
0
Usa Tk Sp

Pt Pol Nth Mx Jp Ire Hg Gre Fra Czr Cd Aus Uk Ita Ger Bg Aut Swd Nw Fin Dk

0

.2

Dispersion in wage floors
.4
.6
.8

1

Figure 4: Legal statutory minimum wages or the degree of extension of negotiated wage floors.
Period: 1980-2003.

Hg Fra Pt Gre Aut Usa Sp Czr Bg Mx Ita

Tk Pol Nw Nth Jp Fin Uk Ger Dk Ire Cd Aus Swd

Figure 5: Degree of dispersion in wage floors by ages, qualifications, regions, sectors or occupations. Period 1980-2003.

25

The overall measure of minimum wage regulation used in the following tables and figures, is
simply the product minwage_legislation*minwage_level.

3.2

Measuring the quality of labor relations

We measure the perceived level of cooperation in the labor market by the quality of the relationship between workers and managers. We first use the Global Competitiveness Reports, a
survey sent out to thousands of executives each year across more than 50 countries. Among
other questions, executives are asked to respond to the following statement: “Labor/employer
relations are generally cooperative”. Responses may vary from 1 for strong disagreement to 7
for strong agreement. One may of course worry about this only reflecting the perception of
executives. We thus use additional information from the International Social Survey program
1999 (ISSP), which asks similar questions but for all categories of citizens. The question is the
following: “In all countries there are diﬀerences or even conflicts between diﬀerent social groups.
In your opinion, how much conflict is there between management and workers in your country?”
Responses are equal to 1 for “very strong conflict”, 2 for “strong conflict”, 3 for “not very strong
conflict”, and 4 for “no conflict at all”. Henceforth we shall focus on workers’ answers only, to
contrast them with the executives’ survey.

3.3

Measuring union density

We measure workers’ involvement in unions by using the unionization data provided by the
OECD at a yearly frequency since the 1960s. We also use data from Boeri et al. (2003) to track
back the evolution of unionization rates since the early 1950s. We should be clear at this point
that our primary focus is on workers’ propensity to cooperate and to group into associations
rather than rely on state intervention to guarantee their wage. In this regard, union density
appears to be a more relevant indicator than union coverage rates. Obviously, the coverage
indicator provides information regarding the bargaining power of unions, and as a matter of
fact the role of unions in regulating wages becomes fairly high in some countries due to the
automatic extension of negotiated wages to all sectors, even if the union density rate is really
low. However the coverage indicator also captures the extent of state intervention in setting
wages, since negotiated wages are extended by law to the diﬀerent sectors of the economy.
Thus this indicator does not truly reflect workers’ preference for direct negotiations over the
alternative of relying on state intervention.

26

4

Empirical evidence on beliefs and minimum wage regulation

This section documents the empirical correlation between beliefs in cooperation and unionization
rates on the one hand, and the extent of state regulation of minimum wages on the other hand.
In particular, the model predicts that individuals rely directly on state intervention rather than
on negotiation when beliefs about the scope of cooperation in the labor market are pessimistic.
But conversely, by directly regulating wages, the state discourages individuals from engaging
in social experimentation and thereby learning about the quality of labor relations. Here we
provide evidence on this two-way relationship, and we also document on the dynamics of beliefs
using survey data on confidence in labor institutions across successive waves of US immigrants
who originate from countries with diﬀering levels of labor market regulation.

4.1

Correlation between the quality of labor relations and state regulation
of wages

Figure 1 reports the correlation between state regulation and the executives’ beliefs, whereas
Figure 6 reports the correlation between state regulation and workers’ beliefs. In either case,
the correlations are strongly negative, suggesting that beliefs in cooperation are more optimistic
in countries with lower state regulation of the labor market.
Table 1 presents the results of the associated OLS regression. Column 1 reports the positive
correlation between the quality of labor relation and union density in 2000. We measure the
degree of cooperation by the GCR index which provides more observations, even if the correlation
pattern is lower than that obtained with the ISSP index. Column 1 shows that the R2 is 0.33,
and union density is statistically significant at the one percent level. The second column shows
that the correlation between the quality of labor relation and union density remains statistically
significant at the five percent level when one controls for the unemployment rate and traditional
labor market institutions taken from Nickell et al. (2001). Columns 3 and 4 report the strong
negative correlation between the GCR index of the quality of labor relation and our index of state
regulation of the minimum wage in the 2000s. The negative correlation is highly statistically
significant at the one percent level even when one controls for the unemployment rate and other
labor market institutions in Column 4, none of which appear to be statistically significant.
Now clearly, the causality between beliefs in cooperation and the extent of state regulation,
can run both ways. On the one hand, one should expect higher support for state intervention
in countries where beliefs in cooperative labor relations are weaker. Figure 7 documents this
point by looking at the correlation between the fraction of population who believe that it is
not the government’s responsibility to set wages, and beliefs in cooperative labor relations. The

27

Table 1: Quality of labor relations in OECD countries: 2000s. OLS estimates
Dependent variable

Unionization rate

(1)
2.091***
(.716)

State regulation
of minimum wages
Unemployment rate
Replacement rate
Benefit duration
Employment protection
Tax wedge
R2
Observations

.34
18

Quality of labor relation
(2)
(3)
**
2.140
(.912)
-3.339***
(.876)
*
-7.301
(3.802)
.555
(.941)
-.466
(.570)
-.098
(.289)
-1.810
(1.682)
.56
.46
18
18

(4)

-2.821***
(.827)
-12.625**
(4.170)
.422
(.860)
.235
(.437)
.152
(.259)
-.366
(1.052)
.74
18

indicator of support for wage regulation by the state is drawn from the 1996 publication of
the International Social Survey program database. There, we focus on the following question:
“Here are some things the government might do for the economy. Please show which actions
you are in favor of and which you are against: control wages by law? ”. The answers are ranked
from 1, for a strong agreement, to 5 for a strong disagreement. Figure 7 shows, on the vertical
axis the mean answer to this question for each country, and on the horizontal axis the index of
beliefs in cooperative labor relations. The correlation between these two variables turns out to
be strongly negative with 41 percent of the variation in public support for state regulation of
wages across countries being associated with diﬀerences in beliefs about the cooperative nature
of labor relations.

4.2

History dependence in OECD countries

Our model predicts history dependence in beliefs about cooperation: in particular, for given
initial beliefs, diﬀerent cooperative equilibria might emerge depending upon the history of successes or failures of negotiations between unions and firms. Crouch (1993) provides overwhelming
evidence of such historical dependence in the development of unions and the quality of labor
relations.
Unionization rates were quite comparable across European countries at the end the 19th
century, ranging from 3 percent in Netherlands, 4 percent in Norway, 5 percent in Sweden, 6
28

R²=0.38

State regulation of minimum wage
.2
.4

.6

Fra

Hg

Uk
Pol

Usa
Jp

Czr

Sp

Aut

Aus
Ger

0

Nw

.3

.4

.5
.6
.7
Cooperative Labor Relations: Workers

.8

Figure 6: Correlation between State regulation of minimum wages and Workers’ beliefs in Cooperative labor relations. Source: ILO, OECD, and ISSP 1999 database.

29

R²=0.41

Is it the role of the state to regulate wages?
2.5
3
3.5

Jp

Ger

Nz

Usa

Swd

Cd
Uk Ire
Nw

Aus
Fra

Ita

2

Sp

3

4

5
Cooperative Labor Relations

6

7

Figure 7: Correlation between the extent of cooperative labor relations (GCR 1999) and the
share of people who disagree with the folling question: "Is it the role of the government to
directly set wages?" (ISSP 1996).

30

percent in France to 13 percent in UK and Denmark. But the development of unions and of
cooperation on the labor market has been deeply influenced by the subsequent social history of
agreements and conflicts between firms and union workers.
Remarkably enough, labor relations were fairly hostile in Denmark in the 19th century, and
the Great Lock-Out of 1898 is probably the single biggest industrial dispute in Europe over
the 19th century. However this dispute led to a social pact between organized labor and firms,
whereby unions would recognize the private property of firms by capitalists, and in exchange,
capitalists and workers unions would negotiate wages directly on a bilateral basis, without any
state intervention. Ever since, the unionization rate has steadily risen in Denmark and this
country displays one of the highest quality of labor relation in the 2000s. The same picture
holds for Belgium, Austria, Germany, United Kingdom and Sweden. According to Crouch,
labor relations in these countries used to be highly conflictual. But precisely this encouraged
employers and the state to design institutions aimed at involving unions in the regulation of
labor markets in order to contain social disruption. This evolution pattern departs from that
of France where central governments, whether from the right or from the left, have remained
traditionally suspicious vis-a-vis unions and have therefore privileged centralized negotiations at
the government level, for example during the Front Populaire in 1936 or more recently with the
Grenelles Agreement in the aftermath of May 1968.
Table 2 provides quantitative evidence regarding the impact of the historical state involvement on the development of the quality of labor relations. There, we bear on Crouch’s analysis
of the attitudes of the states towards unions in Europe during the 19th century19 Crouch classifies states in three categories. The first category comprises states that were most hostile to the
development of unions and consequently more prone to directly regulate labor market and settle
disputes through centralized decisions. This group includes the main catholic strongholds in Europe, namely France, Italy, Spain and Portugal. Crouch account for this fact by stressing that
in these countries the central government needed to assert its authority over the Catholic church
and to confront all forms of organized interests, including worker organizations. The second
category comprises five countries where the state was rather neutral vis-a-vis labor organization
and would consequently let them directly with firms. This is the case of Belgium, Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, Finland, UK and Ireland. Finally, the third category consists of countries
where the State would encourage union involvement in the regulation of labor markets. This
category includes Austria, Germany, Netherlands, Switzerland. In particular, the Austrian and
German governments were first to set up elected workers commissions to run pensions and social
19

Blanchard and Philippon (2006) show that these initial attitudes of the states towards union might also
explain current unemployment rates.

31

insurance schemes as of the 1880s.
Table 2 shows the correlation between the 1999 GCR index of quality of labor relation
and the initial interplay between the State and unions. The cluster of countries with hostile
states is taken as the reference. Table 2 - Column 1 shows that the quality of labor relation in
1999 is positively correlated with the fact of initially belonging to the second or third category
of neutral and supportive states towards unions. The OLS coeﬃcients are statistically highly
significant and the R2 is .55. Table 2 - Column 2 shows that the correlation remains statistically
significant when one controls for contemporaneous values of unemployment and other labor
market institutions, none of these latter variables being statistically significant.
Table 2: Quality of labor relations in OECD countries in 2000s and attitudes of the state towards
unions in the 19th century
Dependent variable
State attitudes towards
early unions in the 19th
Hostile = 1
Neutral = 1
Supportive = 1

Quality of labor relations GCR index
(1)
(2)

Reference
1.121***
(.301)
1.516***
(.447)

Unemployment rate
Replacement rate
Benefit duration
Employment protection
Tax wedge
R2
Observations

4.3

.55
14

Reference
1.122**
(.425)
1.754**
(.652)
-6.549
(5.709)
1.148
(.950)
-1.720
(1.141)
-.258
(.603)
-1.864
(2.040)
.74
14

History dependence: the beliefs of US immigrants

Here we provide additional quantitative evidence on the influence of past minimum wage policies
and past unionization rates on current beliefs towards labor relations. For that purpose, we use
the General Social Survey database which provides information on Americans’ attitudes towards
labor institutions as well as detailed information on the country of origin of their ancestors and
the wave of immigration to which they belong. This database covers the period 1972-2004 and
32

provides information on the birth place and the country of origin of the respondent’s forebears
since 1977. The GSS variable for the country of origin reads as follows: “From what countries
or part of the world did your ancestors come?”. Origins cover nearly all European countries.
The GSS also asks whether the respondent has confidence in labor unions, namely: “Would
you say you have a great deal of confidence, only some confidence, or hardly any confidence at all
in organized labor institutions?”. We measure the extent of confidence in unions with a dummy
variable equal to 1 if the respondent answers ”a great deal of confidence”, and to zero otherwise.
We also have information on whether the respondent belongs to a labor union or not.
We use the information about the past union densities and the existence of statutory minimum wage in the home country from the early 1950s. Note that we do not have data on the
level of minimum wage, but only on the existence of statutory wage floor in some countries such
as France or the United States. To assess the eﬀect of minimum wage institutions on current
attitudes towards unions, we focus on second and first generations of Americans born after 1950,
and whose parents or themselves are likely to have been influenced by these institutions. In order
to get interpretable results, we restrict attention to countries of origin with more than 15 observations, which leaves us with the following set of countries of origins: Austria, France, Germany,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The data description are
reported in the Appendix.
Table 3 - Line (I) reports the probit marginal estimates of the eﬀect of past levels of unionization rate in the home country on current level of trust in unions, and on the probability of
belonging to a union. We control for age (age squared), gender, number of years of education,
income categories, and the number of years of education of the parents. Standard errors are
clustered at the level of the country of origin. Column (1) shows a strong correlation between
past union rates in the country of origin and the probability that the respondent has confidence
in unions now. The relation is statistically significant at the one percent level. The size of the
eﬀect is also large, with a one percent increase in past union rates in the home country being
associated with 0.18 percent increase in the probability that the respondent has a great deal
of confidence in this institution. Column (2) reports the correlation between past unionization
rate in the home country and the current probability of belonging to a union. The correlation
is also positive and statistically significant at the one percent level. Remarkably enough, past
union density is a main predictor of current unionization behavior, and its eﬀect is one order of
magnitude higher than most other individual characteristics.20
20
Similar results about the influence of the country of origin on beliefs are found in Rice and Feldman (1997)
and many others. See Algan and Cahuc (2006), Fernandez and Fogli (2005), Guiso et al. (2006), Fernandez (2007)
for a presentation of this literature.

33

Table 3 - Line (II) reports the correlation between past regulation of minimum wages by
the state in the country of origin and current unionization behavior in the United States. As
reported in Column (I), that the country of origin had a statutory legal minimum wage in the
early 1950s strongly reduces the probability that the respondent trusts unions.
Table 3: Historical labor market institutions in the home country and current unionization
attitudes of Americans by country of origin. Probit estimates
Confidence in unions (=1)
Union membership (=1)
(1)
(2)
***
Union density
(I)
.248**
.186
in home country 1950
(.057)
( .113)
N
1175
1015
.030
.019
R2
***
-.192
Legal minimum wage (II)
-.447
( .178)
in home country 1950
( .139)
N
928
871
.054
.021
R2
Marginal eﬀects with robust standard error GSS : ***:1%, **: 5%, *: 10
Additional controls: gender, age, education, income category

4.4

Experimentation and the dynamics of beliefs in cooperation

Our model stresses that the historical dependence of current beliefs upon past minimum wage
regulations, runs through a learning process and the resulting updating of beliefs. In this section,
we provide evidence of this updating of beliefs.
To measure the evolution of beliefs across generations, we use information on the waves of
immigration of the respondents. Respondents are asked if they are born in the United States
and how many of their parents and grand-parents were born in the country. The answer to
the question on parents birthplace is scaled at 0 if both parents are born in the US, at 1 if
only the mother is born in the US, and at 2 if only the respondent’s father is born in the
country. The answer on grand-parents birthplace is scaled from 0 to 4 indicating the number
of grandparents born in the US. To get representative samples, we merge the first and second
generations Americans into one group, and the third and fourth generations Americans into
another group.
To assess the beliefs about unions in the home country, we use the respondents’ answers to
the following question from the World Values Survey database (which is quite similar to the
question in GSS database): “Do you have a great deal of confidence, quite a lot of confidence,
not very much confidence or none at all confidence in unions?”. We create a dummy variable

34

equal to one if the respondent answers “a great deal of confidence” or “quite a lot of confidence”,
and to zero otherwise.
Table 4 reports the probit estimates of the probability that Americans do have confidence in
unions. We focus on first and second generation Americans. The coeﬃcients associated with the
country of origin correspond to the marginal probit estimates. To explore further the specific
role of the country of origin in the formation of beliefs, we control for individual characteristics,
including age, age squared, employment status and income category. Americans with Swedish
origins are taken as the reference group. The first result is that the country of origin plays
a statistically significant role on the level of confidence in unions. All the country of origin
dummies are statistically significant at the one percent level. Moreover, the coeﬃcients are
economically sizeable. For instance, the probability that Americans with French origins have
confidence in unions is 10 percent lower than for Americans with Swedish origins.
We then explore the extent to which these beliefs are consistent with those that prevail in
the country of origin and we are interested in their rate of convergence. Figure 8 reports the
correlation between the current level of confidence in unions in the country of origin and the
corresponding level of confidence of the first and second generations Americans originating from
that country. The horizontal axis reports the fraction of individuals who have confidence in
unions in the country of origin, whereas the vertical axis reports the fraction of Americans who
trust unions depending on their country of origin. The figure shows a strongly positive correlation
between these two variables, equal to 0.38, with 20 percent of the variation in Americans’ beliefs
towards unions being associated with diﬀerences in beliefs across countries of origin. Moreover,
the variance in Americans’ beliefs in unions across diﬀerent countries of origin is quite large,
with the share of confidence in unions ranging from 0.05 percent to 0.25 percent.
We then assess the convergence in beliefs by focusing on older waves of immigration. Figure
9 reports on the vertical axis the level of confidence in unions of third and fourth generations
Americans, and on the horizontal axis the level of confidence in the country of origin. In contrast
to Figure 8 above, here the correlation between the beliefs of third and fourth generations
Americans and the beliefs in the corresponding home country is close to zero and no longer
significant. Moreover, the variance in the level of confidence across third and fourth generations
Americans from diﬀerent countries of origin is much lower compared to the first and second
generations Americans, the range of variation now lying in the interval [0.075, 0.145].

35

Confidence in labor unions: 1st-2sd generation Americans
.05
.1
.15
.2
.25

Fin
Swd
Ita
Pt

Aut
Ire
Uk

Ger
Jp

Sp
Cd

R²=0.20

Fra

.2

.3
.4
.5
Confidence in labor unions in the home country

.6

Figure 8: Confidence in unions in the home country and by Americans of first or second generations. Source: WVS 1980-2000, GSS 1977-2004.

36

Confidence in labor unions: 3d-4th generation Americans
.06
.08
.1
.12
.14

R²=0.01

Jp

Cd
Ita

Pt

Ire
Ger

Sp
Uk

Fra
Swd

.2

.3
.4
.5
Confidence in labor unions in the home country

Fin

.6

Figure 9: Confidence in unions in the home country and by Americans of third or fourth generations. Source: WVS 1980-2000, GSS 1977-2004.

37

Table 4: Confidence in unions of 1st and 2sd generation Americans by country of origin. Marginal
eﬀects
Confidence in unions =1
Coeﬀ
Std Error
***
Austria
-.071
(.004)
Canada
-.108***
(.003)
***
(.007)
Finland
-.028
France
-.109***
(.008)
***
Germany
-.091
(.007)
(.004)
Ireland
-.071***
***
Italy
-.043
(.009)
(.013)
Japan
-.088***
***
Portugal
-.068
(.019)
Spain
-.099***
(.012)
Sweden
Reference
United Kingdom
-.089***
(.003)
2
.070
Pseudo-R
Observations
921
Marginal eﬀects with robust standard error. GSS database
Controls: age, age2, education, employment status, income
***:1%, **: 5%, *: 10%

5

Unionization and minimum wage regulation

In this section we document the negative correlation between minimum wage regulation and
union density predicted by the model. We show that this correlation holds in both, crosssectional and panel cross country regressions. We also find the same negative correlation in
cross-US states panel regressions.

5.1

Cross-country correlations

Figure 10 depicts the cross-country correlation between workers’ involvement in unions and the
degree of state regulation of wage floors in OECD countries on average over the period 19802003. We construct the composite index of the extent of state regulation of minimum wages by
combining information on the stringency of the legislation minwage_legislation and information
on the minimum wage levels minwage_level. The global composite index minwage is defined as
the product between the two indexes minwage_legislation and minwage_level.
The vertical axis shows the average union densities by country over that period. Nordic
countries display the highest unionization rates over that period, with a 82 percent rate in
Sweden and a 77 percent rate in Denmark. Countries such as Austria and Germany fall in the

38

middle part of the picture with union density rates at around 40 percent. Anglo-Saxon countries
like United-Kingdom or Canada, belong to the same middle group. And Mediterranean countries
show the lowest unionization rates, with less than 10 % in France or Spain. Note that Italy is a
clear outlier, with a unionization rate close to 40 %.
The horizontal axis shows the composite index minwage index measuring state regulation of
minimum wage. As we can see on the Figure, the correlation between the composite index of
wage regulation and unionization rates is strongly negative. Nordic countries which have very
high unionization rates also display the weakest state regulations. There is no legal minimum
wage in these countries: wage floors are negotiated at industry level, and there is a substantial
amount of dispersion in wage floors across regions, industries, qualifications and ages. The same
picture holds for Continental countries like Austria and Germany, which combine relatively high
union density rates and the absence of statutory minimum wage. In contrast, Mediterranean
countries display the highest level of state intervention to set minimum wages. Countries like
France not only set minimum wages by law but they also limit the scope for derogations and for
direct negotiations by social partners. The one clear exception among Mediterranean countries
is Italy. This country does not have a statutory minimum wage, hence its lower ranking in
terms of our index of state regulation. However, in Italy, wage floors negotiated at the industry
level are automatically extended to other industries. Finally, we see noticeable diﬀerences within
the group of Anglo-Saxon countries. Those with high index of state regulation like the United
States are also characterized by low union densities. In contrast, Great-Britain appears to have
a relatively high union density and a lower index of state regulation, which in turn results both,
from unions being so powerful prior to the 1980s and the fact that wage floors were negotiated
by wage councils before 1993.
We explore this correlation pattern further by running OLS regressions between unionization
rates and our index of state regulation of the minimum wage. To maximize the number of
observations, we run this estimation over three time periods, computing the average of the
composite index respectively over the periods 1980-84, 1990-94 and 2000-2003. We also look at
the correlation between unionization rates and the two sub-indexes which capture respectively
the existence of a legal statutory minimum wage and the degree of dispersion in minimum wages.
We evaluate the correlations between unionization and the two sub-indexes taken separately, and
between unionization and the interaction terms between these sub-indexes and the indicator
measuring the level of minimum wages.
Table 5- Column (1) reports the cross-country estimated correlation between unionization
rates and the extent of state regulation of minimum wage over the period 1980-2003. This
correlation is negative, and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Almost 45 percent of
39

80

R²=0.55

60

Swd
Fin
Dk

Bg

Unionization rate (%)
20
40

Nw

Ire
Cd
Ger

Ita
Uk
Jp

Aut
Czr
Nth

Gre

Pt
Hg
Mx
Usa

Fra

-20

0

PolSp

0

.2
.4
State regulation of minimum wages

.6

Figure 10: Union density and the index of state regulation of minimum wage. The index includes
the stringency of the legislation and of the level of minimum wages. Period 1980-2003. Source:
OECD and ILO.

40

the cross-country variation observed in the state regulation index is associated with diﬀerences
in unionization rates. Table 5- Columns (2)-(5) show that the same negative correlation pattern
holds when we look at the two sub-indexes, or when we combine these sub-indexes with the
level of minimum wage. Overall, this first table suggests a strong negative correlation between
unionization rates and the extent to which the state strictly regulates minimum wage.
Table 5: Cross-country correlation between state regulation of minimum wage and union density:
OECD countries 1980-2003. OLS.
Dependent variable

Unionization rate
R2
Observations

5.2

State regulation of minimum wages
Composite
index
(1)
-.518***
(.083)
.441
58

Legal
(2)

Dispersion
(3)

Legal
*Level
(4)

Dispersion
*Level
(5)

-1.568***
(.156)
.658
58

-.587***
(.134)
.262
58

-.606***
(.099)
.442
58

-.214***
(.099)
.102
58

Time variation

The negative correlation between union density and state regulation of minimum wage also appears to hold over the time period 1980-2003 within countries. Countries which have experienced
the sharpest decline in union densities are also those that have tightened state regulation of wage
floors the most. A striking example is the United Kingdom where wage floors used to be set by
unions before the country embraced a statutory minimum wage in 1999 to oﬀset the decline of
union bargaining power. What happened is that the unionization rate had fallen from 50 % in
1980 to less than 30% in the late 1990’s, in part as a result of Margaret Thatcher’s crackdown
on strikes in 1982. Meanwhile, the political pressure from the workers to get a legal minimum
wage has gained momentum, leading Tony Blair to introduce a statutory minimum wage. Of
course the negative relationship can run both ways. It might be the case that union densities
have mainly increased in countries where statutory minimum wages are absent, like Scandinavian countries, because workers cannot rely on state regulation and have strong incentives to
coordinate themselves to defend their wages. Conversely, the decline in union densities could
have triggered changes in minimum wage legislations.
Table 6 reports the within correlation between the evolution of the composite index of state
regulation of minimum wages and the evolution of union density. We focus on two time periods,
the early 1980s and the early 2000s, to allow for enough time variation. The regressions control
for country fixed eﬀects and linear time trends.

41

Table 6 - Column (1) reports the within correlation between contemporaneous values of
unionization rate and state regulation of minimum wage. A strong negative correlation shows
up, the eﬀect being statistically significant at the one percent level. Table 6 - Column (2) reports
the correlation between the index of state regulation of minimum wage and the lagged value of
union density. When looking at state regulation in the early 1980’s, we use union density in the
early 1970s (1970-74). The estimated coeﬃcient is strongly negative and statistically significant
at one percent level. Lower unions rates during the 70’s are associated with more stringent
minimum wage regulation by the state a decade or two later. This result might account for the
rising political support in favor of an increase in statutory minimum wages in countries where
the bargaining power of unions is declining. This is typically the case of the United States, as
we show below.
Table 6: Time variations in unionization rates and state regulation of minimum wages. OECD
countries: 1980-2003. OLS
Dependent variable

Unionization rate
Unionization rate (-1)
Country fixed eﬀects
Time dummies
Observations

5.3

State regulation of minimum wages
(Composite index)
(1)
(3)
***
-1.089
(.312)
-0.528**
(.262)
***
Yes***
Yes
***
Yes
Yes***
36
36

Evidence from the United States

The United States were the first country to implement a statutory minimum wage after the
enactment of the Fair Labor Standard Act in 1938. As the title of the act makes it clear, the
statutory minimum wage was aimed at oﬀsetting the negative eﬀects of the Great Depression by
granting workers a fair wage guarantee. The historian Jonathan Grossman relates the following
story about the birth of the Fair Act : “While President Franklin Roosevelt was in Bedford,
Mass., campaigning for reelection, a young girl tried to pass him an envelope. But a policeman
threw her back into the crowd. Roosevelt told an aide, "Get the note from the girl." Her note read,
I wish you could do something to help us girls....We have been working in a sewing factory,...
and up to a few months ago we were getting our minimum pay of $11 a week... Today the
200 of us girls have been cut down to $4 and $5 and $6 a week. To a reporter’s question, the
President replied, "Something has to be done about the elimination of child labor and long hours
42

and starvation wages." ” (in Public papers and Addresses, 1936).
Similarly, since the 1990s, partly as a result of workers’ diﬃculty to organize and defend
wages, the United States have experienced a steady rise in minimum wages at the state and
federal levels. The federal minimum wage remained unchanged at $3.35 from 1981 to 1990,
when it was raised up to $3.80. During the eighties, states such as Alaska, Connecticut and
Massachusetts began to set a higher minimum wage and by 1989, 15 states had their minimum
wage higher than the federal one. After the rise in federal minimum wage up to $4.25 in 1991, as
many as 10 states (and DC) began to implement floors above the federal level. A considerable
increase in the federal level up to $5.15 in 1997 reduced the number of states with floors higher
than the federal minimum. From 1997 to July 2007, the federal minimum wage has remained
stable at $5.15. But no less than 32 states began to set their minimum wage above the federal
minimum wage. Since 2007, the Federal government is catching-up by raising the federal level
up to $5.85 in 2007, and it should raise it again up to $7.25 in July 2009.
Figure 11 shows that this evolution pattern of minimum wage is negatively correlated with
the evolution pattern of union density since the 1990s. The horizontal axis shows time diﬀerences
in the evolution of the federal minimum wage, while the vertical axis reports the time diﬀerences
in the evolution of the average unionization rate in the United States. We smooth out short
run fluctuations by taking five year averages in 1990, 1995, 2000, and a three year average for
the period 2005-2007. While average union density has dropped by 50 percent over the whole
period, the federal minimum wage has increased by 50.6 percent over that same period. The
figures presented in Appendix D report the same evolution pattern of minimum wage and union
density at the state levels. It turns out that all states are characterized by a negative correlation
between the evolution of union density and that of the minimum wage. Naturally, this dynamics
could be driven by specific state eﬀects and specific state time trends. We thus explore further
this correlation pattern by running OLS estimates that control for these factors.
Table 7 shows the results from regressing minimum wages over union densities in the crossUS-state panel. In this table, we control for state fixed eﬀects and state specific time trends.
We are thus looking at the within correlation between minimum wage levels and union rates.
The estimates cover the period 1997-2007, when a large bulk of states decided to increase their
minimum wage. Table 7 - Column (1) and (2) report the results for states that had a minimum
wage above the federal level between 1997 and 2007. We see strongly negative coeﬃcients,
which are statistically significant at the one percent level in the specification with state fixed
eﬀects (Column (1)) and at the 5 percent level in the specification including state specific trends
(Column (2)). The coeﬃcients are also economically significant. The first specification suggests
that a 1 dollar increase in the minimum wage is associated with a 12 percent decrease in union
43

6

11.5
11

4.5

5
5.5
Minim wage level ($)

Union density rate (%)
8.5
9
9.5
10 10.5
8

4

7.5
1990

1992

1994

1996

1998 2000
period...

2002

2004

2006

Figure 11: Evolution of the federal minimum wage and the average union rate (private sector)
in the United States.
density. Table 7 - Column (3) - (4) report the estimates for all states, including states which
have sticked to the federal minimum wage level during that period. The correlations between
minimum wage levels and union densities remain negative and statistically significant. But these
coeﬃcients are smaller than in columns (1) and (2) respectively, suggesting that the decrease in
union density has been higher in states which have increased their minimum wages above that
of the federal state.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have argued that in countries with highly cooperative labor relations and high
unionization rates, the state is less prone to regulate the minimum wage. In such countries, there
is no need for a legal minimum wage because social partners negotiate wages directly. Conversely,
in countries with strong state regulation of the minimum wage, incentives for social dialogue
are low and so is union density, as strong state regulation of the minimum wage crowds out
social experimentation and learning about cooperation. This crowding out eﬀect progressively
undermines cooperation and leads economies towards steady-state equilibria with bad labor
44

Table 7: Time variations in union density and wage floors in the United States: 1997-2007.
Dependent variable

Union density
State fixed eﬀects
State specific trends
R2
Observations

Minimum wages
(States with wage floors
higher than the federal one)
(1)
(2)
***
-.038**
-.125
(.017)
(.017)
***
Yes
Yes***
No
.63
430

Yes***
.85
430

Minimum wages
(All States)
(3)
-.120***
(.016)
No

(4)
-.030**
(.016)
Yes***

No
.63
451

Yes***
.88
451

relations and high minimum wage regulations.
This in turn suggests that state regulation of the minimum wage can have long run costs
that have been largely disregarded by the economic literature so far. The importance of the
contrast between Scandinavian countries, which display good labor relations and good labor
market performance on the one hand, and Mediterranean countries with poor labor relations
and poor labor market performance on the other hand, suggests that such costs might actually
be large.
The analysis in this paper raises a broader question concerning the link between regulation
and distrust. Aghion, Algan, Cahuc and Shleifer (2008) investigates this relationship between
trust and regulation in general terms, looking at trust in government, in institutions, in competition, and looking at regulations in diﬀerent markets and activities. The authors show and
rationalize a key puzzle in the relation between regulation and distrust: individuals who distrust
government tends to demand even more regulation. Aghion et al. (2008) also investigate the
role of civil education in explaining the relation between distrust and regulation.

45

References
[1] Acemoglu, A., Aghion, P., Lelarge, C., Van Reenen, J. and Zilibotti, F., 2007, Technology,
Information and the Decentralization of the Firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122,
1759-1800.
[2] Akerlof, G., 1980, A Theory of Social Custom of Which Unemployment May Be One Consequence, Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, 749-775.
[3] Alesina, A and M. Angeletos, M. 2005, Fairness and Redistribution: US vs. Europe, American Economic Review, 95: 913-35.
[4] Aghion, P., Algan, Y., Cahuc, P. and Shleifer, A., 2008, Regulation and Distrust, mimeo
Harvard.
[5] Algan, Y. and Cahuc, P., 2007, Social Attitudes and Economic Development: An Epidemiological Appraoch, Working Paper CEPR.
[6] Algan, Y. and Cahuc, P., 2006, Civic Attitudes and Labor Market Institutions, American
Economic Journal, Forthcoming.
[7] Blanchard, O., and Philippon, T., 2006, The Quality of Labor Relations and Unemployment, MIT Working Paper 2006.
[8] Benabou, R., and Tirole, J., 2006, Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2), 699-746.
[9] Bisin, A, and Verdier, T. 2001, The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the Dynamics
of Preferences,. Journal of Economic Theory, 97, 298-319.
[10] Booth, A., 1985, The Free Rider Problem and a Social Custom Model of Trade Union
Membership, Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 253-261.
[11] Booth, A. and M. Chatterji, 1993, Reputation, Membership and Wages in an Open Shop
Trade Union, Oxford Economic Papers 45, 23-41.
[12] Checchi, D. and Lucifora, C., 2002, Union Density, the Economic Roles of Unions and
Institutions, Economic Policy, vol 17(2), pp. 362-408.
[13] Corneo, G., 1995, Social Custom, Management Opposition and Trade Union Membership,
European Economic Review 39, 275-292.

46

[14] Crouch, C., 1993, Industrial Relations and European State Traditions. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
[15] Fernandez, R., 2007, Culture and Economics, New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd
edition, edited by Durlauf, S. and Blume, L., Palgrave Macmillan (Basingstoke and New
York)
[16] Fernandez, R. and Fogli, A., 2005, Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
and Fertility, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Research Department Staﬀ Report 361.
[17] Freeman, R. and Medoﬀ, J. 1984, What Do Unions Do?, New-York, Basic book.
[18] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L., 2004, The Role of Social Capital in Financial
Development, American Economic Review, vol 94(3), pp. 526-556.
[19] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L., 2006, Does Culture Aﬀect Economic Outcomes?,
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 23-48.
[20] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L., 2007a, Long term persistence, Working Paper
University of Chicago. .
[21] Guiso, L., Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L., 2007b, Social Capital as Good Culture, forthcoming, Journal of the European Economic Association.
[22] Hirshman, O., 1970, Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States, Harvard University Press,
[23] Immervoll, H., 2007, Minimum Wages, Minimum Labour Costs and the Tax Treatment
of Low-wage Employment, OECD Social Employment and Migration Working Papers 46,
OECD Directorate for Employment, Labour and Social Aﬀairs.
[24] Knack, S. and Keefer, P., 1997, Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoﬀ, A CrossCountry Comparison, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.112, pp. 1251-1288.
[25] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silvanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R., 1997, Trust in Large
Organizations, American Economic Review, vol 87, pp. 333-38.
[26] Lindbeck, A., and Nyberg, S., 2006, Raising Children to Work Hard: Altruism, Work
Norms, and Social Insurance, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 121(4), pages 14731503,

47

[27] Lindbeck, A., Nyberg S., Weibull, J.W., 1999. Social Norms and Economic Incentives in
the Welfare State, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 1-35.
[28] Naylor, R., 1989, Strikes, Free Riders, and Social Customs, Quarterly Journal of Economics
104, 771-785.
[29] Naylor, R. and M. Cripps, 1993, An Economic Theory of the Open Shop Trade Union,
European Economic Review 37, 1599-1620.
[30] Naylor, R. and Raaum, O., 1993, The Open Shop Union, Wages and Management Opposition, Oxford Economic Papers 45, 589-604.
[31] Neumark, D. and Wascher, W., 2004, Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions and
Youth Employment: A Cross-Sectional Analysis, Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
vol. 57(2), 223-248.
[32] Nickell, S, Nunziata, L., Ochel, W. and Glenda Q., 2001, The Beveridge curve, Unemployment and Wages in OECD from the 1960s to the 1990s, LSE working paper n◦ 0502.
[33] Ostrom, E., 2005, Policies That Crowd Out Reciprocity and Collective Action, in Gintis,
H., Bowles, S., Boyd, R., Fehr, E., (eds), Moral Sentiments and Material Interests, MIT
Press, chapter 9, pp. 253-275.
[34] Persson, T. and Tabellini, G., 2000, Political Economics, MIT Press.
[35] Piketty, T., 1995, Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 551-584.
[36] Putnam, R., 1993, Making Democracy Work, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[37] Putnam, R., 2000, Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community.
New York: Simon and Schuster.
[38] Rice, T., and Feldman, J., 1997, Civic Culture and Democracy from Europe to America,
Journal of Politics, pp. 1143-72.
[39] Tabellini, G., 2005, Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of
Europe, IGIER working paper n◦ 292.
[40] Tabellini, G., 2007a, Institutions and Culture, Presidential lecture at the meeting of the
European Economic Association, Budapest.

48

[41] Tabellini, G., 2007b, The Scope of Cooperation: Norms and Incentives, mimeo, IGIER.
[42] Tocqueville, A., 1835, Democracy in America, Penguin Classics edition 2003.

49

A

Appendix A: Typology of short run equilibria in the (qt , w̄t )
plane

Let us assume that qt = Pr [e = c|ht (n, s)] and w̄t are exogenous.
From equations (2) and (4), we know that the measure of unionized workers is positive if and only if
1 − w̄t −
1 − w̄t −

c
ε

>0

c
qt (1−2ε)+ε

>0

when it = 0,
when it = I.

(A1)

From equation (6) we know that there is investment in labor relations if and only if

∆(w̄t , qt ) > I.

(A2)

Since function ∆ is decreasing with w̄ and increasing with q, condition (A2) defines an area in the
(qt , w̄t ) plane whose frontier is upward sloping. There is positive investment for values of (w̄t , qt ) above
the frontier and no investment for values of (w̄t , qt ) below the frontier.
For values of (w̄t , qt ) below the frontier, there is zero investment and condition (A1) implies that the
measure of unionized workers is positive if and only if w̄t > 1 − εc .
For values of (w̄t , qt ) above the frontier, there is positive investment and (A1) implies that the measure
of unionized workers is positive if and only if w̄t > 1 −
∆(1 −

c
qt (1−2ε)+ε

. Since it turns out that

c
, qt ) = 0,
qt (1 − 2ε) + ε

union density is necessarily positive for values of (w̄t , qt ) compatible with positive investment.

B

Appendix B: Investment in cooperation and the quality of
labor relations

This section documents on the relationship between unions’ investment in cooperation and the quality
of labor relations. The model predicts a strongly positive correlation between the two. We measure the
investment in cooperation by using two main indicators. The first indicator is the degree of workplace
presence of unions. The workplace appears indeed to be the main location for service provision to union
members and for providing protection and support during the negotiation with management. Strong
workplace representation thus directly aﬀects the benefits from union membership and also the extent to
which voice and cooperation prevail over exit in labor relations. We measure the workplace presence of
unions by using the indicator of Checchi and Lucifora (2002) for the 1990s. The indicator ranges from
0 to 1, with a higher score suggesting a higher representation of unions in all workplaces. The second
indicator of investment in cooperation is the degree to which unions try to coordinate and centralize

50

their decisions. We expect that beliefs in cooperation and union membership are higher wherever unions
have been able to create and defend centralized institutions of collective bargaining with employers. We
measure this using the coordination index of Checchi and Lucifora (2002) for the 1990s. The index
combines information about the degree of centralization in wage bargaining and wage coordination across
the main workers unions, on a quinquennial base. The indicator include two vertical and horizontal
dimensions in negotiations. The vertical dimension captures how bargaining is divided between diﬀerent
levels (national, industry, firm) within a union confederation. The horizontal dimension captures the
number of union confederations. The index is ranked between 0 and 1, a higher score indicating a greater
level of centralization/coordination. According to this criteria, France has a low score because workers
union confederations are highly divided and enterprise bargaining has greater importance than sectorial
and national bargaining. In contrast, Nordic countries have a much greater score. This is not necessarily
due to more centralization, since a trend towards decentralization has occurred in these countries since
the eighties. But the degree of coordination between unions confederations is much greater compared to
other countries.
Figure 12 reports the correlation between the indicator of workplace presence of unions and the
perceived quality of labor relations measured by the Global Competitiveness Reports 1999. Figure 13
reports the same correlation pattern between the quality of labor relations and the degree of coordination
and centralization of negotiations between trade unions. In both cases, steady positive correlations show
up, suggesting that the quality of labor cooperation is strongly associated with investment in cooperation
by unions. Approximately 40-50 percent of the cross-country heterogeneity in the quality of labor relations
could be associated with diﬀerences in the unions’ eﬀorts to be present in firms locally and to coordinate
and centralize negotiations nationally.

C

Appendix C: Minimum wage regulations in OECD countries

The data on minimum wages come from the OECD database and Neumark and Wascher (2004) for the
levels, and from the International Labor Organization (ILO) for the legislation.
• Minimum wage legislations
The legislation diﬀers mainly depending on the existence of a legal statutory minimum wages, and
the dispersion of minimum wages. These distinctions are documented below.
1. Method of setting
We first measure the extent to which minimum wages are directly set by law or by collectively agreed
minimum wages negotiated between social partners. Column 2 of table 8 indicates whether wage

51

1

Nw Swd
Dk

R²=0.41

Workplace presence of unions
.4
.6
.8

Fin
Bg

Uk
Aut
Ita
Ger
Ire

Sp

.2

Fra

3

4

5
Cooperative Labor Relations

6

7

Figure 12: Correlation between the workplace presence of unions and the quality of labor relations. Sources: Checchi and Lucifora (2002) and CGR (1999).

52

Centralization and coordination of negotiations
3
4
5

Aut

R²=0.54

Nw
Swd
Bg
Ger
Fin

Dk
Nth

Ire
Ita

2

Fra
Uk

3

4

5
Cooperative Labor Relations

6

7

Figure 13: Correlation between the centralization and coordination of negotiation and the quality
of labor relations. Sources: Checchi and Lucifora (2002) and CGR (1999).

53

floors are set by statutory rules defined by the law or by collective negotiation. Column 3 of table
8 indicates the coverage of the minimum wage. This coverage is equal to one when the minimum
wage is set by law. However, it can be smaller than one when there is no statutory minimum wage.
In some countries the wage floor is negotiated at the sectorial level, but it is automatically extended
in other countries. As a matter of fact, the coverage rates of collectively agreed minimum wage
reach 70 percent in Norway, 80 percent in Sweden 81 percent in Denmark while they are equal
to 99 percent in Austria and Italy. Eventually, almost all Anglo-Saxon countries have a statutory
minimum wage. The United States recognized a statutory wage floor in 1938 by the Fair Act while
United Kingdom established a national minimum wage in 1999 after having abolished the system
of Wage Councils in 1993.

Table 8: Method of wage setting. Source: ILO.
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Czr
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hg
Italy
Japan
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
Uk
Usa

Determination
Statutory, Provincial level
Negotiation, National extension
Negotiation, National level
Statutory, Federal and provincial levels
Statutory, National level
Negotiation, Industry level
Negotiation, Industry level
Statutory, National level
Negotiation, National extension
Statutory, National level
Statutory, National level
Negotiation, National extension
Statutory, Prefectures
Statutory, National
Statutory, National
Negotiation, Industry level
Statutory, National
Statutory, National
Statutory, National
Negotiation, Industry level
Statutory, National
Negotiation, industries, Statutory, 1999
Statutory, Federal, States

Coverage
1
.9
1
1
1
0.8-0.9
0.9
1
0.9
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2. Variation in wage floors
Wage floors can vary in five main dimensions: age, qualification, regions, sectors and occupations.
Tables 9 indicates whether the minimum wage is set at the national level. It shows that most

54

countries with a statutory minimum wage opt to set a single wage at the national level. Exceptions
are Canada and the United States which sets minimum wages at both the federal and the regional
level. In the United States, some States, mainly in the South, do not implement the Federal law
and others set the minimum wage above the federal floor. In Canada, each province sets its own
minimum wage, leading to a wide gap in statutory minimum wages. In Japan, the minimum wage
is set at the prefecture level, with some diﬀerent wages for diﬀerent industries in a given prefecture.
Mexico lies in between, the minimum wage being set at the regional level, but with only three
broad regions and a quite narrow gap between diﬀerent regional levels.
We also report the potential existence of sub-minimum rates for young workers and trainees. Such
sub-minimum rates are quite common in OECD countries since they concern around half of them.
Countries which exclude such provisions are: Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Japan and Mexico.
But significant diﬀerences exist among countries authorizing sub-minimum wage provisions. The
first diﬀerence lies in the range of ages covered by the provision. Basically provisions would extend
until 24 years old in Sweden or 22 years in Netherlands while such reductions are permitted only
for workers younger than 17 years in France and 18 years in Ireland. The second diﬀerence is the
extent of reductions. United-Kingdom stands as a polar case with no minimum wage for people
younger than 21 years. The Netherlands accepts a reduction up to 40 percent of standard minimum
wage at 17 years old while the wage floor is set at 80 percent of the standard minim wage in France
or Spain for this age.

• Minimum wage levels
The level of the minimum wages measured by the OECD refers in general to a full-time workers in
the industry. The data for countries without statutory minimum wage floors correspond to the same
definition, borrowed from Neumark and Wascher (2004).
Australia
The federal minimum weekly wage divided by the median gross weekly earnings of full-time workers. Prior to 1997, the federal minimum is extrapolated based on Metal Industry Award C14 wages and
National Wage Case decisions. Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: An independent Commission (Australian Industrial Relations Commission or AIRC) is responsible for setting
the federal minimum wage via an annual Safety Net Review. Although some state-level legislation also
exists, the federal minimum wage is applicable to the majority of Australian workers. Other provisions:

55

Table 9: Variations in wage-setting. Source: ILO.
Australia
Austria

Variations by:
Industries,Regions, Occupation, Age
Industries, Occupation, Age

Belgium

Age

Canada
Czr
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Hg
Italy
Japan
Mexico

Industries, regions,occupations
Occupation
Industry, Age
Industries, Age, Occupations
Age
Region, Age, Qualifications
Age, Marital status, Qualifications
No
Industry, Age
Industry, Age, Occupation
No

Netherlands

Age

Norway
Poland
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Turkey
Uk
Usa

Industry, age, Occupation
No
Age
Age
Industry,Age, Occupation
Age
Industry,Age
Age, Job tenure

56

Subminimum (Age limits, % of standard minimum wage)
No
20:94%, 19: 88%, 18: 82%
17: 76%, <17: 70%
No
No
<18: 40%
No
17: 90%, <17: 80%
Trainees
No
No
Trainees
No
No
22: 85%, 21: 72,5%, 20: 61,5%, 19: 52,5%,
18: 45,5%, 17: 39,5%, 16:34,5%, 15: 30%
No
No
<18: 75%
<18: 89%, suppressed in1998
<24: 89%
<16: 85%
<21: 0%, Change in 1999
No

Legal wage floor or extention of negociated wage floor
.2
.4
.6
.8
1
0
Usa Tk Sp

Pt Pol Nth Mx Jp

Ire

Hg Gre Fra Czr Cd Aus Uk

Ita Ger Bg Aut Swd Nw Fin Dk

Figure 14:
Minimum wages may diﬀer by industry and occupation if the AIRC approves applications to vary minimum award rates from the federal level. There is also a youth subminimum, with rates ranging from 40
percent to 85 percent of the adult minimum depending on age.
Belgium
The minimum monthly wage for workers aged 21 and over divided by the median gross monthly
earnings of full-time workers. Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The privatesector minimum wage (Revenue Minimum Mensuel Moyen Garanti) is set via a biennial national collective
bargaining agreement between social partners (employers and unions) within the Conseil National du
Travail. This minimum wage is then made mandatory for the entire private sector by royal decree.
Between collective bargaining agreements, the minimum wage is indexed to the consumer price index,
with a formula that adjusts up the minimum two months following a cumulative 2 percent increase in
the CPI. Other provisions: The laws provide for a subminimum wage for employees less than 21 years of
age. This subminimum wage is 70 percent of the adult minimum for employees aged 16 or under, with
the proportion rising by 6 percentage points for each extra year of age.
Canada
Weighted average of provincial hourly minimum wage levels (weighted by the size of the labor force
in each province) divided by median gross hourly earnings of full-time workers. Source: OECD Minimum
Wage Database. Method of setting: Minimum wages are set separately in each province and territory

57

either by minimum wage boards or by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. Other provisions: In most
provinces, a single minimum wage applies to workers aged 16 and over. An exception is Ontario, which
allows a slightly lower minimum wage rate to be paid to students under 18 years of age.
Denmark
The average hourly minimum wage divided by an average hourly wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996).
Method of setting: There is no legally-mandated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum hourly wage
rates are set via centralized industry-level collective bargaining agreements, which may be supplemented
by agreements at the plant level. Other provisions: Minimum wages may vary considerably at the industry
level. In addition, workers under 18 years of age are generally subject to a lower minimum wage.
Finland
Average monthly minimum wage divided by an average monthly wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996).
Method of setting: There is no legislated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage rates are set
via centralized industry-level collective bargaining agreements. The law requires all employers (including
non-union employers) to pay the minimum rates contained in these collective bargaining agreements.
Other provisions: Minimum wages may vary considerably at the industry level.
France
Gross annual equivalent of the annual minimum wage divided by median gross annual earnings of
full-time workers in the private and semi-private sector. Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database.
Method of setting: The minimum wage (Salaire Minimum Interprofessional de Croissance, or SMIC) is
set by the government. Administrative procedures are used to adjust the SMIC each July to reflect both
consumer price increases and real wage increases in the hourly wages of manual workers. In addition, the
government has sometimes enacted additional increases in the minimum wage. Other provisions: Limited
youth subminimum wage rates are applicable to workers under the age of 18. Specifically, workers aged
16 can be paid 80 percent of the adult minimum, while workers aged 17 can be paid 90 percent of the
adult minimum for six months.
Germany
Average monthly minimum wage divided by an average monthly wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996).
Method of setting: There is no legislated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage rates are
set via industry-specific collective bargaining agreements. These agreements can be extended to all
employers in the industry if the workforce of the employers directly aﬀected by the agreement comprises
at least 50 percent of the total workforce in that industry. In addition, the government may call for a
Hauptausschuβ commission (consisting of the government, employers, and employees) to set minimum
wage levels in industries where unions represent only a minority of employees. Other provisions: Minimum

58

wages may vary considerably at the industry level. Some industry agreements include youth subminimum
wage rates.
Greece
Minimum daily wage for an unqualified single worker with no work experience (converted to an hourly
rate by assuming an 8 hour work day) divided by the mean hourly wage in manufacturing. Source: OECD
Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The national minimum wage level is negotiated annually
by representatives of the General Confederation of Greek Workers and the main employer organizations
(facilitated by arbitration if necessary). The negotiated level is routinely ratified by the Ministry of Labor
and is applicable to all workers. Other provisions: The minimum wage varies slightly by tenure and by
marital status.
Ireland
Minimum gross hourly wage divided by median weekly earnings of full-time employees (converted to
an hourly rate). Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The government enacted a
national minimum wage in April 2000. This minimum wage is reviewed annually by the independent Low
Pay Commission, which then recommends an increase for consideration by the government. Prior to that
legislation, statutory minimum wages were set by Joint Labour Committees in a limited number of lowwage industries. These Labour Committees consisted of equal numbers of representatives of employers
and workers appointed by the Labour Court and a chairman appointed by the Minister for Enterprise,
Trade, and Employment. Other provisions: Under current law, workers under the age of 18 can be paid
70 percent of the adult minimum wage.
Italy
Average minimum monthly wage divided by an average wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996). Method
of setting: There is no legislated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage rates typically are set
via industry-specific national collective bargaining agreements, which then are applicable to all workers
in the industry. Other provisions: Minimum wages may vary considerably at the industry level. Some
industry agreements include youth subminimum wage rates. Japan Definition of minimum wage variable:
Weighted average of prefectural hourly minimum wage levels (weighted by the size of the labor force in
each prefect) divided by median gross monthly earnings (converted to hourly basis using average monthly
hours worked). Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database.
Netherlands
Minimum weekly earnings for persons aged 23 to 64 divided by median gross annual earnings of
full-time employees (divided by 52). Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The
minimum wage (Minimumloon) is set by law and is normally updated in January and July of each year

59

based on the average increase in wages negotiated in the private sector. The government may choose to
suspend or alter the increase if the unemployment rate is above a certain level. Other provisions: The
laws provide for a subminimum wage for employees less than 23 years of age. This subminimum wage
ranges from 85% of the adult minimum for employees aged 22 to 30 percent for those less than 17.
Norway
Average minimum hourly wage divided by an average wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996).
Method of setting: There is no legislated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage rates typically are set via industry-specific national collective bargaining agreements, which can then be extended
to cover all workers in the industry. Other provisions: Minimum wages may vary considerably at the
industry level.
Portugal
Minimum monthly wage for nonagricultural workers aged 20 and over divided by median gross annual
earnings of full-time workers (divided by 12). Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The minimum wage (Salário Minimo Nacional) is set annually by the government after consultation
with the Permanent Commission for Social Cooperation. Other provisions: Under current law, workers
under the age of 18 can be paid 75% of the adult minimum wage. Prior to 1987, workers aged 18 and 19
were also eligible for subminimum wage rates.
Spain
Minimum monthly wage for workers aged 18 and over divided by median gross annual earnings of
full-time workers (divided by 12). Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Method of setting: The
minimum wage (Salario Minimo Interprofesional) is set annually by government decree, with the amount
of any increase determined by the Council of Ministers. Other provisions: Under current law, all workers
aged 16 and over are subject to the adult minimum wage. Prior to 1999, workers under the age of 18
could be paid less than the adult minimum wage.
Sweden
The average hourly minimum wage divided by an average hourly wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996).
Method of setting: There is no legislated national minimum wage. Instead, minimum wage rates typically
are set via industry-specific national collective bargaining agreements, which then are applicable to all
workers in the industry. Other provisions: Private sector agreements typically specify separate minimum
wage rates for adult workers (ages 24 and above) and youths.
United Kingdom
Beginning in 1999, national hourly minimum wage divided by median hourly earnings of full-time
adult employees. Source: OECD Minimum Wage Database. Prior to 1993, the average minimum wage

60

in Wages Council sectors divided by an average wage. Source: Dolado, et al. (1996). There was no
minimum wage from August 1993 through March 1999. Method of setting: Under current law, minimum
wage levels are reviewed regularly based on recommendations from the independent Low Pay Commission.
Prior to 1993, minimum wages were set in 25 certain industries by Wage Councils, which were originally
set up to protect low-wage workers who were not covered by collective bargaining agreements. Other
provisions: Under current law, workers aged 18 to 21 may be paid about 85 percent of the current adult
minimum wage; workers under age 18 are exempt from the minimum wage. Prior to 1993, minimum
wage rates diﬀered substantially by industry, age, and region. Beginning in 1986, all workers under age
21 were exempt from minimum wage laws.
United States
Federal minimum hourly wage divided by median usual weekly earnings of full-time employees (converted to an hourly rate by assuming a 40 hour full-time workweek). Source: OECD Minimum Wage
Database. Method of setting: The national minimum wage level is set by the government and can only
be updated by legislative action. Other provisions: States have the ability to set a minimum wage above
the federal level. Subminimum wage rates may be paid to selected full-time students and newly-hired
youths (for 90 days).

61

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
4.5 5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

7

1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...

62
U nio n de nsi ty (% )
4.5
5
5.5

6

4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .4 5 .6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

4

7

6.5

7 .5

4 .5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
8 8.5
9 9.5

5
5 .5
6
6 .5
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

7.5

7

5 5.5 6 6.5 7
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

4.5

4

7

10

7.5

4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
4 4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8

6.5

5

4

9

4

6.5

4 .5

5 5 .5 6 6 .5 7
Min im wa ge l evel ($ )

7 .5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
9.5 10 10 .5 11 11 .5 12 12 .5

4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5 8

4

3 .6 3 .8

Ark ansas

3.5

4.5 5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
5 .5
6
6 .5
7

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
7.5 8 8.5 9 9.5 10 10 .5 11 11 .5 12

4

5

Arizona

4

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
2.4 2.6 2.8 3 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4 4.2

4

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
6 .5 7 7 .5 8 8 .5 9 9 .5 1 01 0.51 11 1.5

D
Appendix D: Minimum wages and union densities in the
United States
California

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

C olorado
Connecticut
D.C .

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

D elaware
Florida
G eorgia

1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
8 .5 9 9 .5 1 0 1 0.5 1 1 1 1.5 1 2

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...

63

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
6.5 7 7.5 8 8.5

7

9

4 .5
5
5 .5
6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

6 .5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
8 8.5 9 9.5 10 10 .5 11

4.5 5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

6

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
8
8 .5
9
9 .5

5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

7 .5

7

10

4 .5

7

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
8 8.5
9 9.5

5
5 .5
6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

7.5

6 .5

10

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

4.5

7

4

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5

5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

7

7

4

4 .5

5 5 .5 6 6 .5 7
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

7 .5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
11 .51212 .51313 .51414 .51515 .516

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

3.5

4.5

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
1 61 6.51 71 7.51 81 8.51 91 9.52 02 0.5

Idaho

4

7.5

4

5.5

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

8

H awaii
Illinois

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

D .C.
Indiana
Iowa

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

Kentuc ky
Maine
Maryland

1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

6.5

4.5
5
5.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

6

1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...

64
4 .5

5
5 .5
6
6 .5
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

7

6

5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
5.5
6
6.5

4.5
5
5.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
7 8
9 10 11

Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

6

7

6

12

4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .4 5 .6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

4.5

4

5

4

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
9 .5 1 0 1 0.5 1 1 1 1.5 1 2 1 2.5 1 3

4.5

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
8 .5
9
9 .5

5 5.5 6 6.5 7
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

8

7.5

10

4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

7

4

4 .5
5
5 .5
6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

6 .5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
9.5 1010 .51111 .51212 .51313 .51414 .5

4

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
1414 .51515 .51616 .51717 .51818 .519

4

7 .5

Michigan

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
11 .512 12 .513 13 .514 14 .515 15 .516

4

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6

4

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
1 2 1 2.5 1 3 1 3.5 1 4 1 4.5 1 5 1 5.5

Massachus etts
Minnesota

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

Missouri
Montana
Nebraska

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

N evada
New Hamphire
New Jersey

1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...

65
3

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
3.5
4
4.5

5 5.5
6
6.5 7
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($ )

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
9
9.5 10 10 .5

5

7.5

11

6.5

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
10 11 12 13 14 15

4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

8.5

9

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
4 .5
5
5 .5

6.5

16

6

6

4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .4 5 .6
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7

4.5
5
5.5
6
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
12 13 14 15

4.5
5
5.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

4

11

3 3.5

4

10

4

3 .5

4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($)

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
16 16 .5 17
17 .5

4.5
5
5.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($)

7

18

6

4

4 .5
5
5 .5
Min im wa ge l evel ($)

6

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3 3.2 3.4 3.6

4

15 .5

4

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .45 .6 5 .8 6 6 .2

New York

4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .4 5 .6
Min im wa ge l evel ($ )

2.5

4.5

8

4

8

N ew Mexico
North Carolina

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

N orth Dakota
Ohio
O klahoma

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

Pennsy lvania
Rhode Island
South Dakota

1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

6

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
6 .5
7
7 .5
8
8 .5

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($ )

5 .5
19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...

W yoming

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...

66

4.5
5
5.5
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($ )

6

17

8

4 .5
5
5 .5
6
Min im wa ge l evel ($ )

6 .5

3

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
3.5
4
4.5
5

5.5

3.5

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
4 4.5 5 5.5 6

6.5

4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8 5 5 .2 5 .4 5 .6
Min im wa ge l evel ($ )

3

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi n im w ag e l evel ($ )

2.5

4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 5.4 5.6
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($ )

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
3 3 .2 3 .4 3 .6 3 .8 4 4 .2 4 .4 4 .6 4 .8

Utah

4

U nio n de nsi ty (% )
10 10 .5 11 11 .5 12 12 .5 13 13 .5 14

4

U nio n de nsi ty (%)
12 13 14 15 16

5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5
Mi ni m w ag e le vel ($ )

10 11

4.5

Un io n de nsi ty (%)
1 21 2.51 31 3.51 41 4.51 51 5.51 61 6.5

T ex as
Virginia

19 90 1 99 2 1 99 4 1 99 6 1 99 8 20 00 2 00 2 2 00 4 2 00 6
p eriod ...
1 990 1 99 2 1 99 4 199 6 1 998 2 000 2 00 2 2 00 4 200 6
per iod...
1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

W as hington
West Virginia
Wis consin

1 99 0 1 99 2 1 99 4 19 96 1 99 8 2 00 0 2 00 2 2 00 4 20 06
pe riod...

