                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             VALUING A HOMELAND SECURITY POLICY:
 COUNTERMEASURES FOR THE THREATS FROM SHOULDER MOUNTED MISSILES

                                           V. Kerry Smith
                                           Carol Mansfield
                                           Laurel Clayton

                                        Working Paper 14325
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14325


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




Thanks are due Barbara Kanninen for assistance with the development of the experimental designs
for the surveys, to Detlof von Winterfeldt and CREATE's Science Advisory Committee for comments
on earlier versions of this research, to Eric Moore for excellent research assistance, and to Richard
Laborin for assistance in preparing several drafts of this manuscript. The research was supported by
the United States Department of Homeland Security through the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis
of Terrorism Events (CREATE) under grant numbers 2007-ST-061-000001 and DE-AC05-76RL01830.
However, any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations in this document are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect views of the United States Department of Homeland Security.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by V. Kerry Smith, Carol Mansfield, and Laurel Clayton. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Valuing a Homeland Security Policy: Countermeasures for the Threats from Shoulder Mounted
Missiles
V. Kerry Smith, Carol Mansfield, and Laurel Clayton
NBER Working Paper No. 14325
September 2008
JEL No. D61,H41,H56

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reports estimates for the ex ante tradeoffs for three specific homeland security policies
that all address a terrorist attack on commercial aircraft with shoulder mounted missiles. Our analysis
focuses on the willingness to pay for anti-missile laser jamming countermeasures mounted on commercial
aircraft compared with two other policies as well as the prospect of remaining with the status quo.
Our findings are based a stated preference conjoint survey conducted in 2006 and administered to
a sample from Knowledge Networks' national internet panel. The estimates range from $100 to $220
annually per household. Von Winterfeldt and O'Sullivan's [2006] analysis of the same laser jamming
plan suggests that the countermeasures would be preferred if economic losses are above $74 billion,
the probability of attack is larger than 0.37 in ten years, and if the cost of the measures is less than
about $14 billion. Our results imply that, using the most conservative of our estimates, a program
with a cost consistent with their thresholds would yield significant aggregate net benefits. More generally,
this research grows out of a need to measure the benefits of an iconic public good -- national defense
-- to assess the economic efficiency of Department of Homeland Security policies.


V. Kerry Smith                                       Laurel Clayton
Department of Economics                              RTI International
W.P. Carey School of Business                        3040 Cornwallis road
P.O. Box 873806                                      Research Triangle Park, N.C. 27709
Arizona State University                             lclayton@rti.org
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
kerry.smith@asu.edu

Carol Mansfield
RTI International
3040 Cornwallis Rd.
PO Box 12194
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709
carolm@rti.org
                                                                                                               1


                      Valuing a Homeland Security Policy:
         Countermeasures for the Threats from Shoulder Mounted Missiles

                         V. Kerry Smith, Carol Mansfield, and Laurel Clayton*


I.      Introduction

        Threats to security have economic consequences. It is impossible to assess the full scope of the

emotional loss to families affected by 9/11. Many people around the world would no doubt suggest they

also experienced tangible losses even though they did not have family or friends who were directly

affected. These losses cannot be measured. But some economic impacts can be measured. Preliminary

ex post assessments of the economic impacts of 9/11, considering health effects (excluding mortality),

damages to structures, ripple effects throughout the economy, and so forth suggest losses in the tens if

not hundreds of billions of dollars. Nonetheless, there remains a potentially larger ex ante effect.

Persistent terrorism risks have the potential to undermine public confidence in any society. Such a loss

of confidence could result in significant changes in how people choose to live their lives and conduct

their daily activities and all that might imply for the economies affected by terrorist threats. Before this

large scale change would occur it is reasonable to expect that governments at all levels, households, and

firms would undertake investments in security. In this country we have experienced a number of

changes in regulations governing private activities. Air travel is certainly a notable example of an activity

that has changed dramatically as a result of new security regulations. In addition people may also alter

other aspects of their own daily activities and re‐evaluate their household budget priorities. In principle,

each of these actions has the potential to raise the transaction costs of daily living. We have little

empirical evidence on the extent of these costs or what people would pay to protect key sectors from

disruption due to terrorism. This paper offers the first empirical evidence on the public’s monetary

support for anti‐terrorism measures.
                                                                                                                         2


         In previous work, some authors measured of the implications of terrorism for the pace and scale

of economic activities. For example, Abadie and Gardeazabal [2003] found that terrorist conflicts had

large effects on the Basque economy, reducing GDP per capita by ten percentage points relative to a

synthetic control region without terrorism. Moreover, the direction of this estimated impact was

confirmed by their evaluation of the stock performance of firms with a stake in this economy using the

1998‐1999 Basque truce as a natural experiment. There have also been a number of other recent

studies confirming both market responses and individual behavioral adjustments to threats of terrorist

actions.1

         Many current homeland security policies focus on ex ante actions that reduce the risk of attacks

or minimize the damage that can take place after particular types of attacks. Ideally, efforts to estimate

the benefits of these policies would consider the ex ante trade‐offs people would make in exchange for

the specific ways in which security would be enhanced. Unfortunately, there appears to be very little

economic research addressing these challenges2. When evaluations of new Department of Homeland

Security (DHS) rules are undertaken (under Executive order 12866) benefits are difficult to quantify.


* W. P. Carey Professor of Economics, Arizona State University, University Fellow Resources for the Future, and
Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research; Senior Economist, RTI International; and Research
Assistant, RTI International, respectively. Thanks are due Barbara Kanninen for assistance with the development of
the experimental designs for the surveys, to Detlof von Winterfeldt and CREATE’s Science Advisory Committee for
comments on earlier versions of this research, to Eric Moore for excellent research assistance, and to Richard
Laborin for assistance in preparing several drafts of this manuscript. The research was supported by the United
States Department of Homeland Security through the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism Events
(CREATE) under grant numbers 2007‐ST‐061‐000001 and DE‐AC05‐76RL01830. However, any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
views of the United States Department of Homeland Security.
1
  For example, Abadie and Dermisi [forthcoming] evaluated whether 9/11 changed the occupancy rates in
commercial buildings around signature structures in Chicago ((i.e. the Sears Tower, the Aon Center, and the
Hancock Center) and found it did have an impact. Zussman et. al. [2008] found that major escalations in violence
in the Israeli‐Palestinian conflict led to declines in asset prices. By contrast, Glaeser and Shapiro use evidence on
wars and cities in the 20th century to document that while wars can have substantial impacts on urban settings in
the short term, they have not significantly altered urban form. Thus, they conclude terrorism is likely to have a
small effect on U.S. cities.
2
  A notable exception is Viscusi and Zeckhauser’s [2005] early survey of law students to assess their willingness to
relinquish civil liberties for domestic security. In addition Sandler et al [2007] report a detailed benefit cost analysis
of terrorism policy using measures of the value of a statistical life, estimates for the value of disability adjusted life
years and GDP effects to measure benefits.
                                                                                                           3


Most studies focus on ex post estimates of damages. While there are certainly a number of features of

homeland security policies that make them difficult to evaluate, one motivation for the research we

report here is to gauge whether people are able to assess the resource commitments they would make

for policy alternatives involving terrorist related actions. In addition to assuming people can make these

choices we also hypothesize that individuals recognize there is uncertainty about whether the policies

will actually be needed and whether they will be effective.

        This paper reports estimates for the ex ante tradeoffs for three specific homeland security

policies that all address a common threat ‐‐ a terrorist attack on commercial aircraft with shoulder

mounted missiles (i.e. Man Portable Air Defense Systems or MANPADS) . Our example focuses on the

willingness to pay for anti‐missile laser jamming countermeasures mounted on commercial aircraft

compared with two other policies as well as the prospect of remaining with the status quo. Our findings,

based a SP conjoint survey conducted in 2006 and administered to a sample from Knowledge Networks’

national internet panel, indicate a statistically significant annual willingness to pay of $222 per

household for a program with laser jamming countermeasures. The results also suggest robust support

for this program that is larger for higher income households and is maintained regardless of whether an

increased gasoline tax or income tax is used as the payment vehicle described for the program. Other

cross checks of our survey indicate frequent fliers have greater support for some actions and that those

who do not support the program feel the threat is not serious.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the rationale for these counter measures

and outlines a simple choice model for the laser jamming missile defense system and two other

programs to protect commercial aircraft from MANPADS. Section III discusses the stated choice conjoint

questions, the details associated with implementing the survey, and the characteristics of the sample.

The findings are presented in Section IV and the last section summarizes the results and comments on
                                                                                                                     4


the relevance of these types of studies for the evaluation of DHS rules as part of the benefit‐cost

analyses required for major rules.



II.     Problem Context and Choice Model

A. Problem Context

        National defense has served for over fifty years of public economics and public finance as a

signature example of a pure public good. Over thirty years ago, Samuelson [1976] used the example in

the tenth edition of his text. His description would aptly fit the case of homeland security today:

        “Nothing is more vital to a threatened society than its security. But national defense,
        regarded as a commodity, differs completely from the case of a private commodity like
        bread…national defense has to be provided more or less automatically for all” (p. 159).

        While few would debate the public good status of national defense or homeland security, most

analysts would also argue that the very features that convey this pure public status also make it difficult

to describe and quantify “amounts” of national defense. As a result, there have been few efforts to

measure citizen’s willingness to pay for more national defense. Indeed, early writers in benefit‐cost

methods suggested the same was true for most public goods, concluding that policy decisions had to be

derived from a political process.3

        The experience with stated preference (or SP) methods applied to estimate the economic

tradeoffs people would make for policies that improve environmental resources, particularly over the

past eighteen years, has provided direct evidence that we can measure the value of some public goods.4

There is now a broader acceptance that SP methods, designed using documented protocols for



3
  Eckstein’s [1961] early and classic treatise on benefit cost methods for water investments noted that efforts to
estimate economic values for the public and non‐market private goods provided by these projects would
ultimately discredit the methodology. See Smith [1996] for further discussion.
4
  This conclusion is not uniformly shared by economists in general. Despite considerable progress in SP methods,
many economists continue to cite Diamond and Hausman’s [1994] critical judgment on the plausibility of
contingent valuation. See Carson and Hanemann [2005] for a more up‐to‐date summary by authors who have
been favorable in their assessments of SP methods.
                                                                                                                     5


questionnaire design, can measure the public’s willingness to pay for a change in the quantity or quality

of many different types of public goods5. A key ingredient for the success of SP strategies has been the

use of specific plans to improve or avoid declines in the quality or amounts of the environmental

services being studied.6 We adopt this same strategy for our evaluation of people’s willingness to pay

for homeland security. As discussed in the introduction, efforts to estimate economic tradeoffs people

would make for the outcomes of DHS policies (“improved security”) independent of the plan for

achieving the improved security are unlikely to provide reliable measure of the policy’s benefits as

measured by aggregate willingness to pay. Our survey describes specific plans to protect commercial

aircraft and, as a result, the tradeoffs we measure from the SP conjoint survey relate to these specific

plans, not improvements in homeland security in general. This specificity is essential to making the

objects of choice salient and to convincing respondents that their stated choices will be consequential

(Landry and List [2006]).

B.       Modeling the Choice of Homeland Security Plans

         In January 2008, DHS announced it would spend $29 million on tests of an anti‐missile laser

jamming system for commercial airliners with three American Airlines Boeing 767‐200s that fly daily

round trips between New York and California.7 The threat of attacks from such systems has been widely

acknowledged since at least 2001 with estimates of 4,000 to 5,000 heat‐seeking missiles accessible to

anti‐Western terrorist organizations (Bolkom and Ellias [2006]).

         While the threat of an attack on a commercial airline is real, the probability a typical person,

even a frequent air traveler, would be involved in a terrorist attack is extremely small with or without

5
  As with revealed preference methods there are no guarantees that SP methods will always work. Instead what
the literature has focused on is a series of robustness checks to identify strategies that are likely to be unreliable.
See Smith [2007] for further discussion.
6
  A key distinction in the work since the Exxon Valdez SP assessment undertaken in 1991 and published much later
in Carson et. al. [2003] has been the use of specific plans describing how changes in non‐market resources would
be undertaken. See Smith [1997] for a discussion of the implications of the use of plans for the interpretation of SP
estimates of economic tradeoffs. This strategy does not as a rule attempt to measure the amount of the non‐
market good that is delivered by the plan involved.
7
  See Hall [2008] for a newspaper account summarizing the pilot program.
                                                                                                                6


public countermeasures (see Becker and Rubenstein [2004] for a similar argument about terrorist

activities in Israel). What is at issue is protecting the commercial airline system as a key part of the U.S.

transportation infrastructure and maintaining public confidence in the airline system. The importance

of this protection has been documented in several studies conducted after 9/11. Balvanyos and Lave

[2005] estimated the consumer surplus loss from an air travel shutdown at as much as $2 billion per day.

Alternative estimates of the economic impact of shutdown using input‐output analysis range from $14.2

to $43 billion for a year (Santos and Haimes [2004]) to $214 to $420 billion for a seven day shutdown of

the entire U.S. commercial air transportation system followed by a two year recovery (Gordon et al

[2007])8.

           To estimate the public’s willingness to pay to reduce the probability of a successful missile

attack and the associated economic and social disruption, we designed a conjoint survey (also known as

a discrete choice experiment). An SP conjoint survey is a systematic, survey‐based, method for

measuring individuals’ tradeoffs. The conjoint method is based on the hedonic principle that goods and

services are composed of a set of features or attributes and that the utility obtained from a particular

good is a function of these attributes. Conjoint questions elicit respondents’ choices among a finite set

of alternatives (see Kaninnen [2007] or Hensher, Rose, and Greene [2005] for a description of conjoint

analysis). Conjoint data yield quantitative estimates of the marginal rates of substitution among

attributes.

           The conjoint survey presented survey respondents with security plans to protect commercial

aircraft that have different features and costs, described in Section III. In our application, each choice

question presented respondents with two plans and a “no‐plan” status quo or baseline option. Each

respondent answered two choice questions, which are described as two independent situations. The

structure yields a panel with answers to two choices for each respondent consistent with a random


8
    The Santos and Haimes analysis involved a 10% shutdown of the US air transport system over a year.
                                                                                                                  7


utility model (RUM). The respondents’ decisions can be described with a random utility model as given

in equation (1).

Vij = v( y i − c ij , A j , A j ⋅ Z i ) + ε ij   (1)

Vij designates the utility individual i realizes from selecting plan j; yi designates income from individual i;

cij corresponds to the cost presented to individual i for plan j; A j represents a vector of attributes for

plan j, including alternative specific constants; Z j designates characteristics of each respondent that are

hypothesized to influence choices; and ε ij is assumed to be i.i.d. and follow a type I extreme value

distribution. Conventional practice assumes the error reflects unobserved heterogeneity in the

preferences of the respondents to these surveys from the analyst’s perspective.

          Before turning to the interpretation of the estimates, a few clarifications and additional details

should be noted. In linear models, characteristics that do not vary across choice alternatives such as

income and individual characteristics do not enter the estimating equation. In one model specification

we allow for differences in responses that might arise due to the income level by allowing the coefficient

on cij to vary discretely with income. A second issue concerns the way that observable features of

respondents are tested as potential determinants of their choices. The product A j ⋅ Z i is a short hand

for specifications that include respondent attributes interacted with alternative specific constants for

the plans. For a respondent’s characteristics to be included in simple RUM models they must be

interacted with attributes of the choice alternatives or with an alternative specific constant.



III.      Form of the Stated Choice Airline Security Survey

A.        Structure of Questions

          There are four important aspects of the design of a conjoint question for estimating economic

tradeoffs: (a) the presentation of the problem context and baseline conditions; (b) the description of
                                                                                                            8


the plans to address the problem and their attributes; (c) the experimental design describing both the

variation in attributes across choice alternatives and the choice sets presented to each respondent; and

(d) the specification of a credible choice mechanism and payment vehicle. We discuss each in turn.

        The survey introduces the choice context by describing the threats to the commercial airline

system from shoulder mounted missiles and emphasizing the impact on the economy for a successful

attack. We characterize the potential impact on the economy (or preventing an impact on the economy)

as a public good. The background discussion also assures respondents that the risks to each traveler are

very small regardless of the plan. Figure 1 contains the background text. After that material the

questionnaire introduces the conjoint questions by describing security plans that respond to the threat.

Figure 1b presents the key elements of each of three plans. The plans are: (1) an anti‐missile laser‐

jamming diversion system for heat seeking missiles that is installed on commercial aircraft; (2)

equipment to prevent fuel tank fires and new training for pilots to increase the prospects for a safe

landing in the event of a missile attack; and (3) new patrols around the twenty largest airports to reduce

terrorist access to areas where missiles could be launched.

        Each plan is described in one‐half to three‐quarters of a screen, along with the summary given in

Figure 2 as well as the summaries provided with the choice questions. Figure 3 reproduces one of the

actual choice questions. Each screen includes a choice between two of the three plans or the “no plan”

status quo alternative (the opt‐out alternative). In the choice questions, two other attributes also vary

across plans—the proposed cost and an increase in the time a passenger can expect to spend waiting in

line as part of airport screening. The three levels for the waiting time attribute are a 10, 22 and 35

minute increase in waiting time (in addition to current waiting times). Waiting time is not linked to the

plans but is described as follows in the survey: “As the number of air passengers returns to normal

levels, people who travel on airplanes may have to wait longer in security lines to maintain the current

level of protection against the threat of hijacking.” Later, before answering the questions, the
                                                                                                                  9


respondents were reminded that “The amount of time passengers have to wait in line does NOT affect

the level of airplane security from missile attacks; screening is necessary to protect from hijacking

threats so the increased waiting time only affects the convenience of air travel for passengers.” This

question allows us to evaluate whether respondents who are frequent fliers noticed these distinctions

as a cross check of the overall survey results.9

         The cost of the plan was described in the text before the conjoint questions as a “transportation

security fee”. The fee was presented two different ways to randomly assigned sub‐samples. Half of the

respondents received a questionnaire in which the fee was described as an addition to the respondent’s

federal income taxes. The additional tax varied over four values‐‐$8, $15, $50, and $120. The other half

of the sample received a gasoline tax version in which the fee was added to the cost of a gallon of

gasoline. At the outset of the survey respondents were asked the number of vehicles they owned and

their typical weekly gasoline expenditures. These responses were used together with a percentage

increase in weekly gasoline expenditures to define the estimated cost they would experience. The

percentage increase varied over four values— ½%, 2½%, 5% and 15%. As figure 3 indicates the increase

in gasoline expenses is presented in three ways ‐‐ as an increase in weekly expenses , the corresponding

annual increase (i.e. 52 times the weekly amount), and the percentage of reported typical expenses.

         The last aspect of the conjoint survey is the experimental design.10 The experimental design for

the conjoint questions sought to balance statistical information (efficiency), level balance, and

orthogonality, while minimizing the cognitive burden on respondents.11 To generate the choice sets, we


9
  A common early criticism of SP methods was that respondents did not take them seriously. One element in the
NOAA Panel’s recommended attributes of contingent valuation surveys to ensure they met a burden of proof
requirement was to include questions that allowed assessment of complementary behaviors or attitudes, changes
in other activities that would be associated with the change implied by an individual’s choice . Similarly the
attitudes would also be ones consistent with the stated decision, see Arrow et al. [1993].


10
  Dr. Barbara Kanninen assisted in developing the experimental design.
11
  See Kanninen [2007] especially chapters 5, 6 and 7 for more details on how these decisions are made. Prior
information about people’s preferences over the attributes and the levels for the attributes, if available, can
                                                                                                                10


used the LMA method, which generates choice sets by drawing from a design matrix that has M times the

number of columns needed for each choice set (see Louviere, Hensher and Swait [2000] p. 124‐126).

The method starts with an orthogonal main effects design. A main effects design allows for estimation

of the main effects but no terms for interactions between the attributes. In our conjoint question with a

primary focus on distinct plans as choice alternatives, we had no reason to believe that there would be

interaction effects. Our plans had three attributes: (1) cost, which had four levels; (2) the plan

description, which had three levels corresponding to the three plans; and (3) waiting time, which had

three levels. Each choice question presented two plans and the “no plan” status quo option. As a result,

our design development began with a balanced, orthogonal matrix with 144 pairs of plans. From it we

deleted repeated choice sets and choice sets with overlaps. Because the focus of the valuation

experiment was the laser jamming system, this plan was always included as one of the two alternative

plans, so we also deleted choice sets that did not include the plan with jamming equipment for infrared

missiles. Twelve remaining choice sets met criteria for orthogonality and balance. The 12 choice sets

were divided into 6 blocks of two choice sets. One of the six blocks was then randomly assigned to each

respondent as the survey was taken on line. The final design is given in Table 1.



B.      Implementation of Survey

        The air safety conjoint study was administered to the Knowledge Networks (KN) web panel. This

panel was created using a national random‐digit dial (RDD) frame that includes households with and

without computers and/or internet access (houses without internet access are provided with an internet

device). Appendix A describes the KN panel. The survey was launched to 3,059 panelists aged 18 or




enhance an experimental design. However, in this case, we had no information about which of the three airline
security plans would be most preferred, so it was not possible to identify dominated choices or incorporate
preferences into the conjoint design.
                                                                                                                         11


older on March 11, 2006. By March 20, 2,250 panelists completed the survey with a completion rate of

74% and the survey was closed.

         Table 2 summarizes the demographic characteristics of the KN panelists who were assigned to

each payment vehicle. The means and standard deviations (in parentheses) are reported for a series of

demographic, economic, and attitudinal variables. A few details related to these summary data should

be noted. Income was elicited using household income in an interval format. The mid‐point of each

interval was assigned to each respondent. A Pareto tail adjustment was used to set the value for the

income assigned to those in the highest, open‐ended interval (see Miller [1966]). The risk tolerance

measure was derived using a framework developed by Barsky et al. [1997]. Their index uses responses

to a series of choices between a job with a fixed salary and another with a 50‐50 chance of two different

income levels, one higher than the fixed salary and one lower. With locally constant relative risk

aversion, the answers classify respondents into one of four risk tolerance groups.12 We use the

numerical scores assigned to each group by the risk index. The attitude measure “Importance Airline

Security” equals “1” if the respondent selected “security from terrorism or crime” in response to the

question “When you travel by commercial airline, which of the following is most important to you?

Please check only one answer.” and zero otherwise.13

         As we noted 74% of those invited to take the survey actually completed it during the time span

allowed for data collection, which raises the possibility of selection effects for those responding

compared to the overall KN panel. KN provided the socio‐economic characteristics of all panelists

invited to take the survey so it is possible to consider selection effects as part of the choice model. A

12
   The formulation of the Barsky et al. [1997] question allows each respondent to be placed in intervals based on
their response to an initial question and a follow up that changes the rewards up or down based on whether they
accepted or rejected the initial offer. Their risk tolerance index, θ, is the reciprocal of the coefficient of relative risk
aversion. If U(y) is the utility function expressed in terms of annual income, y, then 1/θ=coefficient of relative risk
                ⎛U       ⎞
aversion = − y⎜ yy ⎟ .
                ⎝    U y ⎠
13
   The other issues included in the question were: Cost of travel, safety from accidents, amount of time it takes to
get where you want to go, level of convenience of traveling by air and the level of customer service you receive.
                                                                                                                 12


probit selection model evaluating the attributes of KN respondents who completed the survey

compared to those who were invited but did not take the survey indicate that older, white, and/or

unemployed KN panelists were more willing to take the airline security survey. We use this model to

construct an estimate of the inverse Mills ratio and test for the potential effect of selection on the KN

panelist choices. 14 A second selection effect arises with the decision to participate in the KN panel itself.

While this selection effect is beyond the scope of our project, Appendix A discusses some of the

research on the question. While the literature documents selection effects in the creation of the panel,

they also found no evidence that these selection effects impact responses to questions concerning

people’s attitudes toward government or willingness‐to‐pay questions about the environment.

        IV.      Results

A.      Model Estimates

        Table 3 reports the results of four choice models estimated using McFadden’s [1974] logit

framework. These models are replicated for each payment vehicle—the increase in the gasoline tax and

the increase in income tax. While our survey was conducted in 2006, before the recent dramatic

increases in the price of gasoline, we were nonetheless concerned that respondents might not accept

the gas tax as a payment vehicle. However, our experience was quite different. People apparently saw

the gasoline tax increase as relevant to the issue of homeland security. In focus groups conducted as

part of this research, this general attitude was confirmed. The participants described the U.S. security

problems as related to our dependency on foreign sources of oil.



14
  The probit selection model describing the attributes of the KN panelists that are associated with who accepted
the invitation to participate is given as follows (the values in parentheses below the estimated parameters are the
asymptotic Z statistics for the null hypothesis of non‐association):
Participate in airline security survey (=1) = ‐.391 + .048 X 10‐5 household income(measured in
                                           (‐4.10) (0.73)
dollars) +.068 own home(=1) ‐.064 female(=1) +.299 white(=1) ‐.124 black (=1) +.130 college
         (1.16)                (‐1.27)            (4.69)          (‐1.41)         (1.83)
graduate (=1) +.017 age (years) +.286 unemployed (=1)            pseudo R2 =.0595
                (10.37)             (2.48)
                                                                                                                  13


         The four models presented in Table 3 are distinguished based on: (1) the inclusion of an inverse

Mills term as an approximate test for a selection effect arising from the difference between panel

members who accepted the invitation to complete the survey and those who did not; (2) distinguishing

the effects of different income levels on the choice of plans; and (3) accounting for observable

characteristics and attitudes of respondents that are hypothesized to influence choices. Model (1) is the

simplest specification including the proposed price (an increase in gasoline expenditures from the

gasoline tax or an increase in the income tax), the increased waiting time for security checks, and

alternative specific constants for each plan. Model (2) includes the inverse Mills ratio as a control for

the panel selection effect calculated using the probit model reported in footnote 13. The Mills ratio is

interacted with the security waiting time attribute based on the hypothesis that respondents sensitive

to time costs of activities might also be less willing to accept invitations to complete the internet

surveys. Model (3) includes these effects and allows the effect of price to be different across income

groups.15 Model (4) uses this treatment of the marginal utility of income and allows for differential

effects—through the interactions described in general terms in equation (1) for our measure of risk

tolerance as well as attitudes toward airline security and a qualitative variable included in models (3)

and (4) for respondents who report flying frequently in the last six months.




15
   The definitions for each income group were: inc 1 = 1 if household income is less than or equal to 27,500; inc 2 =
1 if income is greater than 27,500 and less than or equal to 55,000; inc 3 = 1 if income is between 55,000 and
112,500; and inc 4 = 1 if income is greater than 112,500.
                                                                                                              14


        Before comparing the estimates across payment vehicles, we should note that while we report

one set of estimates, the models for the gasoline tax were estimated in two ways. First we set the cost

equal to the increase in expenditures based on the respondents’ reported typical weekly gasoline

expenditures and the randomly assigned percentage increase in the conjoint question. Next we used an

instrument to account for respondents who assume they could adjust driving behavior in response to

higher gasoline prices and would not actually have to pay the full increase. The instrument regresses

reported gasoline expenditures on the current gasoline taxes in the respondent’s state of residence,

their reported income and the number of vehicles they owned. The predictions from this model were

used as the base for computing the proposed cost of each program used in the conjoint analysis.16 The

estimates in Table 3 are based on the second approach using computed expenditures because it

attempts to control for adjustments respondents may have made in interpreting the actual costs they

would experiences (after adjusting their driving patterns in response to any increase unit charge added

to the price of gasoline) .

        Within a payment vehicle, the results for the choice models are quite stable with the laser

jamming security system having the largest estimated alternative specific coefficient.17 All the other




16
   The equation below presents the estimated equations for deriving our instrument for gasoline expenditures,
with t‐statistics in parentheses below the estimated parameters
ln(gas exp)         =       1.22     ‐ .076 ln(gas tax)
                            (5.03)       (‐1.16)

                 +        .165 ln (income)   + .366 (no. of cars owned)
                          (8.62)               (22.89)

                 R2 =     .274         n = 2092

The adjustment uses a variation on Goldberger [1968] adjustment for bias in the expected value of the
exponentiated value of the log of gas expenditures. Our instrument is exp(predicted log of gas expenditure ‐
                                                                     )
.5 σˆ 2 ), where the predictions are based on the above equation and σ 2 = the estimated variance of the
predictions from the equation.
17
   With discrete choice models the estimated parameters are ratios of the effect hypothesized to be measured by
the coefficient to the unobserved error’s scale parameter. Both cannot be separately identified. As a result,
strictly speaking we can expect the scale parameter estimate would change across model specifications within
                                                                                                             15


estimated parameters are consistent with what would be expected from economic choices. In Models

(1) through (3), the effect of price is generally negative and statistically significant regardless of payment

vehicle. Increased time for security checks has a negative and significant effect in model (1). In model

(2), the interaction term between waiting time and the Mills ratio is negative and significant in the gas

tax sample. Finally in model (3) time in security lines is influential to the choices of those respondents

who report that they fly a lot.

        Turning to the selection effect, the interaction term between time spent in security lines and the

Mills ratio is negative and significant for the three gasoline tax models that include the term, but

insignificant in the income tax models. In the gasoline tax model (2), the addition of the selection effect

interaction term changes the sign and significance of the security time waiting coefficient (Time). Longer

waiting times still reduce support for the plans, but the effect is stronger in individuals with a high Mills

ratio value. Developing a hypothesis for the direction of the of the selection term is more complex than

the conventional selection model where the inverse Mills ratio is reflecting the conditional expectation

of the model’s error given the unobserved heterogeneity for the relationship governing selection into

the sample falls above an observable threshold. For this simple additive relationship we would consider

the correlation between the two error terms reflecting unobserved heterogeneity to describe the

expected sign of the selection effect. Positive correlation implies that those who participate would be

more likely to do more of the activity being modeled. The marginal effect of an independent variable

reflects the propensity of the sample to do whatever is modeled and the selection effect adjusts it so

that it is relevant for the overall sample (based on the selection model as a maintained hypothesis).

Thus, with a positive correlation the measured effect for an independent variable (without considering

the selected nature of the sample) is larger than it should be and the selection term would adjust so it

had a smaller effect for the overall sample.

each payment vehicle. We report estimates of marginal willingness to pay computed as ratios of coefficients to
allow more direct comparisons that are not affected by the parameter normalization used in the RUM framework.
                                                                                                           16


        The specification we used to include an ad hoc selection term in the conjoint choice framework

is more complex. We can only recover an effect of selection if the inverse Mills term is interacted with

plan attributes. We hypothesize that this interaction is likely to be most informative with the term for

the increased time in security. Our reasoning for describing its affect on the choice model is as follows.

Respondents in our sample would be less sensitive, all else equal, to requests for their time. They

completed the invitation sent to the KN panelists sooner than other panelists. Thus, in a choice context

the estimates for the effects of increased time would be smaller in absolute magnitude than they would

be if the full sample included more time sensitive respondents. Using the selection term to compute the

overall effect of increased waiting time on a choice should be negative so this positive correlation would

support a negative coefficient for the interaction term between the inverse Mills term and the increased

time for security. Of course, we should add that it could well be that KN survey respondents view the

time spent answering surveys and the time spent in security lines at airports very differently. In this case

we could not offer a specific hypothesis for the sign of the coefficient’s effect on choices involving

increased time in security lines. The standard errors are based on STATA’s robust estimator for the case

of maximum likelihood estimation to allow for the heteroscedasticity associated with estimating the

Mills term.

        Turning to model (4), price is interacted with the qualitative variable identifying income groups

and the Barsky et al. measure of risk tolerance (RTOL). Generally the results are not significant, except

for the lowest income group for the income tax payment vehicle. It is difficult to know how to interpret

this result because the risk tolerance measure does not appear to influence the choice of plans. When

we compare the estimates of the coefficient of risk aversion by income group and payment vehicle, the

second income class ($27,500‐$55,000) and the highest income group have the largest average value for

the risk tolerance. For the sample receiving the gas tax payment vehicle these means are approximately

comparable. The sample with the income tax payment vehicle had quite different means for the risk
                                                                                                            17


tolerance measure with the highest income group having an appreciable higher risk tolerance (0.494 ,

with the range from 0.11 to 1.61) than the second income group (0.430). It is not possible to assess

whether these differences in average risk tolerance across groups contribute to the estimated role for

interactions of risk tolerance with the effects of price and level of income on choices. We only find a

significant difference for low income households, who would be judged more tolerant of financial risks

based on this question.

        Respondents with concerns about security are willing to pay more for any of the plans for both

payment vehicles. The survey apparently did a good job convincing respondents to the gas tax version

that the plans would not affect a specific traveler’s risk of being involved in a missile attack on a

commercial aircraft, as reflected by the insignificant interaction effect of the qualitative variable used as

a proxy measure to identify frequent fliers with the alternative specific constants for the plans for the

gasoline tax version. In the income tax version, the interaction term is negative for all three plans and

significant for all but the plan proposing increased patrols in the largest airports. Considering model (3)

for both payment vehicles, frequent fliers were sensitive to security waiting times, so these respondents

appear to have distinguished the features of the choice alternatives.

        Comparing the results across payment vehicle—there are direct differences in the estimated

coefficients for the prices and alternative specific constants for all models. The normalization

restrictions on the estimated parameters make this effect difficult to interpret using the parameters

alone. As a result, we considered the estimate for the marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) for each plan

based on the simple models and turn to these results below.

        Table 4 reports estimates for MWTP for each payment vehicle, model, and plan. Considering

first the gasoline tax models, the plan to install laser jamming devices generates the largest MWTP. It is

remarkably stable across specifications and, as noted, varies as we would expect with income level of

the respondent when the model is altered to allow a different marginal utility of income for each of four
                                                                                                                   18


income classes.18 In contrast, MWTP for the plan to introduce patrols was not significantly different from

zero for the sample receiving the gasoline tax as the payment vehicle. Across both payment vehicles

(gasoline tax versus income tax), taking account of selection does not influence the ranking of the

security plans within a payment vehicle (comparing model (1) and model (2)).

         The respondents to the income tax payment vehicle questions have the same ranking of the

three plans based on MWTP, but there are large differences in the estimated magnitudes of the MWTP

for each plan from those estimated using the gasoline tax sample. The MWTP estimates for the laser

jamming and fuel tank protection plans are lower with the income tax payment vehicle compared to the

gasoline tax plan. Using the asymptotic standard errors, these differences would be judged significantly

different for the laser jamming plan with models that do not distinguish separate income effects

(Models (1) and (2)).19 Otherwise, the estimated MWTP were not significantly different across the two

payment specifications. Using income tax payment vehicle, respondents’ choices implied equal MWTP

for the plan to strengthen the fuel tank and train pilots and the plan to patrol around the largest

airports.

         After the conjoint questions, the survey included questions about the respondents’ opinions

about the three plans, the plans’ cost, and other topics related to the responses to the conjoint

questions. There is an interesting distinction in the perceptions of the likely success of the patrolling

plan between respondents who live in states with at least one of the twenty largest airports and those

who do not. Respondents in a state without one of the twenty largest airports and do not fly a lot are

significantly more likely to believe that the patrolling plan is not likely to work than those who are also

infrequent fliers but live in a state with one of these airports. There are some small differences in the


18
   We also grouped respondents by estimates of their marginal tax rates as well as into two income groups—low
and high income and the results are comparable, suggesting the general conclusion that the willingness to pay
estimates for plans increase with income is not the result of the specific definitions selected for these four income
classes.
19
   The asymptotic Z statistic for testing the null hypothesis of equality is 2.6.
                                                                                                             19


assignment of the gasoline and income tax versions of the surveys to states with large airports, but a

cross tabulation of the distributions did not indicate a significant difference in these assignments.

However, these apparent differences in attitudes might be argued as partially explaining the difference

in the economic valuation of plans across the two samples. Regardless at best this difference in attitudes

would account for a small portion of the differences in the estimates for the two payment vehicles.

        Thus, it would seem the difference in MWTP is difficult to explain based on the economic

characteristics and attitudes of the two samples alone. Instead we believe that the differences arise

primarily from differences in the attribute levels for cost in the two samples. The gas tax payment

vehicle does a better job at presenting respondents with costs that are closer to their “choke” prices.

Table 5, reports the distribution and summary statistics for the prices actually assigned to each

respondent by payment vehicle and plan. The highest cost under the income tax payment vehicle

($120) is far below the highest cost presented in the gas tax version. The design values for the

percentage increase in the gasoline tax we selected for the conjoint questions were based on average

expenditures for typical households. We selected the design values with the ex ante expectation that

the costs under the two payment vehicles would be approximately comparable once the respondents’

reported weekly gasoline expenditures were factored in. As Table 5 indicates, the actual median cost

increase in gasoline expenditures presented in the survey for the plan to use jamming devices closely

matches the median increase in income tax for this plan. Since all respondents received this plan in both

samples, this assignment matches our design criteria reasonably well.20 However, the medians for the

other plans are not as similar. Moreover, the ranges of actual costs for the three plans for the gasoline

tax version of the survey are much larger than with the income tax. For this reason we believe the

gasoline tax version is pushing some respondents closer to their choke prices, resulting in higher MWTP

estimates. This conclusion also stems from the use of a linear choice model –where the marginal effect

20
  Every respondent in both samples received the laser jamming plan so the first column in Table 5 summarizes the
results for the full sample.
                                                                                                           20


of the annual cost is assumed to be approximately constant over the range of costs proposed in each

sample. The highest estimates for the MWTP for the laser jamming plan under the income tax version

are for the two highest income classes and could well have been substantially higher—if the design had

allowed consideration of larger costs. Thus, we hypothesize that this difference in assigned costs for

plans explains most of the difference in MWTP estimates across the two payment vehicles.

Unfortunately we do not have sufficient variation in the design points for plan costs with the income tax

version of the payment to test this hypothesis.

        Overall, the results for both payment vehicles present a consistent description of respondent

preferences with clear support for the laser jamming system over the other two alternatives, consistent

responsiveness to attributes and attitudes across the payment vehicles and consistent variation in

MWTP responsiveness to income. This pattern is especially apparent with the gasoline tax.



C.      Plausibility Cross‐Checks for the Stated Choices

        In this section we present some additional results to help gauge the plausibility of the SP MWTP

estimates. Consistent links between observable features or attitudes of respondents to their choices is

an indication of plausibility. As discussed in the previous section, the responses were sensitive to the

cost of the plan and the income of the respondents. In addition, the difference in the significance of the

security waiting time coefficient across frequent and infrequent fliers indicates respondents recognized

the relevance of the design attributes to their situation. In all these cases, our survey responses are

consistent with what one would expect from economically meaningful choices.

        As mentioned in the previous section, the survey included a set of questions about the plans,

payment vehicles, and other attitudes that might be correlated with an individual’s response to the

conjoint questions. Table 6 provides three gauges. The first panel is a split comparing the respondents

who describe the reason they voted for no plan as being due to “high taxes” (or price of gasoline was
                                                                                                         21


too high). Those receiving the gasoline tax were more likely to cite this reason than those receiving the

income tax. This finding is consistent with our discussion of the implications of the range of costs

assigned under this payment scheme for estimates of the marginal willingness to pay. When

respondents receive proposed costs that span a range more likely to capture all respondents’ choke

prices for the programs then we should expect a different rate at which respondents identify costs as

their reason for not selecting a plan. The second panel gauges the consistency between the statements

of concern about terrorists’ use of missiles and the decisions to support the plan. For both of the

payment vehicles, we see the expected pattern. Those who are very concerned or somewhat concerned

are more willing to select a plan. Finally the last panel examines whether responses that the laser

jamming plan is not likely to work were different between the two payment schemes. At the ten percent

level we would conclude there was a difference. Ideally one would not want responses on the plans

effectiveness to differ with payment vehicle. The explanations in other dimensions are completely

comparable. However the higher costs may have caused some respondents to consider the plan’s

effectiveness more carefully than they would have if the costs were lower.

V.         Summary and Implications

           Over the past seven years since 9/11 federal expenditures for homeland security have increased

substantially.21 These actions are consistent with reported public concerns about terrorist threats. The

majority of the economic research on security has focused on indirect measures of the effects of

terrorist threats for the level of economic activity, the structure of urban property markets, and

precautionary behaviors people are willing to undertake. None of these studies consider observed

behaviors with sufficient resolution in choices to estimate the implied tradeoffs people are making to

enhance their security.




21
     Sandler et al (2007) report estimates for 2005 that are approximately $30 billion dollars.
                                                                                                          22


        This research exploits the advances in SP methods to estimate the tradeoffs implied by people’s

choices of different security plans. Our survey suggests it is possible to estimate the economic tradeoffs

people would be prepared to make to reduce the prospects for threats of disruption to the commercial

aircraft sector and the resulting impacts on the U.S. economy. The formulation of the question

emphasized the aggregate economic losses and thus the public dimensions of the protection provided

by specific plans.

        Estimates of household MWTP for the laser jamming system (using a conservative summary of

the estimates across payment vehicles) range from $100 to $220 annual per household. Von

Winterfeldt and O’Sullivan’s [2006] decision theoretic analysis of the laser jamming plan suggests that

the countermeasures would be preferred if economic losses are above $74 billion, the probability of

attack is larger than 0.37 in ten years and if the cost of the measures is less than about $14 billion. Our

MWTP estimates suggest that even using the most conservative of our estimates a program with a cost

consistent with their thresholds would yield significant net benefits.

        This type of analysis seems likely to be increasingly important to the design and implementation

of homeland security policies. A recent Office of Management and Budget (OMB) evaluation of the

regulatory impact analysis (RIA) for major rules indicated that DHS has faced less stringent review of

their benefit assessments than other Federal agencies (OMB 2007). To date there has been very little

experience with measuring the benefits of security policies. For the most part, DHS assessments have

relied on the fatality consequences of successful attacks and assumed the benefits are associated with

each policy’s estimated risk reduction or they have relied on upper bound measures. This later group

compares the event being influenced by the policy to 9/11 and implicitly asks the rhetorical question of

its impact compared to the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. Most of the DHS RIA’s

describe the benefits of a policy qualitatively, rather than quantitatively (see OMB 2008 or OMB 2007
                                                                                                           23


for examples). One reviewer of the OMB summary document implied that the “free ride” that DHS

benefit‐cost evaluations enjoyed at OMB would not persist indefinitely (OMB 2007).

        The results reported in this paper suggest that people can make choices over security choices

when they are described using specific plans. The results also indicate that the tradeoffs their choices

imply are economically consistent. While some might argue that specific security policies are too

complicated for the public to understand, public opinion plays an important role in Congressional

support for different policies. Public opinion about government policies also affects the degree to which

individuals change their own behavior, and thus the costs and benefits of the policy. The range of MWTP

estimates indicates that the heterogeneity in these measures for the tradeoffs respondents would make

is consistent with their circumstances and opinions about the nature of terrorist threats. The estimated

MWTP also seems reasonable compared to the costs of a successful attack and relative to other

insurance payments such as automobile and home insurance.

        Nonetheless it is unlikely that policy staff will have the resources or time to prepare a new

stated choice survey (or identify revealed preference behaviors) to estimate benefits for each new

policy. The time available for analysis is limited and often the assessment methods must be flexible so

they can adapt to the changing status of rules as they are designed. Thus, the real challenge facing

benefit‐cost analysis of homeland security policies is the development of a set of tradeoff studies that

will permit the type of benefit transfer strategies commonly used in assessments of rules associated

with environmental policies.
                                                                                                       24


                                                REFERENCES

Abadie, Alberto and Javier Gardeazabal, 2003, “The Economic Costs of Conflict: A Case Study of the

        Basque Country,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93 (March): 113‐132.

Abadie, Alberto and Sofia Dermisi, 2006, “Is Terrorism Eroding Agglomeration Economies in Central

        Business Districts? Lessons from the Office Real Estate Market in Downtown Chicago”, NBER

        Working Paper No. 12678, November, Journal of Urban Economics, forthcoming

Arrow, Kenneth J., Robert Solow, Paul R. Portney, Edward E. Leamer, Roy Radner, and Howard Schuman,

        1993, ‘Report of NOAA Panel on Contingent Valuation” Federal register 58, 4601‐4614.

Balvanyos, T. and Lester Lave, 2005, “The Economic Implications of Terrorist Attack on Commercial

        Aviation in the USA,” report to the Center for Risk and Economic Analysis of Terrorism (CREATE),

        University of Southern California, Los Angeles.

Banzhaf H.Spencer, Dallas Burtraw, David Evans, and Alan Krupnick. 2004. “Valuation of Natural

        Resource Improvements in the Adirondacks” Resources for the Future working paper.



Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997, “Preference

        Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and

        Retirement Study,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112 (May): 537‐580.

Becker, Gary S. and Yona Rubinstein, 2004, “Fear and the Response to Terrorism: An Economic Analysis,”

        unpublished paper, Department of Economics, University of Chicago, August 1.

Berrens, Robert P., Alok K. Bohara, Hank Jenkins‐Smith, Carol Silva, and David L. Weimer, 2003, “The

        Advent of Internet Surveys for Political research: A comparison of Telephone and Internet

        Samples,” Political Analysis, Vol. 11 (1): 1‐22.

Cameron Trudy A. and J.R. DeShazo, 2004. “Valuing Health‐Risk Reductions: Sick‐years, Lost Life‐Years,

        and Latency” http://faculty.spa.ucla.edu/deshazo/pdf/13/general_paper_.pdf
                                                                                                         25


Cameron, Trudy A. and J.R. DeShazo, 2005, “Comprehensive Selectivity Assessment for a Major

        Consumer Panel: Attitudes Toward Government Regulation of Environment, Health, and Safety

        Risks,” unpublished paper, Department of Economics, University of Oregon, November.

Carson, Richard T. and W. Michael Hanemann, 2005, “Contingent Valuation” in Karl Göran‐Mäler and

        Jeffrey R. Vincent editors, Handbook of Environmental Economics, Vol. II (Amsterdam: North

        Holland), pp. 821‐936.

Carson, Richard T., Robert Cameron Mitchell, W. Michael Hanemann, Raymond J. Kopp, Stanley Presser,

        and Paul A. Ruud, 2003, “Contingent Valuation and Lost Passive Use: Damages from the Exxon

        Valdez Oil Spill”, Environmental and Resource Economics, Vol. 25 ( July):257‐286.

Dennis J.M., C. Chatt, R. Li, A. Motta‐Stanko and P. Pulliam. 2005. “Data Collection Mode Effects

        Controlling for Sample Origins in a Panel Survey: Telephone versus Internet”

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman, 1994, “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than No

        Number?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 8 (Fall): 45‐64.

Eckstein, Otto, 1961, Water Resource Development: The Economics of Project Evaluation, (Cambridge,

        Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Frey, Bruno S., Simon Luechinger and Alois Stutzer, 2007, “Calculating Tragedy: Assessing the Costs of

        Terrorism,” Journal of Economic Surveys Vol. 21, (1): 1‐24.

Glaeser, E.L., J.M. Shapiro, 2002, “Cities and Warfare: The Impact of Terrorism on Urban Form,” Journal

        of Urban Economics, 51(2): 205‐224.

Goldberger, Arthur S. 1968, “The Interpretation and Estimation of Cobb Douglas Functions,”

        Econometrica, Vol. 35 (April): 464‐472.

Gordon, Peter, James E. Moore II, Ji Young Park, and Harry Richardson, 207, “The Economic Impacts of a

        Terrorist Attack on the U.S. Commercial Aviation System,” Risk Analysis, Vol. 27 (3): 505–512.

Hall, Mimi, 2008, “Passenger Jets Get Anti‐Missile Devices,” U.S.A. Today. January 4‐6.
                                                                                                        26


Hensher David A.,John M. Rose, and William H. Greene, 2005, Applied Choice Analysis: A Primer

        (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press)

Johnson, F. Reed, Barbara J. Kanninen, Matthew Bingham, Semra Özdemir, 2007, “Experimental Design

        for Stated Choice Studies,” B.J. Kanninen editor, Valuing Environmental Amenities Using Stated

        Choice Studies, (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) pp 297‐333.

Kanninen, Barbara J., editor, 2007, Valuing Environmental Amenities Using Stated Choice Studies,

        (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer).

Krosnick, J.A. and L.C. Chang, 2001. “A Comparison of the Random Digit Dialing Telephone Survey

        Methodology with Internet Survey Methodology as Implemented by Knowledge Networks and

        Harris Interactive.” Ohio State University, http://www.knowledgenetworks.com/ganp/reviewer‐

        info.html.

Landry, Craig E. and John A. List, 2007, “Using Ex Ante Approaches to Obtain Credible Signals for Value in

        Contingent Markets: Evidence from the Field,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol.

        89 (May): 420‐429.

Louviere, Jordan J. 1988, Analyzing Decision Making: Metric Conjoint Analysis, Sage University Paper

        Series on Social Sciences 07‐67, Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.

Louviere, Jordan J., David A. Hensher, and Joffre D. Swait. 2000, Stated Choice Methods: Analysis and

        Applications. (New York: Cambridge University Press).

McFadden, Daniel, 1974, “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka

        editor, Frontiers of Econometrics (New York: Academic Press), pp. 105‐142.

Miller, Herman P. 1966, Income Distribution in the United States, (A 1960 census monograph).

        Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Office of Management and Budget, 2008, 2007 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal

        Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State, Local and Tribal Entities. June 2008.
                                                                                                           27


Office of Management and Budget, 2007, 2006 Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal

        Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State, Local and Tribal Entities. January 2007.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1976, Economics, 10th Edition (New York: McGraw Hill).

Sandler, Todd,, Daniel Arcie, and Walter Enders, 2007, “Transnational Terrorism” In Bjorn Lomberg (ed),
        Global Crisis, Global Solutions, Copenhagen Consensus 2008 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press, 2009) forthcoming.
Santos, J.R. and Y.Y. Haimes, 2004, “Modeling the Demand Reduction Input Output Inoperability due to

        Terrorism of Interconnected Infrastructures,” Risk Analysis, Vol. 24(6): 1437‐1451.

Smith, V. Kerry,1997, “Pricing What is Priceless: A Status report on Non_market Valuation of

        Environmental Resources” in Henk Folmer and Tom Tietenberg, editors, The International

        Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics (Cheltenham, U.K: Edward Elgar) pp.156‐

        204.

Smith, V. Kerry, 1996, “Resource Evaluation at the Crossroads” address for thirty‐fifth anniversary of

        Resources for the Future, reprinted in V. Kerry Smith, editor, Estimating Economic Values for

        Nature (Cheltenham,U.K.: Edward Elgar) pp 2‐41.

Smith, V. Kerry. 2007, “Judging Quality,” B.J. Kanninen editor, Valuing Environmental Amenities Using

        Stated Choice Studies, (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer) pp 297‐333.

Viscusi, W.Kip, Joel Huber, and Jason Bell. 2004 “The Value Of Regional Water Quality Improvements”,

        The Harvard John M. Olin Discussion Paper Series Discussion Paper No. 477,

        http://www.law.harvard.edu/programs/olin_center/

Viscusi, W. Kip and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 2003, “Sacrificing Civil Liberties to Reduce Terrorism Risk,”

        Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Vol. 26 (March/May): 99‐120.

von Winterfeldt and Terrence M. O’Sullivan, 2006, “Should We Protect Commercial Airplanes Against

        Surface‐to‐Air Missile Attacks by Terrorists?” Decision Analysis, Vol. 3, (June): 63‐75.
                                                                                                       28


Zussman, A., N. Zussman, and M. Nielson, 2008, “Asset Market Perspectives on the Israeli‐Palestinian

       Conflict,” Economica, 75(297): 84‐115.

Zwerina, K, Joel Huber, and W. Kuhfeld, 1996, “A General Method for Constructing Efficient Choice

       Designs.” Durham: Fuqua School of Business, Duke University.
                                                                                          29



             Figure 1: Threat form Missile Attacks on Airlines

Airline Security
The terrorist hijacking of commercial airplanes and attacks on the World Trade
Center and the Pentagon on September 11, 2001, led to major changes in airport
security screening. Despite the increase in airport security, there are a number of
continuing threats to air travel safety.

The Department of Homeland Security has identified ground‐to‐air missiles as an
important threat to the security of the air transportation system in addition to the
on‐going threats posed by hijacking.

Ground Attacks with Missiles: Commercial aircraft can be attacked from the
ground with small surface‐to‐air missiles (SAMs). These missiles can be carried by a
single person and are fired from an area close to the airport.

The three main kinds of surface‐to‐air missiles are:

    •    Heat‐seeking: target heat sources on an aircraft;
    •    Laser‐guided: follow a laser path aimed at the aircraft and require
         extensive training and skill;
    •    Command line‐of‐sight missiles: directed using radio controls and require
         a very high level of skill;

It is estimated that there are at least 4,000 to 5,000 missiles that may be accessible
to anti‐Western terrorists. The majority of these missiles are heat seeking.

The chances that you would actually be on a plane experiencing a missile attack
or a hijacking is very, very small, even if you fly a great deal.

In U.S. airports, over 75,000 commercial airplanes depart on an average day,
ranging from over 100 departures to over 1,100 departures a day at the 50 largest
U.S. airports.

An important reason for government concern is the security and reliability of the
commercial air transportation system.

One successful attack would affect everyone in the U.S.

When people are killed in an attack it increases feelings of insecurity and reduces
people’s willingness to travel by air. The airline industry still suffers from the drop
in air travel after 9/11. A 10% decline in airline travel reduces economic activity by
about $40 billion a year. Another successful hijacking or missile attack would have
serious impacts on our transportation system and on the whole U.S. economy.
                                                                                                                   30

                          Figure 2: Description of Missile Defense Systems

        Detect & Divert                  Preventing Fires & Landing              Patrolling Around Airports
                                                   Safely
• All U.S. airplanes install system   • All U.S. airplanes install fuel tank   • Guards would patrol the area
  to detect and divert heat‐            fire suppression systems                 around 20 largest airports
  seeking missiles.                   • Additional pilot training to safely    • Moderately effective
• Very effective as soon as it is       land missile‐damaged plane             • Works for all types of missiles
  installed.                          • Moderately effective with                as well as other threats to
• Only works for heat‐seeking           sufficient time to develop               airports
  missiles.                             systems and training
• Heat‐seeking missiles most          • Works for all types of missiles
  common.
                                                                                                                  31

                                       Figure 3: Sample Choice Question

                                   Defense Against             Defense Against Missiles
                                   Missiles – Detect            – Preventing Fires and           Current System
                                     and Divert:                    Landing Safely:
                                • All U.S. airplanes install   • All U.S. airplanes install   • No special protection
                                  system to detect and           fuel tank fire suppression     against surface‐to‐air
                                  divert heat‐seeking            systems                        missiles
                                  missiles                     • Additional pilot training
                                • Very effective as soon         to safely and missile‐
      Security System             as it is installed             damaged plane
                                • Only works for heat‐         • Moderately effective with
                                  seeking missiles               sufficient time to develop
                                • Heat‐seeking missiles          systems and training
                                  most common                  • Works for all types of
                                                                 missiles
Increase in waiting time for    • Average of 10 minutes        • Average of 22 minutes        • No change in waiting
   passengers in airport          more on every flight           more on every flight you       time
       security line              you take                       take
                                • YOUR household’s             • YOUR household’s weekly      • No change in cost of
                                  weekly gas expenses            gas expenses would             gas
        Cost to YOU               would increase 20¢ a           increase $1.00 a week or
                                  week or $10.4 per year         $52 per year (a 2.5%
                                  (a ½ % increase)               increase)
 Please select the plan you
  would vote for; the plan
selected by the majority will
   be one recommended,
   check only one option
                                                                                                        32

           Table 1: Experimental Design for the Airline Security Conjoint Surveya

       Version     Question                  Alternative 1                  Alternative 2
          1           1           Detection and Jamming Device             Training pilots
                                             Time=10min.                    Time=22min
                                            Cost=$8, 1/2%                 Cost=$15, 2.5%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=22min                     Time=10min
                                            Cost=$8, 1/2%                  Cost=$50, 5%
           2            1         Detection and Jamming Device             Training pilots
                                             Time=10min                     Time=35min
                                           Cost=$15, 2.5%                  Cost=$50, 5%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=22min                     Time=35min
                                           Cost=$15, 2.5%                 Cost=$120, 15%
           3            1         Detection and Jamming Device             Training Pilots
                                             Time=35min                     Time=10min
                                             Cost=$8, ½%                  Cost=$120, 15%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device             Training Pilots
                                             Time=22min                     Time=35min
                                          Cost=$120, 15%                  Cost=$15, 2.5%
           4            1         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=10min                     Time=22min
                                            Cost=$50, 5%                 Cost =$120, 15%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device             Training Pilots
                                             Time=35min                     Time=22min
                                           Cost=$15, 2.5%                   Cost=$8, ½%
           5            1         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=10 min                    Time=35min
                                          Cost =$120, 15%                   Cost=$8, ½%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=35min                     Time=10min
                                            Cost=$50, 5%                  Cost=$15, 2.5%
           6            1         Detection and Jamming Device             Training Pilots
                                             Time=22min                     Time=10min
                                            Cost=$50, 5%                    Cost=$8, ½%
                        2         Detection and Jamming Device                  Patrol
                                             Time=35min                     Time=22min
                                          Cost=$120, 15%                   Cost=$50, 5%
a
  In the designation of the cost attribute the first number corresponds to the increase in the income
tax and the second number to the percentage increase in gasoline expenditures.
                                                                                                      33

      Table 2: Variable Names, Definitions, Means and (Standard Deviations) of the Two Samples
              Variable                       Variable Definition1             Gas Tax    Income Tax
      (Variable Abbreviation1)                                                Version      Version
                Age                                                             47.4        48.7
                                                                               (16.8)      (17.0)
         Proportion Female                                                      0.53        0.50
                                                                               (0.50)      (0.50)
         Proportion White                                                       0.74        0.74
                                                                               (0.44)      (0.44)
       Proportion Own Home                                                      0.71        0.69
                                                                               (0.45)      (0.46)
         Proportion Retired                                                     0.16        0.19
                                                                               (0.37)      (0.39)
             Proportion                                                         0.31        0.30
          High School Grad
                                                                               (0.46)      (0.46)
             Proportion
            College Grad                                                         0.18       0.17
                                                                               (0.38)      (0.37)
         Household Income                                                      53,992      51,665
                                                                              (40,880)    (41,459)
    Proportion of respondents in    =1 if household income is less than or       .297       .334
        income category 1                     equal to $27,500                  (457)      (.471)
               (INC1)
    Proportion of respondents in    =1 if household income is greater than      .376        .354
        income category 2             $27,500 and less than or equal to        (.485)      (.479)
               (INC2)                              $55,000
    Proportion of respondents in    =1 if household income is greater than      .271        .261
        income category 3             $55,000 and less than or equal to        (.445)      (.439)
               (INC3)                             $112,500
    Proportion of respondents in    =1 if household income is greater than      .055        .050
        income category 4                         $112,500                     (.228)      (.218)
               (INC4)
        Proportion Fly‐Past          Proportion of respondents who have
             6 Months              flown at least once in the last 6 months    0.23         0.23
              (Flyalot)
                                                                               (0.42)      (0.42)
           Risk Tolerance           Risk tolerance measure from Barsky et       0.45        0.43
               (RTOL)                              al. (1997)
                                                                               (0.53)      (0.52)
    Weekly Gasoline Expenditures   Reported weekly gasoline expenditures
                                                                               44.58       43.53
                                                                              (35.79)     (33.53)
         Importance Airline          Equals “1” if the respondent selected
              Security               “security from terrorism or crime” in     0.10         0.11
             (Security)              response to the question “When you
                                    travel by commercial airline, which of
                                   the following is most important to you?
                                   Please check only one answer.” and zero
                                                    otherwise.
                                                                               (0.30)      (0.31)
      Number of Observations                                                   1,071       1,179
1
Definitions of variables reported in Table 3.
                                                                                                                   34

Table 3: Choice Models for Airline Securitya

       Choice
                                     Gasoline Tax                                     Income Tax
    Determinants
                        (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)
         Price        ‐.0026      ‐.0026                              ‐.0083      ‐.0083
                      (‐6.51)     (‐6.51)                             (‐9.49)     (‐9.49)
      Price*INC1                              ‐.0040                                          ‐.0101
                                              (‐4.28)                                         (‐6.92)
Price*INC1*RTOL                                           ‐.0010                                           .0049
                                                          (‐0.48)                                          (2.07)
      Price*INC2                              ‐.0028                                          ‐.0098
                                              (‐4.21)                                         (‐7.34)
Price*INC2*RTOL                                           .0006                                           ‐.0007
                                                          (0.54)                                          (‐0.29)
      Price*INC3                              ‐.0023                                          ‐.0046
                                              (‐3.99)                                         (‐3.22)
Price*INC3*RTOL                                           .0007                                            .0018
                                                          (0.66)                                           (0.71)
      Price*INC4                              ‐.0015                                          ‐.0070
                                              (‐1.59)                                         (‐2.22)
Price*INC4*RTOL                                           .0013                                           ‐.0014
                                                          (0.54)                                          (‐0.24)
         Time         ‐.0073      .0070        .0160                  ‐.0113      ‐.0072       .0017
                      (‐2.45)     (0.96)       (1.85)                 (‐3.95)     (‐1.12)      (0.23)
    Time* fly a lot                           ‐.0126       ‐.006                              ‐.0117        .011
                                              (‐2.04)     (‐0.87)                             (‐2.19)      (1.58)
        Time*                     ‐.0346      ‐.0331       ‐.036                  ‐.0101      ‐.0098       ‐.014
         Mills                    (‐2.15)     (‐2.07)     (‐2.18)                 (‐0.71)     (‐0.68)     (‐0.96)
    Laser Jamming       .569        .575        .603                    .823        .824        .832
        System         (4.60)      (4.64)      (4.84)                  (6.90)      (6.91)      (6.95)
     Laser*Flyalot                                         ‐.266                                           ‐.907
                                                          (‐0.97)                                         (‐3.45)
    Laser*Security                                          .490                                           1.374
                                                           (1.51)                                          (4.54)
       Pilot            .344       .349        .372                     .529        .529        .535
     Training          (2.84)     (2.88)      (3.06)                   (4.68)      (4.68)      (4.72)
  Pilot Training                                           ‐.290                                           ‐.977
     *Flyalot                                             (‐1.01)                                         (‐3.59)
       Pilot                                                .652                                           1.263
Training*Security                                          (1.96)                                          (3.84)
      Patrol            .057       .060        .089                     .553       1.554        .558
                       (0.40)     (0.43)      (0.62)                   (4.01)      (4.01)      (4.04)
    Patrol*Flyalot                                         .018                                            ‐.357
                                                          (0.06)                                          (‐1.24)
    Patrol*Security                                        .907                                            1.029
                                                          (2.38)                                           (3.14)
      Pseudo R2        .023       .0246       .0273                    .0271       .0273       .0311
a
 The numbers in parentheses below the estimated coefficients are the Z‐statistics for the null hypothesis of no
association.
                                                                                                     35



                        Table 4: Estimated Willingness to Pay for Security
                        of Commercial Airlines to Terror Related Threatsa

                                                          Model+
         Plan                                                               (3)
                             (1)          (2)
                                                      INC1          INC2          INC3      INC4
 A. Gas Tax
 Jamming Device for        220.8         221.8        149.0        210.1           266      394.8
 Infrared Missiles         (4.90)        (4.93)       (3.72)       (3.80)         (3.54)    (1.55)
 (Man Pad)
 Fuel Tank Protection      133.4         134.8         91.9        129.6          164.1     243.5
 and Pilot Training        (2.93)        (2.97)       (2.73)       (2.70)         (2.67)    (1.45)
 Increased Patrols          22.2          23.4         21.9         30.9           39.1      58.1
                           (0.41)        (0.44)       (0.64)       (0.64)         (0.65)    (0.61)
 B. Income Tax
 Jamming Device for        99.6         99.7         82.3           84.5         181.9       119.4
 Infrared Missiles        (7.66)       (7.66)       (6.02)         (6.09)       (3.32)       (2.17)
 Fuel Tank Protection      64.0         64.0         52.9           54.3         117.0        76.8
 and Pilot Training       (4.81)       (4.81)       (4.28)         (4.37)       (2.96)       (2.03)
 Increased Patrols         66.9         66.9         55.2           56.7         122.1        80.1
                          (4.89)       (4.89)       (4.20)         (4.24)       (3.26)       (2.07)
a
  The numbers in parentheses are the asymptotic Z statistics for a test of zero marginal willingness to
pay.
+
  The model numbers refer to the models in Table 3.
                                                                              36




               Table 5: Plan Costs Assigned by Payment Vehicle

                                            Fuel Tank &
                    Jamming Device            Training             Patrol
Gasoline Tax
   Range              2.5 – 1192            2.6 – 1164           2.4 – 2053
   Median                57.5                  40.2                 83.4
   Mean                 107.4                  75.5                129.8
Income Tax
   Range                8 – 120               8 – 120             8 – 120
   Median                  50                    15                 50
   Mean                  48.8                  36.2                60.4
                                                                                                                    37



                     Table 6: Respondents’ Decisions About Plans: Confirming Attitudes


            I. Response: I didn’t vote for either plan because I think my income taxes are
                         (the price of gasoline is) already too high. (χ2(1) = 9.31, p‐value =
                         0.003)

             Payment Vehicle                  No                 Yes              Total
             Gasoline Tax                    833                225               1058
                                            (78.7)             (21.3)
              Income Tax                     973                189               1162
                                            (83.7)             (17.3)
            a
              Numbers in parentheses are percentages. Responses are asked of each respondent with
              each payment vehicle at the end of the sequence of two questions so they relate to the
              second of the questions asked.


   II. Question: Are you very concerned, somewhat concerned, or not at all concerned about the
   risks of missiles being fired at airplanes inside the U.S.?

    Pick Plan Because                                           Very             Somewhat            Not at all
    Worried                Total      Don’t Know              Concerned          Concerned          Concerned
                   2
    Gasoline Tax (χ (3) = 111.89, p‐value = 0.00)
       No                   798             2                     109                469                218
       Yes                  260             0                     100                150                 10
    Income Tax (χ2 (3) = 113.48, p‐value = 0.00)
       No                   852             2                     130                501                219
       Yes                  310             1                     124                170                 15


III. Question: I don’t think the plan to install jamming devices on planes to detect and divert missiles will work very
well

A. Jamming devices* ( χ2 =2.984, p‐value=0.08)
     Payment Vehicle                      No                          Yes                         Total
       Gasoline Tax                      936                          122                         1058
                                        (88.5)                       (11.5)
        Income Tax                       1054                         108                         1162
                                        (90.7)                       (9.29)
* “No” indicates respondent failed to check verbatim indicating he/she felt the plan would not work.
                                                                                                       38

Appendix A: The Knowledge Networks Web‐Panel
        The current Knowledge Networks (KN) panel consists of approximately 40,000 adults actively

participating in research. Beginning recruitment in 1999, Knowledge Networks (KN) has established the

first online research panel based on probability sampling that covers both the online and offline

populations in the U.S. The panel members are randomly recruited by telephone and households are

provided with access to the Internet and hardware if needed. Unlike other Internet research that covers

only individuals with Internet access who volunteer for research, KN surveys are based on a sampling

frame that includes both listed and unlisted phone numbers, and is not limited to current Web users or

computer owners. Panelists are selected by chance to join the panel; unselected volunteers are not able

to join the KN panel.

        KN initially selects households using random digit dialing (RDD) sampling methodology. Once a

household is contacted by phone and household members recruited to the panel by obtaining their e‐

mail address or setting up e‐mail addresses, panel members are sent surveys over the Internet using e‐

mail (instead of by phone or mail). This permits surveys to be fielded quickly and economically, and also

facilitates longitudinal research. In addition, this approach reduces the burden placed on respondents,

since e‐mail notification is less obtrusive than telephone calls, and allows research subjects to

participate in research when it is convenient for them. KN’s panel recruitment methodology uses the

quality standards established by selected RDD surveys conducted for the Federal Government.

        A number of studies have compared KN and other web‐based surveys with other modes of

administration. Overall some differences in the responses to web‐based, mail and telephone surveys

have been documented, but in some cases the web‐based survey offers an improvement over telephone

surveys in eliciting more accurate responses (Berrens et al. 2003, Krosnick and Chang 2001, and Dennis

et al. 2005). Dennis et al. (2005) found mode effects, but only “sparse” evidence for differences due to

sample selection (sample origin) comparing a web survey of KN panel members, a telephone survey of

active KN panel members, and a telephone survey of persons who refused to join the KN panel and
                                                                                                          39

members who did not respond to the web survey. Berrens et al. (2003) and Krosnick and Chang (2001)

investigate mode effects comparing KN’s panel with an RDD telephone survey and the Harris Interactive

internet panel (members of this panel volunteer to join). Both papers report some statistically significant

differences across the three samples, although the authors considered the differences to be modest in

size. The Berrens et al. survey asked questions about climate change and included a discrete choice

contingent valuation survey question about the household’s willingness to pay for Senate ratification of

the Kyoto Protocol. The authors concluded comparing all four samples that:

        “…across all four samples, the analyst would make the same policy inference for the
        validity test—the probability of voting yes on the referendum is significantly and
        inversely related to the bid price (or cost) of the policy.” (p. 20)

        While the models were estimated with logit and thus measure normalized coefficients in each

model (i.e. the parameter relative to a scale parameter), the coefficient estimates for the cost term are

remarkably stable—ranging from ‐.88 (RDD Telephone) to ‐.80 (Harris Interactive). Berrens et al.

conclude that “With appropriate weighting, samples from these panels are sufficiently representative of

the U.S. population to be reasonable alternatives in many applications to samples gathered through RDD

telephone surveys” (p. 1).

        In addition, recent studies have investigated the potential for nonresponse bias in SP willingness

to pay surveys administered through KN. Studies that investigated various sources of non‐response bias

have found some evidence of sample selection, but little evidence of bias in willingness to pay and the

differences that have been found were judged to be small (Banzahf et al. 2004, Viscusi et al. 2004,

Cameron and DeShazo 2004). Cameron and DeShazo [2005] investigated the possible selection effects

resulting from KN’s recruiting process on attitudes toward government regulation of environment,

health and safety risks. The authors began their analysis using the full RDD sample contacted by KN

between 1999 and May 1, 2003, to join the KN web panel and matched the telephone numbers to

census tracts (for telephone numbers without a matching address, the authors match the number of the

most likely census tract). Looking at the complete set of census tracts from which the KN panel was

recruited, the authors found that Census tract‐level factor scores summarizing year 2000 Presidential
                                                                                                       40

voting patterns, economic and demographic attributes of the households influence the likelihood that

individuals join the KN panel. However, accounting for selection effects associated with joining the KN

panel and completing their survey, they cannot reject the null hypothesis of no error correlation

between the selection probability model’s error and attitudes toward government involvement in social

regulations measured as part of their survey (attitudes toward government regulation was measured by

the question: “People have different ideas about what their government should be doing. How

involved do you think the government should be in regulating environmental, health and safety

hazards?” The answer options ranged from 1 = minimally involved up to 7 = heavily involved).
