NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LITIGATION OF FINANCIAL INNOVATIONS
Josh Lerner
Working Paper 14324
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14324

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Josh Lerner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Litigation of Financial Innovations
Josh Lerner
NBER Working Paper No. 14324
September 2008
JEL No. G21,O34
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the litigation of patents relating to financial products and services. I show that
these grants are being litigated at a rate 27 to 39 times greater than that of patents as a whole. The
patents being litigated are disproportionately those issued to individuals and to smaller, private entities,
as well as those whose features may proxy for higher quality. Larger entities are disproportionately
targeted in litigation. I discuss how the findings are in large part consistent with the theoretical literature
on the economics of litigation.

Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Introduction
The impact of financial innovation is widely accepted. For instance, the economic
importance of new products and services in the financial arena has been heralded by
Miller [1986] and Merton [1992], questioned by Van Horne [1985], and empirically
documented by Tufano [1989]. Yet the empirics of financial innovation have attracted
remarkably little academic attention, as highlighted in a review article by Frame and
White [2004].

Moreover, in the past decade, there has been a profound change in the conditions
under which financial innovations are pursued. The State Street case in the late 1990s
unambiguously established the patentability of financial inventions. (The history of
financial patenting is summarized in Appendix A.) Because patents fundamentally alter
the way in which innovations can be used—for instance, they make the type of rapid
diffusion documented by Tufano [1989] less feasible—assessing the impact of patenting
is critical to understanding the future of financial innovation. In particular, we know
almost nothing about the way in which these financial patents, having been granted, are
utilized by firms.

This paper seeks to understand the litigation of financial patents. Litigation is
crucial to delineating the boundaries of patent awards. Moreover, since patent litigation
typically entails several millions of dollars of expenditures for each party in a suit
(AIPLA [2005]), the lawsuits in this sample represent a significant expenditure of
resources in their own right.

After framing the paper through a discussion of the economics literature on suit
and settlement, I empirically examine the litigation of all financial patents awarded
between January 1976 and August 2003 through the end of 2005. I find that financial
patents are being litigated at a rate 27 to 39 times greater than that of patents as a whole.
Even relative to the most extensively litigated major category of patents (drugs and
health), the rate is more than an order of magnitude higher. The rates are also far greater
than that in the early years of an emerging industry where the extent and breadth of patent
protection was initially ambiguous, biotechnology.

The bulk of this paper seeks to understand the litigation of financial patents in
greater depth. I show that:
•

The finance patents being litigated are disproportionately those issued to
individuals. Inasmuch as those granted to corporations are being adjudicated, it is
overwhelmingly those issued to smaller, private entities. This seems inconsistent
with suggestions that larger firms will be able to detect infringements more
accurately.

•

Litigated patents appear to be more important than other financial patents: they
have more claims, and disproportionately cite and are cited by other patents. This
result appears consistent with standard economic models of suit and settlement.

•

Litigation does not appear to have increased for patents awarded after the State
Street decision, despite the likely increase of uncertainty about these awards. If

2

these years also saw an increase in the awarding of lower-quality patents,
however, the lack of a temporal pattern may be consistent with theory.
•

The defendants in these cases are dominated by larger firms. I suggest that welloff firms’ greater propensity to be the target of lawsuits—and individuals’ and
smaller firms’ tendency to initiate litigation—may reflect differences in the cost
of litigation.

The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 1 briefly reviews the relevant
literature on the economics of litigation. Section 2 describes the construction of the dataset. Section 3 analyzes which patents are litigated. Section 4 examines which firms are
defendants in lawsuits. The final section concludes the paper.

1. Modeling and Analyzing Suit and Settlement
Since the pioneering work of Priest and Klein [1984], economists have
understood that the decision to litigate rather than to settle disputes is a function of the
expected payoffs. To summarize a well-developed literature (see the survey by Cooter
and Rubinfeld [1989]), conditional on a legal harm being done, four considerations can
be seen as increasing the probability of a trial being held:
•

The likelihood that the offence is detected by the potential plaintiff.

•

The size of the stakes under dispute.

•

The uncertainty about the outcome of the controversy between the two parties.

•

The costs of settlement relative to that of trial.

3

In the context of financial patent litigation, these hypotheses have a number of
implications:
•

The extent to which infringements are identified may be a function of the
characteristics of the patentees. It is likely that larger, more established firms
will have better information about the state of the market and the activities of
their rivals, so they might be more likely to initiate litigation. Typically, patent
litigation is initiated by the patent-holders themselves.1 Among the ways we can
characterize an entity are whether the patent-holder is a corporation, whether it is
publicly traded, and its size and sales.

•

While we cannot directly measure the value of patents, several indirect measures
can be employed. The literature (e.g., Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002], Lanjouw,
Pakes, and Putnam [1998]) has suggested that patent value can be captured
through a number of proxies, including the number of claims made in the issued
patent, the number of citations in other patents that the patent subsequently
received (an indication that subsequent inventions have built on this discovery),
and the number of citations made by the patent (which has been interpreted as
reflecting the care with which the patent drafters have searched the prior patents).
Theory suggests that these more valuable patents should be more frequently
litigated.

•

The extent of uncertainty surrounding financial patents increased substantially
after the State Street decision. Prior to this period, there was a general consensus

1

While potential infringers can sue for “declaratory judgment” that they do not infringe a
patent, these actions are only permitted when the alleged infringer has already been
threatened with litigation. Other parties are not allowed to sue to have a patent declared
invalid.
4

that financial innovations were unlikely to be patentable. After the decision,
questions about the future of business method patent awards, the scope of these
grants, and the size of the monetary damages associated with the infringement of
financial patents have proliferated. But it should also be noted that the
acceleration in the number of filings after the decision (documented in Lerner
[2002]) suggests that more marginal discoveries may have been patented postState Street. These less important discoveries may be less frequently litigated for
the reasons delineated in the previous bullet.
•

Assessing the relative costs of settlement rather than trial is challenging. An
overall time trend may be difficult to discern. For instance, lawyers have been
increasingly willing to work for plaintiffs on a contingency basis in patent cases,
which reduces the cost of litigation sharply. Danzon [1983] shows how such
contingency arrangements can lead to a greater willingness of plaintiffs to file
suit in some cases, but not others.

One complication is introduced by the fact that most theoretical depictions are of
the decision to proceed to trial once a suit has been filed. The empirical analysis here will
focus on the initial decision to file litigation. In part, this is due to necessity: it is the
exceptional patent case that proceeds to the end of a trial.2 It can thus be argued that the
decision to initiate litigation is the critical one in this setting. But more importantly, basic
models of suit and settlement (e.g., Cooter and Rubinfeld, [1989, Section II.C]) suggest
that factors affecting the decision to settle a dispute prior to trial should also drive the
2

For instance, in Lanjouw and Lerner’s [2001] sample, only in 11% of the patent suits
was a verdict rendered in the case.
5

decision to settle prior to the inception of litigation. The same considerations—the
probabilities of success, the extent of uncertainty, and the rewards if successful—should
largely shape the decision to file a lawsuit and to proceed to trial.3

It should be noted, however, that models of nuisance litigation suggest that the
decision to file a suit may be different in some instances from the decision to proceed to
trial. In particular, a plaintiff may be willing to file a suit that would have a negative
expected value were it to go to trial if certain conditions are met, such as if the defendant
has greater costs in litigating disputes or if the defendant’s costs are more “front-end
loaded” (see, for instance, Bebchuk [1988], Cooter and Rubinfeld [1989], and Rosenberg
and Shavell [1985]). In these instances, a plaintiff may rationally initiate a losing suit.

Earlier literature (e.g., Lerner [1995]) has suggested that firms as opposed to
individuals, and larger firms in particular, should have more litigation experience and
consequently lower litigation costs due to “learning curve” effects. This might lead us to
conclude that nuisance litigation against large firms should be rare. Recent developments,
however, raise questions about this interpretation. For instance, the reliance on
injunctions both prior to (preliminary injunctions) and after (injunctive relief) a finding of
patent infringement mean that the cost of an adverse judgment to a larger firm—where a
shut-down and the associated reputational damage may affect a wide variety of product
lines—may be greater than to a small firm or to an individual with a single product (or no

3

A similar assumption has been made in other empirical research on litigation, such as
Browne and Puelz [1999] and Lanjouw and Schankerman [2003].

6

product at all). If this suggestion holds, we may see disproportionate numbers of lawsuits
directed against large firms by individuals or smaller concerns.

2. Constructing the Data-Set
This section summarizes how I constructed the data-set used in this analysis.
More details are in Appendix B.

Patent awards. I identify awards using the online database of the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, which summarizes all patents awarded since January 1976. Because I
wanted to be able to assess the quality of issued patents (which relies on being able to
identify how frequently the awards are cited in subsequent documents), I only included
patents in the sample if they were awarded through August 2003 (which gives me three
years to observe citations). In total, there are 2944 awards in the sample.

Litigation. I employ the Derwent LIT/ALERT patent litigation database to
determine if, and how often, each patent in the sample has been litigated through the end
of 2005. I do not observe cases where litigation was threatened but no lawsuit was filed.
Ideally, I could address this concern through a Heckman-style regression. But in the
classic Heckman analysis, we typically have strong priors about what considerations lead
to non-responses (e.g., that young children or a wealthy spouse may deter a woman’s
labor force participation). In this analysis, it was much more difficult to identify
observable variables that could plausibly explain settlement prior to the filing of a
lawsuit.

7

Characteristics of patentees. I also characterize the features of the parties to
whom the patents were assigned in the year of the award. I classify the awardees into
publicly traded corporations, privately held firms, individuals, and others (e.g.,
government and university entities), as well as obtaining information on the headquarters
location, revenues, and employees of the patentee.

Features of the patents. I compiled the number of forward and backward citations
through July 2006 in order to have as full depiction of the patents as possible. I also
identified those forward and backward citations that are self-citations. The interpretation
of self-citations is ambiguous: in part, it may indicate awards that are more valuable to
the patentees. Earlier work, however, suggests that large firms disproportionately cite
themselves. Finally, I computed two alternative measures of patent quality: generality
and originality (see Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2002]).

Potential defendants. In the final analysis in Section 4, I examine which firms are
sued for infringement. In order to identify potential infringers, I analyze all firms in the
“Finance, Insurance and Real Estate” industry category (except for Standard Industrial
Classification class 65, which contains real estate operators) listed in Compustat in any
year between 1990 and 2002. I download a variety of measures characterizing the firm’s
financial health and its propensity to innovate on an annual basis.

3. An Analysis of the Litigation of Patents

8

A. Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides an overview of the firms and patents included in the sample.
Several patterns stand out in Panel A:
•

While the award date of the patents in the sample ranges from 1976 to 2003, they
are concentrated in the second half, with the mean award in late 1994. This
reflects the acceleration of financial patenting activity in recent years.

•

These patents are heavily cited relative to the typical U.S. award. Jaffe and
Trajtenberg [2002, p. 439] find that the typical twelve-year-old patent had
received just fewer than seven citations, or one-quarter the level seen here.4

•

Financial patenting activity is dominated by U.S. firms, which account for 74% of
the awards. In recent years, approximately one-half of all patent awards have gone
to non-U.S. entities. This disparity is particularly dramatic among individuals and
private firms. The foreign assignees are dominated by Japanese firms to a much
greater extent than in other technical fields, which reflects the fact that Japan is
one of the few nations outside the U.S. that unambiguously allows business
method patents.

•

As noted in Lerner [2002], the representation of government and university
assignees (about 0.4%) is considerably less than in patents as a whole, and
certainly much less than in other academically-linked fields such as biotechnology
and advanced materials.

•

While the bulk of patents are not litigated, a few awards are extensively so, with
one patent being involved in fifteen lawsuits. (This is an award to an individual

4

The predicted number of citations is slightly lower if one computes a weighted average
based on the actual ages of the awards in the financial patents sample.
9

inventor, Lawrence B. Lockwood, which is being litigated through the patent
holding

company

Pangea

Intellectual

Properties.

The

patent—number

6,289,319—covers an automated “financial transaction processing system,” and is
cast in sufficiently broad terms that it probably covers all e-commerce
transactions, as well as those employing automated teller machines. Pangea has
been targeting small firms in its litigation, in a successful effort to obtain
settlements of hundreds of thousands of dollars each from firms that are reluctant
to bear the cost of litigation.5)

The second panel indicates a few characteristics of the lawsuits themselves. Most
involve a single financial patent, but several encompass multiple awards. More
interestingly, the role of third parties here is much greater than elsewhere. Only 46% of
the disputes involve an assignee or an inventor as a plaintiff or a defendant. In other
cases, the litigation is being conducted by third parties (who have typically purchased or
licensed the patent) instead. This share of third parties is much greater than seen
elsewhere. For instance, Lanjouw and Schankerman [2001, Table 1] find that in 68.5% of
the cases, the assignee is either a plaintiff or defendant. (They do not examine cases
where the inventor but not the assignee was a litigator, which would increase the share at
least modestly.)

5

See,
for
instance,
the
discussion
http://www.infoworld.com/articles/hn/xml/02/05/15/020515hnpangea.html
October 10, 2006).
10

in
(accessed

This point is underscored by Table 2. This presents the five most frequently
represented firms in several categories, which prove to be dramatically different:
•

The first column reports the most frequently represented financial innovators, as
reported in Lerner [2006]. This compilation is based on stories in the Wall Street
Journal on financial innovation between 1990 and 2002.6 This list is dominated
by financial institutions and includes a major publisher.

•

The second column presents the most frequent financial patentees between
January 1976 and August 2003. While Citigroup appears here as well (and other
financial institutions appear further down on the list), it is dominated by
information technology companies. These firms—which routinely file for
protection of hardware and software inventions—rapidly began filing for patents
on innovations that were developed in the course of projects for financial service
firms after the State Street decision (or even before).

•

The most frequent plaintiffs7 in financial patent litigation between 1976 and 2005
are reported in column 3. This list, in contrast to the others, is dominated by

6

Mergers and acquisitions introduced complications to the tabulations. Citicorp appears in
the first column because it was an active innovator until its acquisition by the Travelers
Group in 1998. Subsequent innovations by this institution were attributed to Citigroup, its
corporate parent in 2003 (which is credited with innovations developed by the new
combined entity and the old Travelers Group). (Lerner [2006] provides a more detailed
description of the procedure used.)
7
In some cases, entities file for “declaratory relief,” or for a ruling that a patent they are
being threatened with litigation about is invalid. These cases appear relatively rare in the
sample. Prior to making this and the subsequent tabulation in the fourth column of Table
2, I eliminate cases where the defendant is an assignee or an inventor of a patent in
contention, but the plaintiff is not. I also eliminate from the list of defendants parties that
appear twice or more as plaintiffs, as these cases are also likely to be suits for declaratory
relief. In the third and fourth columns, when two firms are involved in the same number
of suits, I rank them based on the number of patents over which they have litigated.
11

patent holding companies that have no lines of business other than licensing and
litigating patent awards.
•

The most frequent defendants in financial patent litigation between 1976 and
2005 are reported in the fourth column of Table 2. In contrast to the plaintiffs, the
compilation of the most frequently represented defendants is dominated by major
investment banks, trading exchanges, and other established financial institutions.

B. The Overall Level of Litigation
I then examined the propensity for these patents to be litigated. The basic
distribution of patent awards and suits over time is presented in Table 3. The first two
columns make clear that the number of financial patents granted has increased in recent
years and that the rate of litigation (which is expressed as suits per thousand patents
issued) peaked among the patents issued between 1990 and 1994.

The data in column 2, however, have two limitations. First, not all cases are
reported to the PTO. Lanjouw and Schankerman address this issue by comparing the
number of cases reported to the PTO with the number of case filings identified as patent
related by the Federal Judicial Center. This administrative office compiles a
comprehensive database of all litigation. It does not, however, indicate which patents
were involved in individual cases, so cannot be used as the basis for the analysis here.
From this information, Lanjouw and Schankerman are able to compute an adjustment
factor (reported in Appendix I of their 2003 paper), which scales up the number of
reported cases to reflect non-reporting.

12

The second limitation has to do with the fact that all patents are not litigated
immediately after issue. Rather, a considerable number of cases are initiated involving
patents that are a few years old (the probability of litigation drops considerably for older
patents). Because many of the patents in the sample are quite young (having been
awarded as recently as mid-2003), this truncation bias may be significant. I report two
adjustments to the number of lawsuits:
•

First, based on the actual distribution of litigation over time of all patents awarded
between 1982 and 1986, Lanjouw and Schankerman [2003, Appendix I] report
adjustment factors: i.e., factors that allow one to compute the total expected
amount of litigation over a patent’s lifetime based on the extent of such activity in
the initial years after award.8

•

Second, I look at the propensity to litigate financial patents specifically. Using the
number of lawsuits in each year after each patent award in the sample as the
dependent variable, I estimate the propensity of patents in different age groups
and technology classes and with different grant dates to be litigated. I then use
these coefficients to predict the amount of litigation over the patent’s lifespan.

8

There are two subtle differences between my procedure and Lanjouw and
Schankerman’s. First, the earlier authors assumed that there was only one patent per
lawsuit due to the limitations in the early Derwent data noted above, while I researched
the cases to determine missing patents. Because there are on average 1.3 patents per case
in my sample, my reported litigation rate will be slightly higher. Second, approximately
twenty percent of the entries in the Derwent database are duplicate records, referring to
different actions in the same suit. I deleted these entries (which apparently was not done
by Lanjouw and Schankerman). Thus, collectively these two adjustments should have a
very modest effect on the comparisons.
13

Because the litigation of financial patents tends to be more concentrated in the
later years after the award, this generates larger estimates than the first approach.

Columns 3 and 4 present the adjusted amount of litigation. Once these corrections
are made, there is no clear time trend in the amount of litigation: the upward adjustments
are greatest for the oldest patents (due to the severe non-reporting biases in early years)
and the most recent ones (because of their greater truncation). Comparing the litigation
rates in the third column to the similarly adjusted data of Lanjouw and Schankerman
[2001, Table 1], the overall rate of litigation is 27 times greater than in their overall
sample of awards; using the fourth, it is 39 times greater.

The rate of patent litigation is far greater than that in other fields. In the
technology group with the greatest litigation rate in the Lanjouw-Schankerman sample,
“drugs and health,” has a litigation rate that is less than 7% that seen in financial patents.
Nor do other emerging technologies—where uncertainty is presumably greater—appear
to have rates approaching financial patents. For instance, Lerner [1995] examines the
litigation of the first 2048 biotechnology awards. He finds that the rate of litigation was
less than one-fifth the rate seen here.

C. The Distribution of Litigation
Table 4 considers the litigation rate for patents with different classes of owners.
Here again, there are dramatic differences across the various sub-samples:

14

•

Patents assigned to individuals are five times more likely to be litigated than
those held by public corporations, and about 50% more likely to be so than those
held by private firms (which include both smaller operating firms and patent
holding companies).

•

Patents by individuals and institutions in the United States are 8 to 10 times more
likely to be litigated than foreign-owned ones.

•

The litigation rate of firms of different sizes differs dramatically. Among patents
awarded to firms with fewer than 200 employees at the time, for instance, there is
more than one lawsuit per patent. Among the patents awarded to the largest firms
(those with over 200,000 employees), there is no litigation at all in this sample.
When firms are segmented by revenues, a similarly dramatic pattern appears.

The prevalence in litigation of patents by small firms and individual inventors is quite
striking.

I compare the characteristics of the patents themselves in Table 5. I examine
domestic and foreign patentees separately, as their citation practices may differ. I contrast
patents that are and are not litigated. Like litigated patents overall, litigated financial
patents have more forward citations and claims. The difference in the number of forward
citations, however, is much smaller and no longer statistically significant at the fivepercent confidence level when I compute citations per claim. Thus, while litigated
financial awards may be more expansive in their claims, they are not disproportionately

15

cited once the number of claims is controlled for. Litigated patents do, however, cite
more prior art.9

I then turn in Table 6 to a regression analysis to explain the prevalence of
litigation. The unit of observation is each patent award in the sample. I employ two
dependent variables in the reported regressions. The first is an indicator denoting as one
instances where the patent was litigated before the end of 2005, and zero otherwise. This
is in the first column, which features a probit analysis. The second (in the remaining
columns) is the count of lawsuits in which the patent was involved. In these cases, I
estimate Poisson and negative binomial specifications. (I do not adjust the dependent
variable here for truncation or reporting biases, instead employing dummy variables for
each patent award year.)

In the first three regressions (which include a probit analysis as noted above, as
well as a Poisson and more robust negative binomial regression when using the count of

9

In the discussion above, I have argued that forward citations proxy for importance,
which drives litigation. There might be another relationship between citations and
innovation, however: patents that are litigated might be more frequently cited, not
because they are more important, but rather because the publicity generated by the
lawsuit calls attention to the award. This might lead to false inferences. In an unreported
table, I test for the presence of a publicity effect. In particular, for all litigated patents, I
look at the mean number of citations obtained in the years before and after the patent was
litigated. Part of the difference in citations between litigated and non-litigated patents
appears to be driven by a “publicity effect.” In the three years after the dispute, the
litigated patents garner 5.2 more forward citations relative to the baseline before the
inception of litigation. (By the fourth year, the citation rate has returned to the baseline.)
For the mean patent in the sample, which is twelve years old, this translates into a little
under one-half of a citation per year. This accounts for roughly 23% of the difference in
annual forward citation rates for litigated and non-litigated financial patents (4.0 and 2.1).

16

lawsuits), I employ a set of independent variables suggested by the theoretical discussion
above.10 These include the number of claims, the logarithm of one plus the number of
forward and backward citations per claim, dummy variables denoting cases where there
were no forward or backward citations, and the share of citations that are self-citations
(which may be informative about the importance of the patent to the firm or just citation
practices).11

Each of these regressions paints a consistent story. Patents ranking higher on the
proxies for importance—those with more claims and with more forward and backward
citations—are more likely to be litigated. The controls for self-citations are consistently
insignificant.

In Table 7, I explore the magnitude of the coefficients. I analyze the first, third,
fourth and fifth regressions reported in Table 6. In the first column, I report the predicted
dependent variable at the means of the continuous variables and with the binary variables
coded as zero. In the subsequent rows, I change one independent variable at a time, e.g.,
increasing the number of claims by one standard deviation or shifting the binary variable
denoting a U.S. assignee from zero to one. In each case, I show the change in predicted
dependent variable as the independent variable is shifted.

10

The sample size is smaller in the first regression. Some observations are dropped from
the probit regression because a zero or one outcome is perfectly predicted.
11

In cases where there are no citations, I code the share of self-citations as zero.
17

These provide an illustration of the magnitude of the effects delineated above. For
instance, regarding the finding that patents with more claims are more frequently
litigated, a one standard deviation increase in the third regression increases the predicted
number of suits per thousand patents from 24 to 64. Those with more forward citations
also experience an increase—a one standard deviation boost in the third regression raises
the litigation rate per thousand to 49. Patents with more backwards citations, which again
may suggest more important awards, similarly experience an increase in the litigation rate
(to 40 per thousand).

Regression 4 adds a variety of characteristics of the patentee to the specification.
(Once again, each patent is a separate observation, so some patentees are represented
multiple times in the regression). Consistent with the cross-tabulations in Table 4, patents
awarded to public corporations are far less likely to be litigated: the predicted litigation
rate falls by two-thirds. Those patents awarded to U.S. residents are more likely to be so.
(The patterns concerning individuals are statistically insignificant.) When I add the
logarithm of employment (in thousands) and sales (in millions of 2003 dollars) in the
year of the award to the specification in regressions 5 and 6, larger firms’ patents are
associated with less litigation, as before. (In each case, I add one to the count of
employees or sales before taking the logarithm.) For instance, a one standard deviation
increase in employment in the fifth regression reduces the expected amount of litigation
by 70%. We will defer discussing the implications of these results until we explore the
distribution of defendants in these cases in Section 4.

18

Another natural question is whether there is a time trend in the pattern of
litigation. On the one hand, the uncertainty around patent value is likely to have increased
markedly after the State Street decision. On the other hand, the increase in financial
patent filings after this decision may mean that more marginal discoveries were being
patented post-decision. Chart 1 shows the coefficient on each annual dummy variable in
the first negative binomial regression in Table 6 (the third regression). Not only are there
no consistent patterns over time, but the year dummies are collectively and individually
insignificant. A similar pattern emerges from year dummies in the other regressions.
Perhaps reflecting the countervailing pressures, no pattern in the propensity to litigate
appears around the time of the decision.

D. Robustness Checks
I undertake a variety of robustness checks to examine whether the results are
sensitive to the specification used. Most of these changes appear to have little impact.

The first concern is whether the results are sensitive to my assumption that the
appropriate time control was the date of award. It is reasonable to control for award date,
as older patents may be more frequently litigated simply because they had more time to
generate conflicts and the propensity to litigate will vary over time (patents can typically
not be litigated until they are awarded). But it may be that there are systematic patterns
in the patents applied for over time. To address this concern, I repeat in unreported
regressions the specifications reported in Table 6, now also employing dummy variables
for the application year. The key results are little changed.

19

Another possibility is that the specification is problematic because it fails to
account for the large number of zero observations in the sample. One way to address this
problem is to estimate a zero-inflated negative binomial specification, in which a first
stage estimates the probability that the patent is litigated at all, and the second focuses on
the number of suits filed conditional on there being litigation. I report the second stage in
column 7 of Table 6, again using a second-stage specification akin to that in column 3.
(The first stage, which includes controls for the year of the award, the employment and
sales of the firm, and the status of the assignee, is not reported.) The basic results go
through as before. In unreported regressions, I repeated the other analyses using zeroinflated equations, and found that the key results were qualitatively unchanged. Similarly,
I re-estimate the equations in Table 6 using a Tobit specification, and find that the results
are qualitatively unchanged.

Another concern is that lawsuits may vary in intensity. In some cases, suits may
be dropped or settled soon after being filed; in others, litigation may progress for years.
(Of course, a suit that is quickly settled for a large amount may also be very disruptive to
a defendant.) In order to measure the intensity of litigation, I total the number of docket
filings in each case, using the records of the PACER system.12

12

In approximately five percent of the cases, I am unable to obtain the index of the docket
file, either through PACER or an examination of the physical docket. In these instances, I
assume that the case had zero docket entries. I also repeat the analysis, assuming that
these missing cases have the mean number of docket entries, and find that the results are
essentially unchanged.
20

I then estimate Tobit regressions, employing the cumulative number of docket
entries in the lawsuits associated with each patent as the dependent variable. Table 8
reports the regressions corresponding to the negative binomial analyses in columns 3
through 6 of Table 6. The primary results that appeared in the earlier regressions continue
to go through as before.

I also undertook a variety of other robustness checks in unreported analyses.
Among the changes were:
•

Using the adjusted counts of lawsuits, as in Tables 3 and 4, rather than the actual
counts as the dependent variable in the regressions. (In the reported regression, by
using dummies for the year of issue, I addressed the differing vintages of the
patents.) In ordinary least squares regressions, the results were similar in both the
magnitude of marginal effects and statistical significance.

•

Repeating the analysis using alternative measures of patent importance, such as
originality and generality (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2002]) in lieu of the
citation counts. These alternative measures proved to have limited explanatory
power.

•

Employing the additional financial data available about publicly traded firms. The
basic patterns continued to hold when these controls were added.

•

Adding fixed effects for the firms awarded the patents. In regressions akin to that
reported in column 3 of Table 6, the results were little changed: patents with more
forward citations and claims were significantly more likely to be litigated. When
measures of firm characteristics were added, however, these coefficients’

21

significance dropped sharply from the reported regressions, which reflected the
fact that the features of the firms only changed slowly (if at all).
•

Dividing the patentees by those above and below the median employment (and in
a separate analysis, sales). Among both large and small patentees, the basic
patterns held: patents with more claims and citations are more frequently litigated.
The relationship between firm size and probability of litigation, however, is only
statistically significant among the smaller firms.

4. Analysis of Defendants
In the analysis in Section 3, I analyze which patents are litigated. I now turn to
examining which firms are especially likely to be named as defendants in these actions.
Because it is difficult to observe the entire pool of potential defendants, I focus on
publicly traded firms, which I can identify and characterize.

Theoretical work on the propensity to file litigation suggests that the costs of
litigation should matter. But, as discussed in Section 1, the predicted effects are not
obvious: larger firms should have lower litigation costs due to “learning curve” effects,
but are also more vulnerable to damage to other product lines and their reputation from
an adverse judgment. I employ several proxies for potential litigation costs:
•

the firm’s experience (measured, admittedly imperfectly, as the logarithm of its
age as a public entity)13

13

I compute the age and other measures using the Compustat identifier associated with the
firm at the time of the innovation. I map in the count of innovations using the appropriate
identifier. These assignments are not always apparent, but can be determined by
22

•

its financial scale (as measured through the logarithm of assets)

•

its financial condition (measured via its profitability, calculated as pre-tax
operating income over sales)

•

its leverage, measured as the ratio of the book value of the firm’s long-term debt
to total capitalization (the book value of its long-term debt and preferred stock
plus the market value of its common stock).

•

the location of its headquarters (foreign firms might face greater litigation costs),
and

•

the extent to which it engages in innovative activities (measured by the number of
innovations associated with that firm reported in the Wall Street Journal, the
extent of the firm’s interconnections to academia, and the financial innovations
occurring in the firm’s zip code, all computed in the year of the observation).

I confine the analysis to all firms with a primary assignment to Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) codes 60–69 or else who developed a financial innovation that was
reported in the Wall Street Journal during these years. (See Lerner [2006] for a
discussion of the identification of these innovations; the results are robust to just using
financial firms.) I report the analysis for the entire sample, and then for U.S.-only firms,
and just for the period after the State Street decision. In each case, I add (but do not
report) fixed effects that control for the major three-digit Standard Industrial
Classification classes in the sample.
reviewing the corporation’s history using the Hoover’s directory, Lexis-Nexis, the SDC
Mergers and Acquisitions database, and online sources. Thus, for instance, an innovation
by Wachovia Bank in 1999 would be assigned to Compustat GVKEY 11247 (denoted
‘‘Wachovia Corp-Old’’), while one by First Union Bank in that year would be assigned
to GVKEY 4739 (denoted ‘‘Wachovia Corp,’’ reflecting the fact that First Union
acquired Wachovia in 2001 and assumed its name).
23

The analysis, reported in Table 9, suggests that the strongest determinant of a firm
being a defendant in financial patent litigation is its scale: the coefficient measuring the
firm’s assets is consistently positively and significant. The measures of innovation are
consistently insignificant, and the firm headquarters dummies are inconsistent in sign.

One interpretation of these patterns—as well as the earlier finding that patents
owned by individuals and smaller firms are much more likely to be litigated—harkens
back to the discussion of the costs of litigation delineated in Section 1. If large firms find
litigation substantially more costly than do other parties—presumably due to the risk of
damage to their reputation or to other lines of business from a possible injunction—they
may disproportionately be the subject of nuisance litigation, in which entities with lower
litigation costs rationally target them with dubious claims, confident that the defendants
will find it in their interest to settle the cases.

5. Conclusions
This paper examines the litigation of financial patents. I find that financial patents
are being litigated two to three dozen times more frequently than patents as a whole. The
awards being litigated are disproportionately those awarded to individuals and to smaller,
private entities. Patents with more claims and more citations are also more frequently
litigated. Larger firms are disproportionately targeted in litigation.

24

I argue that many of the patterns here are consistent with theoretical models of
suit and settlement. In particular, the selection of more important patents for litigation
follows directly from theoretical suggestions that high-stakes disputes should lead more
frequently to litigation. If we accept the suggestion that larger firms have significantly
greater costs of litigation, the patterns regarding the initiation of lawsuits and the targets
in litigation would be consistent with theories of nuisance litigation.

It is less clear why we see the extraordinary high level of litigation in this area,
even when compared to other emerging technology classes. It may be that given the
substantial uncertainty and high potential rewards associated with these patents, the
pressures to proceed to litigation are particularly great. Alternatively, the differences in
the litigation costs between the various innovating parties may drive large numbers of
nuisance suits, which may explain the prevalence of litigation.

This paper suggests a number of questions. Foremost among these are the
consequences of these patterns of litigation for innovation in financial services. For
instance, has the high level of intellectual property litigation deterred or encouraged the
introduction of new products and services in this area? How have firms’ innovative
choices been affected by this new intellectual property regime? What has been the impact
on social welfare? Understanding the consequences of these shifts are important, given
the economic impact of financial innovation.

25

References

American Intellectual Property Law Association [AIPLA], 2005, 2005 Report of the
Economic Survey, Washington, AIPLA.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., 1988, Suing solely to extract a settlement offer, Journal of Legal
Studies 17, 437-450.
Browne, Mark J., and Robert Puelz, 1999, The effect of legal rules on the value of
economic and non-economic damages and the decision to file, Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 18, 189-213.
Cooter, Robert D., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, 1989, Economic analysis of legal disputes
and their resolution, Journal of Economic Literature 27, 1067-1097
Danzon, Patricia M., 1983, Contingent fees for personal injury litigation, Bell Journal of
Economics 14, 213-224.
Frame, W. Scott, and Lawrence J. White, 2004, Empirical studies of financial innovation:
mostly talk and not much action? Journal of Economic Literature 42, 116-144.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2002, The NBER patent
citations data file: lessons, insights and methodological tools, in Adam B. Jaffe and
Manuel Trajtenberg, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowledge
Economy, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, 2002, Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A
Window on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, MIT Press.
Lanjouw, Jean O., and Josh Lerner, 2001, Tilting the table? the use of preliminary
injunctions, Journal of Law and Economics, 44, 573-603.
Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes, and Jonathan Putnam, 1998, How to count patents and
value intellectual property: uses of patent renewal and application data, Journal of
Industrial Economics 46, 405-433.
Lanjouw, Jean O., and Mark Schankerman, 2001, Characteristics of patent litigation: a
window on competition, Rand Journal of Economics 32,129-151.
Lanjouw, Jean O., and Mark Schankerman, 2003, An empirical analysis of the
enforcement of patent rights in the United States, in Wesley Cohen and Steven Merrill,
eds., Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy, Washington, National Academy Press,
pp. 145-179.

26

Lerner, Josh, 1995, Patenting in the shadow of competitors, Journal of Law and
Economics 38, 563-95.
Lerner, Josh, 2002, Where does State Street lead? a first look at finance patents, 19712000, Journal of Finance 57, 901-930.
Lerner, Josh, 2006, The new new financial thing: the origins of financial innovations,
Journal of Financial Economics 79, 233-255.
Merton, Robert C., 1992, Financial innovation and economic performance, Journal of
Applied Corporate Finance 4 (Winter), 12-22.
Miller, Merton H., 1986, Financial innovation: the last twenty years and the next, Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 21, 459-471.
Priest, George L., and Benjamin Klein, 1984, The selection of disputes for litigation,
Journal of Legal Studies 13, 1-55.
Rosenberg, David, and Stephen Shavell, 1985, A model in which suits are brought for
their nuisance value, International Review of Law and Economics 5, 3-13.
Tufano, Peter, 1989, Financial innovation and first-mover advantages, Journal of
Financial Economics 25, 213-240.
Van Horne, James C., 1985, Of financial innovation and excesses, Journal of Finance 40,
621-631.

27

Appendix A: Background on Business Method Patents14

There has long been ambiguity about the patentability of business methods in the
United States. At least since a 1908 court decision that established the “business methods
exception,” many judges and lawyers have presumed that business methods were not
patentable subject matter. While the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) has issued
patents on financial and other business methods for several decades, many observers
questioned their validity. Consequently, patent-holders were reluctant to incur the time
and expense to litigate their awards.
Attitudes toward business method patents changed with the July 1998 appellate
decision in State Street Bank and Trust v. Signature Financial Group. This case had
originated with a software program used to determine the value of mutual funds, on
which Signature had obtained a patent in 1993. State Street Bank sued to have the patent
invalidated on the grounds that it covered a business method and was hence not
patentable. While State Street’s argument prevailed in the district court, the Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit, the centralized appellate court for patent cases, reversed
the finding. In its decision, the court explicitly rejected the notion of a “business method
exception.” The Supreme Court declined to hear State Street’s appeal of the appellate
decision in January 1999. In the numerous articles in the trade press that followed the two
decisions, the case was interpreted as unambiguously establishing the patentability of
business methods.
The decision appears to have led to a substantial increase in the filing and
granting of business method patents, including financial patents. One of the major
concerns expressed about the expansion of awards in this area has been about their
quality. These concerns are at least partially supported by Lerner [2002], who shows that
while academic research is highly relevant to many financial patents, these works are far
less often cited than in patents in other academically related areas, such as biotechnology.

14

This appendix is based on Lerner [2002].
28

Appendix B: Details About Sample Construction

Patents: Following the procedure in Lerner [2006], I identify all patents assigned to
relevant US Patent Classification subclasses. Patents are classified at the time they issue
to one or more classifications. There are over one hundred thousand such classes. The
PTO takes such classifications very seriously, because they ensure that examiners will be
able to identify the relevant earlier awards when they engage in subsequent patent
searches. As in the earlier analysis, I employ all patents with a primary assignment to
subclasses 705/4, 705/35 through 705/45, and 902/1 through 902/41.
Litigation: The Derwent database is built using reports to the PTO from the district courts
where the patent litigation is initiated. While these reports are required to be filed, as
Lanjouw and Schankerman document [2001, 2003], in a considerable number of
instances (about 35% in recent years and more earlier), no such report is made. (To
address this deficiency, I adjust the computed patent litigation rates, as discussed in detail
in Section 3.B.) The data on litigation were downloaded in May 2006. There appears,
however, to be substantial reporting lags: no suits from 2006 and only one after August
2005 were found.15 From the database, I gather information on the key dates, parties, and
location of the case, as well as the patents that were involved.16 Because the lists of
litigating parties provided by Derwent are incomplete (it only assigned one patent to each
lawsuit prior to 1990, even if there were multiple ones at issue), I obtained the docket
filings for the earlier cases and augmented their records. I count the number of lawsuits
involving each patent, regarding each case as one suit even if there are multiple
defendants named.
Patentees: I define publicly traded entities as those for which financial and related
information for the year prior to the award is available from Compustat, WorldScope, or
filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. I classify as private firms all
other cases where there is a non-governmental, non-academic assignee other than the
inventor.17 For private entities, I employ a variety of sources, including the Moody’s
manuals, the Corporate Technology Directory, national directories of firms (particularly
of Japan), and directories of various segments of the financial services industry. In these
cases, I simply seek to obtain information on the revenues and employment of the firm,
15

I assume in the calculations below that the database contains all records involving
patent litigation filed through the end of 2005. Thus, the estimates of the amount of
litigation—and the disparities from other areas of patent litigation—are slightly
understated.
16
Because the considerable majority of patent cases ultimately settle, and these
settlements are highly diverse and rarely disclosed to the public, it is impossible to
characterize the outcomes of these cases in a systematic manner.
17
Because it is difficult to determine whether non-U.S. foreign firms are publicly traded,
some public firms may be misclassified as private. Given that the corporate financial
patentees are dominated by U.S. and large Japanese firms, this problem should be
limited.
29

as well as the nation in which its headquarters is based. If I am unable to identify the
relevant information in the year of award, I use information from the year beforehand or,
if this is not available, the year after the award. In many cases, however, I am unable to
locate the sales and revenue information: many of the assignees are small patent holding
companies that keep extremely low profiles. I am, however, able to characterize the
location of all assignees: if information on firm location is not available from the above
databases, I employ the location of the assignee as identified in the issued patent. If there
is no assignee, I use the location of the inventor.
Potential defendants: Information on financial health and headquarters location are taken
from Compustat. I count innovations by a given firm by totaling the stories about
innovative financial products or services introduced by that firm in the Wall Street
Journal in a given year. I characterize the potential for knowledge spillovers by totaling
the number of innovations by firms headquartered in the same zip code in the same year.
I characterize the extent to which each firm is close to the academic frontier by
employing the firm’s representation on the editorial boards of four leading academicpractitioner journals, normalized by the firm’s assets. I calculate each firm’s editorial
board seats at the beginning of each year. I count a firm that is a sponsor of a journal as
having the equivalent of two editorial board seats. Lerner [2006] provides more details on
these measures.

30

Table 1: Characteristics of Patents and Lawsuits
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003.
The table presents the key features of the patents and the 246 lawsuits involving these patents
through the end of 2005.
Panel A: Patent Awards
Year patent issued
Application year
Claims made
Citations made
Citations made per claim
Citations received through July 2006
Citations received through July 2006 per claim
Self-citations made
Self-citations received through July 2006
Generality
Originality
Sales of assignee in issue year (billions of 2003$s)
Employment of assignee in issue year (000s)
Assignee is a U.S.-based individual
Assignee is a non-U.S.-based individual
Assignee is a U.S.-based public corporation
Assignee is a non-U.S.-based public corporation
Assignee is a U.S.-based private firm
Assignee is a non-U.S.-based private firm
Nationality of assignee (if non-U.S.):
Japanese
British
French
German
Lawsuits involving patent through end of 2005
Panel B: Lawsuits
Number of financial patents in suit
Patent invented by plaintiff?
Patent assigned to plaintiff?
Patent invented by defendant?
Patent assigned to defendant?

Mean
Std. Dev.
1994.7
7.3
1992.1
7.1
20.9
20.9
13.3
17.6
1.2
3.1
24.0
33.2
2.3
6.0
0.6
2.1
0.4
1.0
0.44
0.25
0.53
0.27
24.9
37.8
86.0
113.3
16.0%
2.3%
32.5%
16.2%
24.9%
7.7%
57.6%
8.5%
6.5%
6.3%
0.08
Mean
1.32
5.90%
32.60%
1.10%
6.40%

Min.
1976
1969
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.07
0.06
0
0.005

Max.
2003
2002
375
243
121.5
407
129
60
15
1
1
467
891

0

15

0.59
Std. Dev.
1

Min.
1

Max.
7

Table 2: Most Frequently Represented Firms
The table summarizes the firms most frequently represented in the tabulations of financial innovators between 1990 and 2002, financial
patentees between 1976 and 2003, and litigators of financial patents between 1975 and 2005. The tabulations of plaintiffs and defendants
exclude cases where an alleged infringer sues for declaratory relief; the compilation of defendants, actions against frequent patent
plaintiffs.
Innovators
Merrill Lynch
Citigroup
American Express
Citicorp
McGraw-Hill

Patentees
Hitachi
International Business Machines
NCR
Citigroup
Fujitsu

Note:
The source of the first column is Lerner [2006].

Plaintiffs
Pangea Intellectual Properties, LLC
Divine Technology Ventures
Source, Inc.
Meridian Enterprises Corp.
Travelers Express Co.

Defendants
American Express
Citigroup
Chicago Board of Trade
New York Mercantile Exchange
JP Morgan Chase

Table 3: Distribution of Adjusted and Unadjusted Lawsuits, by Year
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The table
presents for each time period the number of financial patents issued and the adjusted and unadjusted rate
of lawsuits involving these patents. See text for discussion of the adjustment procesess.
Patent award year
1976-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989
1990-1994
1995-1999
2000-2003

No. of
Patents
110
258
443
294
762
1075

All patents

2942

Unadjusted lawsuits/
Rate, Adjusted Using
1000 patents
All Patents
45.5
285.9
19.4
62.4
101.6
235.4
210.9
411.9
86.6
299.2
58.6
337.1
83.6

293.5

Rate, Adjusted Using
Finance Patents
285.9
62.4
266.4
607.1
491.4
506.6
429.3

Table 4: Adjusted Lawsuits by Firm Type
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The table
presents for various sub-classes of assignees the adjusted rate of lawsuits involving these patents. See
text for discussion of the adjustment processes.
Firm type in award year

Adjusted lawsuits/ 1000 patents
Using All Patents

Adjusted lawsuits/ 1000 patents
Using Finance Patents

By Assignee Status
Publicly Traded Firm
Privately Held Firm
Individual
p-Value, test of no difference

114.5
396.6
591.7
0.000

175.4
579.1
846.5
0.000

By Nation of Assignee
United States
Japan
Other
p-Value, test of no difference

382.8
29.9
61.0
0.000

560.9
34.8
95.8
0.000

By Employees in Award Year
0-200
201-1000
1001-50,000
50,001-200,000
>200,000
p-Value, test of no difference

1153.0
313.1
80.3
47.1
0.0
0.000

1581.9
488.0
115.7
70.8
0.0
0.000

790.9
681.5
74.7
84.5
45.1
0.0
0.000

1238.0
1096.9
119.9
113.9
72.8
0.0
0.000

By Revenues in Award Year (millions of 2003$s)
0-10
10.1-100
100.1-1000
1000.1- 10,000
10,000.1-50,000
>50,000
p-Value, test of no difference

Table 5: Comparison of Means for Litigated and Non-Litigated Patents

The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The table
presents for patents assigned to domestic and foreign assignees several characteristics of the patents.

Claims
Forward citations/year
Backward citations
Forward cites/year/claim
Backward cites/claim

Domestic
Not Litigated
Litigated
31.00
22.73
4.04
2.40
19.39
14.78
0.28
0.20
1.77
1.18

***
***
**
*
*

Note:
*,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level

Foreign
Litigated Not Litigated
24.83
14.40 *
4.07
1.40 ***
9.83
8.24
0.21
0.16
0.61
0.96

Table 6: Regression Estimates of Number of Lawsuits
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The dependent variable in the first regression is a
dummy variable indicating whether the patent was ever litigated; in the remaining regressions, it is the count of lawsuits involving the patent. The first
regression employs a probit specification; the second is a Poisson estimation; and the remainder use negative binomial specifications.
Dependent variable:
Was patent litigated?
Probit
Logarithm of number of claims in patent
1.062
[0.101]***
Log of forward citations per claim
0.668
[0.118]***
Zero forward citations?
-0.711
[0.731]
Log of backward citations per claim
0.887
[0.149]***
Zero backward citations?
-14.189
[863.717]
Share of forward citations that are self-citations
-1.791
[1.616]
Share of backward citations that are self-citations
-0.311
[0.404]
Was assignee a public corporation?
Was assignee an individual?
Was assignee based in the United States?
Log of employment in year of issue (000s)
Misssing employment data?
Log of sales in year of issue (millions of 2003 $s)
Missing sales data?
Year of issue dummy variables
p-Value
Observations

Y
0.000
2757

Dependent variable: Number of lawsuits involving patent
Poisson
Negative Binomial
1.125
0.976
0.806
0.854
0.621
0.705
[0.183]*** [0.184]*** [0.182]*** [0.184]*** [0.198]*** [0.206]***
0.962
0.844
0.704
0.785
0.715
0.824
[0.246]*** [0.241]*** [0.237]*** [0.239]*** [0.272]*** [0.289]***
-0.177
-0.118
-0.160
-0.138
-0.278
[0.912]
[0.891]
[0.885]
[0.889]
[0.889]
1.047
0.922
0.700
0.709
0.770
0.796
[0.295]*** [0.287]***
[0.285]**
[0.287]**
[0.303]** [0.306]***
-14.276
-15.444
-14.675
-16.062
-14.919
[1,020.750] [1,508.425] [959.875] [1,936.375] [1,161.905]
-1.420
-0.171
0.076
-0.016
-0.655
-1.278
[1.413]
[1.004]
[0.947]
[0.963]
[1.257]
[1.219]
-0.178
0.093
0.162
0.139
0.088
0.085
[0.416]
[0.286]
[0.281]
[0.278]
[0.510]
[0.426]
-1.092
-0.016
0.094
[0.268]***
[0.359]
[0.441]
0.428
0.335
0.283
[0.282]
[0.284]
[0.280]
1.309
1.390
1.248
[0.387]*** [0.399]*** [0.391]***
-0.573
[0.124]***
-0.186
[0.341]
-0.250
[0.073]***
-0.465
[0.547]
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
2941
2941
2941
2941
2941
2941

Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets.
*,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level.
The seventh regression is the second stage of a set of equations that controls for probability of no litigation occurring at all.

Table 7: Estimated Litigation Probabilities
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The dependent variable in the regression in the first row is a dummy variable indicating
whether the patent was ever litigated; in the remaining regressions, it is the count of lawsuits involving the patent. The regression in the first row employs a probit specification and the
remainder use negative binomial specifications. The first column presents the predicted dependent variable at the means of the continuous variables and with the binary variables coded as
zero; the other columns show the change in predicted dependent variable as one variable at a time is shifted.

Probability of Litigation (regression #1 in Table 6)
Count of Lawsuits (#3)
Count of Lawsuits (#4)
Count of Lawsuits (#5)

+1 Standard
Deviation in
Log Claims

+2 Standard
Deviations in Log
Claims

+1 Standard
Deviation in Log
Forward Citations
per Claim

3.22%
0.024
0.014
0.005

8.45%
0.064
0.032
0.010

18.37%
0.170
0.076
0.021

5.57%
0.049
0.026
0.009

9.08%
0.099
0.048
0.014

5.71%
0.040
0.022
0.007

Patent Holder is
from the United
States
0.051
0.020

+1 Standard
Deviation in Log
Employment
0.002

+2 Standard
Deviations in Log
Employment
0.000

At means
Probability of Litigation (regression #1 in Table 6)
Count of Lawsuits (#3)
Count of Lawsuits (#4)
Count of Lawsuits (#5)

+1 Standard
+2 Standard
Deviation in Log
Deviations in Log
Forward Citations Backward Citations
per Claim
per Claim

At means

3.22%
0.024
0.014
0.005

Patent Holder
is a Public
Corporation
0.005
0.005

Patent Holder is an
Individual
0.021
0.007

+2 Standard
Deviations in Log
Backward Citations
per Claim
9.49%
0.067
0.034
0.010

Table 8: Regression Estimates for Litigation Intensity
The sample consists of 2942 financial patents issued between January 1976 and August 2003. The dependent
variable is the count of filings in all lawsuits involving the patent. All regressions employ Tobit specifications.
Dependent variable: Number of lawsuits involving patent
Tobit
Logarithm of number of claims in patent
253.611
217.638
196.733
200.241
[37.234]*** [36.742]***
[36.109]***
[36.166]***
Log of forward citations per claim
132.278
116.131
98.600
108.184
[41.201]*** [40.902]***
[40.800]**
[40.739]***
Zero forward citations?
22.383
6.912
5.720
2.863
[140.695]
[144.327]
[146.102]
[145.230]
Log of backward citations per claim
284.909
252.231
231.944
228.618
[52.237]*** [51.074]***
[51.109]***
[50.852]***
Zero backward citations?
-2261.379
-2254.871
-2241.221
-2233.043
[14490.399]
[9749.142]
[8798.306]
[9032.619]
Share of forward citations that are self-citations
-144.901
-3.578
28.058
17.151
[225.276]
[132.905]
[130.783]
[130.221]
Share of backward citations that are self-citations
5.834
27.042
40.690
36.589
[54.521]
[41.425]
[44.194]
[41.247]
Was assignee a public corporation?
246.571
243.371
234.984
[76.882]***
[78.424]***
[76.193]***
Was assignee an individual?
-29.671
-44.860
-56.751
[50.894]
[52.851]
[51.193]
Was assignee based in the United States?
-225.985
-35.122
14.706
[49.876]***
[69.367]
[75.584]
Log of employment in year of issue (000s)
-89.986
[22.204]***
Misssing employment data?
-18.262
[65.354]
Log of sales in year of issue (millions of 2003 $s)
-41.595
[12.535]***
Missing sales data?
-30.959
[93.387]
Year of issue dummy variables
Y
Y
Y
Y
p-Value
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
Observations
2941
2941
2941
2941
Notes:
Standard errors in brackets.
*,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level.

Table 9: Regression Estimates of Financial Patent Litigation Defendants
The sample consists of 15,397 annual observations of financial firms and financial innovators (see
text) in Compustat between 1990 and 2002. The dependent variable is the count of filings in all
patent lawsuits with the firm as a defendant in the year of the observation. All regressions employ
negative binomial specifications.
Dependent variable: Number of lawsuits involving firm
Negative Binomial
Entire
U.S.-Based
1999 and After
Sample
Firms Only
Observations Only
Log years firm has been publicly traded
0.18
0.428
0.305
[0.249]
[0.285]
[0.259]
Log of firm's assets
0.458
0.36
0.442
[0.144]***
[0.127]***
[0.136]***
Profit margin
-0.134
0.043
-0.069
[0.390]
[0.555]
[0.408]
Leverage
-1.615
-1.667
-2.038
[1.142]
[1.351]
[1.089]*
Firm based in Bermuda
-15.367
-15.779
[0.607]***
[0.621]***
Firm based in Japan
-17.254
-17.514
[0.645]***
[0.556]***
Firm based in Canada
-14.515
-15.143
[0.623]***
[0.716]***
Firm based in U.K.
1.733
1.428
[0.659]***
[0.646]**
Firm based in other foreign nation
-16.142
-16.655
[0.621]***
[0.579]***
Innovations by firm
0.524
0.384
0.201
[0.396]
[0.344]
[0.265]
Academic connectedness
-0.763
-1.395
-0.615
[1.020]
[2.804]
[0.459]
Other innovations in ZIP code
-0.27
-0.168
0.013
[0.240]
[0.234]
[0.207]
Industry controls
Y
Y
Y
p-Value
Observations

0.000
15937

0.000
15034

Notes:
Robust standard errors in brackets.
*,**, and *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% significance level.

0.000
5472

Chart 1: Annual Dummy Variables from Regression 3 in Table 6
The table presents the coefficients from the 3rd regression in Table 6. The coefficient for 1976 is normalized to zero. No financial patents
awarded in 1979 through 1981 and 1984 were litigated.
2

1.5

1

0.5

19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03

0

-0.5

