                                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MANAGING CONTRIBUTION AND CAPITAL MARKET RISK IN A FUNDED PUBLIC DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN:
                         IMPACT OF CVAR COST CONSTRAINTS

                                                    Raimond Maurer
                                                    Olivia S. Mitchell
                                                     Ralph Rogalla

                                                  Working Paper 14332
                                          http://www.nber.org/papers/w14332


                               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             September 2008




         This research was conducted with support from the TransCoop Program of the Alexander von Humboldt
         Foundation and the Pension Research Council (PRC) at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.
         We are grateful for useful comments from Peter Brady, Peter König, and Steven Haberman, and for
         data provided by the Hessian Statistical Office. This is part of the NBER Program on the Economics
         of Aging. Opinions and errors are solely those of the authors and not of the institutions with whom
         the authors are affiliated nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.

         NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
         reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
         NBER publications.

         © 2008 by Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla. All rights reserved. Short sections
         of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
         credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Managing Contribution and Capital Market Risk in a Funded Public Defined Benefit Plan:
Impact of CVaR Cost Constraints
Raimond Maurer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Ralph Rogalla
NBER Working Paper No. 14332
September 2008
JEL No. G11,G15,G2,G23,H3,H55,H71,J26,J32

                                              ABSTRACT

Using a Monte Carlo framework, we analyze the risks and rewards of moving from an unfunded defined
benefit pension system to a funded plan for German civil servants, allowing for alternative strategic
contribution and investment patterns. In the process we integrate a Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR)
restriction on overall plan costs into the pension manager's objective of controlling contribution rate
volatility. After estimating the contribution rate that would fully fund future benefit promises for current
and prospective employees, we identify the optimal contribution and investment strategy that minimizes
contribution rate volatility while restricting worst-case plan costs. Finally, we analyze the time path
of expected and worst-case contribution rates to assess the chances of reduced contribution rates for
current and future generations. Our results show that moving toward a funded public pension system
can be beneficial for both civil servants and taxpayers.


Raimond Maurer                                       Ralph Rogalla
Finance Department, Goethe University                Goethe University of Frankfurt
House of Finance (Uni-PF H 23)                       House of Finance (Uni-PF H 23), Gr
Grüneburgplatz 1                                     D-60323 Frankfurt am Main
D-60323 Frankfurt am Main, Germany                   rogalla@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de
rmaurer@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de

Olivia S. Mitchell
Dept of Insurance & Risk Management
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
MITCHELO@WHARTON.UPENN.EDU
                                                                                                          1




    Managing Contribution and Capital Market Risk in a Funded Public
        Defined Benefit Plan: Impact of CVaR Cost Constraints

1. Introduction

        Traditional PAYGO public pension plans confront demographic aging in most devel-

oped nations, and some policymakers advocate boosting funding to ease the crunch of paying

for the future pension liability. In the case of civil servant pensions, a handful of these have

substantial assets including in the Netherlands (ABP 2006) and the state of California

(Mitchell et al. 2001). But more generally, and in Germany in particular, civil servants are

often promised a non-contributory, tax-sponsored defined benefit (DB) pension which is usu-

ally not funded. This study evaluates the impact of an alternative approach to public sector

pension fund management, by deriving optimal contribution rate and asset allocation patterns

in a partially funded scheme for the German federal state of Hesse. We show this approach

can be useful in permitting a state to finance its public pensions so as to cut costs for taxpay-

ers and enhance pension security for participants.

        Plan sponsors are generally concerned with two types of risk, namely contribution rate

and solvency risk (Lee 1986; Haberman, Butt, and Megaloudi 2000). When managing the

funded pension, plan sponsors and beneficiaries wish to insure that plan funds will be suffi-

cient to cover pension liabilities, while ideally smoothing contribution rates over time. To

combine both types of risk, traditional studies on managing DB pensions have introduced a

quadratic cost criterion as the plan manager’s objective function (c.f. Haberman and Sung

1994, 2005; Haberman 1997a,b; Ngwira and Gerrard 2007; and Owadally and Haberman

2004). These risks are typically measured by squared deviations of current contribution rates

and funding levels from their expected or notional values. 1 Another approach adopts a Con-

ditional Value at Risk (CVaR) criterion as a key risk measure used for plan control: the

1
 Other plan manager objectives could include expected utility from dividends paid by the pension plan or from
possible terminal surplus values (c.f. Hainaut and Devolder 2007; Detemple and Rindisbacher 2008).
                                                                                                            2




CVaR of a parameter at the α percent confidence level is defined as the parameter’s expecta-

tion under the condition that its realization exceeds the Value at Risk (VaR) for that level

(Artzner et al. 1997, 1999; Rockafellar and Uryasev 2002). For instance, Bogentoft, Romeijn,

and Uryasev (2001) include CVaR constraints on funding levels while seeking to minimize

total costs of pension funding. Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008a, b) directly minimize

the Conditional Value at Risk of total pension costs, while Haberman et al. (2003a, b) inves-

tigate the trade-off between mean shortfall risk (i.e. CVaR on plan solvency) and excess con-

tribution rate risk.

        In this paper, we identify contribution and investment strategies that minimize pen-

sion contribution rate risk (as in Haberman, Butt, and Megaloudi 2000), and we also impose

CVaR restrictions on total plan costs appropriate to a public pension scheme. 2 Focusing on

the CVaR of the stochastic present value of plan costs offers an elegant and objective way to

compare different intertemporal contribution and investment paths on a common basis. More-

over, this approach allows us to explicitly incorporate decisionmakers’ risk budget, by defin-

ing the maximum admissible CVaR of plan costs.

        We implement our approach in the context of German civil service pension plans. To

date, only two German states have started funding a portion of their public pension liability,

depositing 20-40 percent of covered payroll to the active civil servants’ pension fund; these

investments have been mainly restricted to government bonds. To illustrate the power of our

model, we examine the Hessian public pension plan which we argue is rather representative

of the public sector environment in Germany. We show that controlling only on costs re-

quires a high regular contribution rate of about 40 percent of covered payroll. Conversely,

focusing only on contribution rate volatility yields low regular contribution rates and low-risk


2
  In accordance with Feldstein and Ranguelova (2001) and others, we suggest that the decision to start prefund-
ing an initially unfunded public pension plan requires attention to the cost risks associated with funding and
investing in capital markets. Such a strategy may be considered only if these risks can be held to acceptable
levels. Accordingly, we incorporate a restriction on the maximum size of plan costs in worst-case scenarios.
                                                                                                         3




asset allocations, but taxpayers are exposed to substantial risk of extraordinary but predict-

able transfers to cover shortfalls. Combining both approaches can produce moderate contribu-

tion rates accompanied and a substantial equity portfolio which generates acceptable contri-

bution rate volatility while keeping total pension costs under control.

        In what follows, we briefly describe the public pension on which we focus, and we

derive the value of plan liabilities and payroll-related contribution rates needed to finance

them. Section 3 outlines the plan manager’s objective function and the model underlying the

asset/liability management process. Results of our stochastic simulation study are detailed in

Section 4. A final Section concludes.



2. Valuing Public Pension Liabilities in a Non-Stochastic Framework: The German

Civil Servant Plan

        German civil servants have traditionally been promised a noncontributory, tax-

sponsored, unfunded, and relatively generous DB-type annuity that depends on retirement

age, years in civil service, and final salary. 3 In exchange for this plan, civil servants do not

participate in the national social security system nor are they covered by supplementary oc-

cupational pensions (Heubeck and Rürup 2000). Over time, civil servant pensions have be-

come less generous: the retirement age, which had been 65, is being raised to 67, and pension

accruals have been reduced to approximately 1.79 percent of final salary per service year.

This will generate a maximum replacement rate of 71.75 percent after 40 years of service

(versus 75 percent under the old rules).

2.1 Civil Service Employee Dataset

        We base our assessment of the public plan by focusing on civil servants employed by

the German federal state of Hesse. This population of civil servants is rather representative of

3
  For a more detailed discussion of the German civil servant pension system and the dataset employed in this
study, see Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008a, b).
                                                                                                                4




the approximately 1.5 million active (about 4.5% of the workforce) and 900,000 retired civil

servants in Germany as a whole. 4 The dataset provided by the Hessian Statistical Office in-

cludes anonymized files on active civil servants in 2004 in Hesse reporting their age, sex,

marital status, line of service, and salary. 5 There are 104,919 active civil servants in the data-

base: the average age is 44.7 years, earning an average salary of € 39,000, and 45 percent

female. Payroll amounted to an annual €4.26 billion or 33 percent of Hesse’s annual state tax

revenues in that year.

2.2 Population Dynamics and Economic Assumptions

         This analysis of a transition toward a funded pension incorporates both current em-

ployees as well as those to be hired in the future into the calculations. (Unfunded past service

liabilities are assumed to be covered from other revenue sources, as in Maurer, Mitchell, and

Rogalla 2008a, b). Projecting the civil service population requires forecasting the evolution

of age and salary for existing employees, as well as making assumptions about new hires.

Since practically speaking, employee turnover for reasons other than retirement is insignifi-

cant, we assume that all workers remain active until age 67 and reach retirement with cer-

tainty. 6 Vacant positions are assumed to be filled with new recruits with a 50% chance of

being male or female. Each new worker’s entry age is set to the empirical average age of new

hires, accounting for average time spent in position-related education or service credited as

prior creditable years. New workers receive the age-related remuneration for their positions

and marital status is that of the previous position holder. Retired civil servants are represented

by the expected cash flows of the indexed life annuities they receive according to the civil



4
  These numbers include only federal and state civil servants, but not the approximately 200,000 active and
500,000 retired civil servants who worked for former state-owned (now privatized) enterprises such as the Ger-
man national railway and federal mail (Bundesministerium des Innern, 2005).
5
  Information on a handful of top-level civil servants, judges, and state attorneys is omitted to preserve anonym-
ity.
6
  Provisions for early retirement and disability benefits, as well as dependents’ benefits due to death in service,
must therefore be conducted separately from this analysis.
                                                                                                               5




service pension benefit formula. (For married retirees we calculate indexed joint-and-survivor

annuities, assuming that both partners are of same age and opposite sex.)

        To value the civil servant pension liability profiles, we use mortality tables specific to

the Hessian civil service derived by Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008a). Future mortality

improvements are incorporated using an exponential trend function suggested by the German

Association of Actuaries (‘Zieltrend 2. Ordnung’; c.f. DAV 2004, p. 56ff.). Employing this

trend function, by 2030 the mortality of a female civil servant aged 65 will fall by 40 percent.

Inflation, salary growth, and investment returns have significant influence on pension plan

valuation and must also be considered in forecasting future benefit accruals (Hustead and

Mitchell 2001). The analysis is conducted in real terms, inasmuch as salaries and pension

benefits tend to be tied to the consumer price index; accordingly, the growth rate of real

wages and real pensions is zero. Because pension liabilities have a long duration, they are

highly sensitive to the discount rate selected. Our analysis adopts the economic approach to

pension valuation so we capitalize liabilities at the real rate on (quasi-) risk-free long-term

government bonds reflecting the state’s financing costs. 7 We set the real risk-free interest rate

at 3 percent in our base case, a more conservative assumption than the nominal 8 percent em-

ployed by US state-sponsored pension plans (Novy-Marx and Rauh 2008). 8 To check the

interest rate sensitivity of our findings, we also report results using a 1.5 percent a real inter-

est rate.




7
  For a detailed discussion on the differences between the economic and the actuarial approach to pension valua-
tion, see Blake (2006, p. 77).
8
  Adjusting average nominal par yields of long-term German government bonds by the average inflation rate for
the post-WWII period results in real returns of about 4 percent. The yield on European inflation indexed bonds
is currently about 2 percent. However, the markets for indexed long duration government bonds are still not well
developed, so we base our analyses on the assumption of a real discount rate of 3 percent. Moreover, the federal
state of Saxony uses a nominal discount rate of 4.75 percent for valuing their pension liabilities. Accounting for
a long-run inflation target of 2% set by the European Central Bank, this lies in range of our real 3 percent base
case discount rate.
                                                                                                               6




2.3 Deriving Future Contribution Rates

        If plan sponsors seek to fund their pension scheme, they must analyze pension liabil-

ity patterns so as to derive the contribution rate adequate to pay for plan liabilities. To deter-

mine the plan’s normal cost, we employ the aggregate level percentage of payroll method

which expresses total projected plan costs as a percentage of active members’ payroll

(McGill et al. 2005). Starting with the initial civil service population and developing it over

the next 50 years, we calculate the present values of future salary payments as well as future

pension payments and accruals. We conduct a discontinuance valuation as of the last period

(2053), computing the projected benefit obligation (PBO) for all outstanding pension prom-

ises. 9 The ratio of the present values of pension liabilities and salary payments represents the

deterministic yearly contribution rate required to fund pension promises, expressed as a per-

centage of active civil servants’ payroll. 10

        In the base case with a 3 percent discount rate, the present value of future pension li-

abilities amounts to € 20.8 billion versus the present value of salary payments of € 111.5 bil-

lion. Therefore, the smoothed average contribution rate required to pay for the pension prom-

ises is 18.7 percent of salaries. Applying an alternative discount rate of 1.5 percent increases

the present value of pension liabilities to € 44.8 billion and that of salary payments to € 149.3

billion. Since pension liabilities exhibit longer duration than salary payments, decreasing dis-

count rates will increase contribution rates – in this case, from 18.7 to 30 percent.




9
  While this horizon could easily be further extended beyond 50 years, all the then-active civil servants will be
fully covered by the funded system and all retirees will receive a significant fraction of their benefits from the
funded system.
10
   Throughout, we set aside the past service pension obligation accrued by current and past workers on the pre-
sumption that these will have to be handled with some other financing mechanism.
                                                                                                        7




3. Stochastic Investment Returns and Pension Plan Funding

3.1 The Pension Manager’s Objectives and Asset/Liability Management

        When investment returns are stochastic, the plan manager is posited to minimize the

variability of annual plan contributions, while at the same time ensuring that (worst-case)

plan costs are kept under control. To this end, the manager is free to choose a fixed rate of

normal contributions CR as a fraction of salaries, as well as a constant allocation of plan as-

sets to equities and bonds. 11 We assume that at the beginning of each period t, the sponsor

endows the plan with regular contributions RCt based on CR and salary payments in t. These

funds are then used to pay for pensions due at time t, and any remaining plan assets are in-

vested. At the end of every period, the plan’s funding situation is scrutinized by comparing

current plan liabilities measured by the PBOt+1 and current plan assets At+1. If plan liabilities

exceed plan funds, additional contributions will be required to re-establish the balance be-

tween assets and liabilities. On the other hand, if assets exceed liabilities, this will permit

lower contributions to the plan.

        Funding deviations are reduced by amortizing the shortfall over a period ranging from

1 to 20 years, depending on the manager’s control function. In other words, we employ the

spread method described by Haberman (1997a) to determine how much additional beyond

normal costs must be added to cover underfunding. The plan’s liability at the end of period t,

i.e. PBOt+1, is calculated as:

                                              1.79375% ⋅ τ i,t +1 ⋅ S67,i ⋅ a67,i
                             PBOt +1 = ∑                                            ,           (1)
                                          i            (1 + r )67 − Age   i ,t +1




where (for each civil servant i of Agei,t+1) τi,t+1 is the number of pensionable service years

accrued until t+1, S67,i is the projected salary at retirement age 67, a67,i is the immediate pen-




11
  Here, we follow Haberman et al. (2003a, p. 513) who show that pension funds tend to exhibit rather stable
asset allocations over time.
                                                                                                        8




sion annuity factor at age 67, r is the discount rate, and 1.79% is the final salary-related re-

placement rate per pensionable service year.

        We define ULt+1 = PBOt+1 - At+1 as the unfunded liability at the end of period t (at the

beginning of period t+1), which is to be recovered over a pre-specified time horizon m, the

spread period. 12 Then, the total contribution to the plan in t+1 (Ct+1) is the sum of regular

contributions (RCt+1) and adjustment payments ADJt+1:

                                        Ct +1 = RCt +1 + ADJt +1,                                 (2)

with

                                       ADJt +1 = ANFm,r ⋅ ULt +1,                                 (3)

where ANFm,r is the annuity factor for an m-period time annuity due calculated at the discount

rate r according to

                                                                     −1
                                                    ⎛ m −1 1 ⎞
                                       ANFm, r   = ⎜⎜ ∑               ⎟ .
                                                                    i ⎟
                                                                                                  (4)
                                                    ⎝ i = 0 (1 + r ) ⎠

For simplicity, the amortization or spread period m is assumed to be the same for asset short-

falls as well as surpluses (which in practice, may not always be true; c.f. Winklevoss 1993).

        Finally, we stipulate that the overall contributions Ct+1 may not be negative, i.e. that

RCt+1 ≥ - ADJt+1 . Thus negative adjustment payments are limited in each period to the cur-

rent regular contributions; the manager is prohibited from withdrawing from the pension fund

for other purposes. The rationale for this is that political decisionmakers are sometimes

tempted to withdraw funds and misuse them for short-term political objectives when plans

are overfunded. We seek to avoid this by imposing structural withdrawal restrictions.

        To derive the optimal investment and contribution policy for this public pension plan,

we run a Monte Carlo simulation with 10,000 iterations. The optimal policy parameters for

the pension plan – the normal contribution rate CR and the equity weight x – are computed

12
 For a discussion of optimal spread period lengths see Dufresne (1988), Haberman (1997a), and Owadally and
Haberman (1999, 2004).
                                                                                                     9




assuming that the plan sponsor’s objective is to minimize the variance of periodic contribu-

tions around the normal contribution rate over time, under the constraint that the Conditional

Value at Risk (CVaR) at the 1 percent level of the stochastic present value of total pension

costs TPC does not exceed a pre-specified level c. This integrates the approaches by Haber-

man, Butt, and Megaloudi (2000), 13 who use a combined measure of contribution and fund-

ing volatility as objective function, and Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008a, b), who seek

to minimize the CVaR of total pension costs.

           More formally, the plan manager’s optimization problem can be defined as follows:

                                           ⎡ T −1 ⎛                         ⎞ ⎤
                                                                             2
                                                            Ct
                                    min E ⎢∑ ⎜⎜                       − CR ⎟⎟ ⎥
                                    CR , x
                                           ⎢⎣ t =1 ⎝ Salary Paymentst       ⎠ ⎥⎦
                                    s.t.                                                       (5)
                                    CVaR1% (TPC ) ≤ c,

where the constant c describes the tolerable level of worst-case pension costs, which we will

assume is determined by the deterministic pension liability derived in section 2.3 (i.e. € 20.8

billion in case of a discount rate of 3%).

           Following Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008a, b), the stochastic present value of

total pension costs TPC is calculated according to:

                                            T
                                                   RCt + SCt (1 + ξ1 ) − Wt (1 − ξ 2 )
                                   TPC = ∑                                             ,       (6)
                                            t =1              (1 + r )t
where RCt denotes regular contributions in t based on the fixed normal contribution rate CR

and the payroll in t and supplementary contributions SCt and withdrawals Wt are defined as:

                               ⎧ ADJt | ADJt > 0                       ⎧− ADJt | ADJt < 0
                         SCt = ⎨                                  Wt = ⎨                  .    (7)
                               ⎩     0, else                           ⎩    0, else




13
     Specifically, we use their objective function assuming that parameters w and θ equal 1.
                                                                                                                    10




Here r is the fixed real discount rate reflecting government’s financing costs and ξi are pen-

alty factors on supplementary contributions and withdrawals. The α%-CVaR of TPC is de-

fined by:

                             CVaRα % (TPC ) = E (TPC | TCP > VaRα % (TPC )) .                                 (8)

In the objective function (5), dividing current plan costs Ct by salary payments results in the

currently applicable overall rate of contributions to the plan (as a fraction of the current pay-

roll). Their volatility around the normal contribution rate CR specified by the plan manager

can be interpreted as an ‘expected’ contribution rate in this setting. We find it natural to in-

clude upward deviations of the contribution rate in the volatility measure. This formula also

accounts for downward deviations, since setting normal contribution targets too high could

result in actual contributions always falling below target (c.f. Haberman, Butt, and Megaloudi

2000). 14

         Supplementary contributions and withdrawals are penalized with ξi to ensure that an

adequate normal contribution rate is set: that is, supplementary contributions of 1 Euro cost

the plan (1+ ξ1) Euros. Conversely withdrawing 1 Euro from the plan generates only (1- ξ2)

Euros. We do this to offset a common perception that public funds paid into the civil servant

pension plan are “free” money. 15

3.2 Stochastic Asset Model

         In order to project future asset returns on investments in equities and bonds, we rely

on the first-order vector autoregressive (VAR) model widely used in the academic and practi-




14
   By contrast, some studies do not account for upward deviations (e.g. Haberman et al. 2003a) or put more
emphasis on underfunding risk and over-contribution risk (e.g Chang, Tzeng, and Miao 2003).
15
   For a more detailed discussion of the rationale behind the penalty factors, see Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla
(2008). Due to the spread method applied, it is likely that contribution volatility will be significant after the final
period when the plan is terminated and the discontinuance valuation undertaken. By contrast, in an ongoing
plan, existing funding deviations would be recovered over time and therefore deviations in contribution rates
would be substantially lower. To prevent artificially high contribution volatility from unduly influencing deci-
sion-making, we only take into account contribution rate variations until time T-1.
                                                                                                                 11




cioner literature (Hoevenaars, Molenaar and Steenkamp 2003; Campbell, Chan and Viceira

2003; Campbell and Viceira 2005). Let yt be the vector:

                                                             ⎛ rm,t ⎞
                                                             ⎜ ⎟
                                                        yt = ⎜ xt ⎟                                        (8)
                                                             ⎜s ⎟
                                                             ⎝ t ⎠

that contains the real money market log return at time t (rm,t), the vector xt , which includes

the excess returns of equities and bonds relative to rm,t (i.e. xi,t = ri,t - rm,t), and a vector st de-

scribing state variables that predict rm,t and xt. As predictor variables we include the nominal

3-month interest rate (rnom), the dividend-price ratio (dp), and the term spread (spr). 16 We

assume that the dynamics of yt are governed by an unrestricted VAR(1) according to

                                                 yt +1 = a + Byt + ε t +1                                  (9)

with εt+1 ~ N( 0 , Σεε ).

         We calibrate the model based on quarterly logarithmic return series starting in 1973:I

and ending in 2007:I. The real money market return is defined as the difference between the

nominal log 3-month Euribor and the price inflation (for the time before Euribor was avail-

able we use the Fibor). For the log return on German equities and the corresponding log divi-

dend-price ratios, we rely on DAX 30 time series data provided by DataStream. In deriving

the return series for the diversified bond portfolio, we rely on the approach used by Campbell

and Viceira (2002). The bond return series rn,t+1 is constructed from 10-year constant matur-

ity yields on German bonds according to:

                                               1
                                   rn,t +1 =     y n −1,t +1 − Dn,t ( y n −1,t +1 − y n,t ),             (10)
                                               4

where yn,t = ln(1+Yn,t) is the n-period maturity bond yield at time t. Dn,t is the duration, which

can be approximated by:


16
  These state variables find wide acceptance in the strategic asset allocation literature (c.f. Campbell and Shiller
1988, 1991; Fama and French 1989; Campbell, Chan and Viceira 2003; Campbell and Viceira 2005; Cochrane
2005; and Brandt and Santa-Clara 2006). For a concise survey refer to Hoevenaars et al. (2008).
                                                                                                                 12




                                                      1 − (1 + Yn,t )− n
                                             Dn,t =                      .                               (11)
                                                      1 − (1 + Yn,t )−1

Assuming a flat term structure between maturities n-1 an n, we approximate yn-1,t+1 by yn,t+1.

Excess returns are again derived by subtracting the log money market return, xb,t = rn,t – rm,t.

The yield spread is computed as the difference between the log 10-year zeros yield on Ger-

man government bonds and the log 3-months Euribor, both provided by Deutsche Bundes-

bank.

         We use quarterly data to calibrate the VAR due to a higher number of available ob-

servations, but we are interested in yearly asset returns as our liabilities are modelled on an

annual basis. To this end, we aggregate the quarterly returns generated by the asset model and

adapt parameters a and Σεε such that the moments of yearly asset returns generated by the

model presented in Table 1 reflect those of annual returns in our historic time series. 17, 18

Table 1 here



4. Public Pension Plan Control in a Stochastic Framework

4.1 Worst-Case Pension Costs and Contribution Rate Risk

         Next we draw on the results above to derive the optimal asset allocation and normal

contribution rate for the pension plan. The base case scenario assumes a spread period m for

any under- or overfunding of 20 years, 19 a real discount rate of 3 percent to discount future

pension payments, no real salary or pension increases, and a 20 percent penalty factor for




17
   Our historic time series generated a mean real log return on bonds of almost 5 percent p.a. resulting in equities
yielding an excess return of only 1.5 percent. In this study we calculate with an expected return of 4 percent on
bonds, which we consider to be more appropriate over the long run.
18
   The adjusted parameter estimates for quarterly data are summarized in Table 4 in the appendix.
19
   Within a framework comparable to the approach taken by this paper, Haberman (1997a) finds that for a dis-
count rate of 3 percent and depending on the level of return volatility, minimizing the volatility of contributions
requires spread periods ranging from 10 to 217 periods. However, he concludes that more practical values lie in
the range of 20 to 30 periods, of which we choose the former for our base case scenario.
                                                                                                13




supplementary contributions ξ1 and withdrawals ξ2, which is equivalent to 1 percent per year

for the spread period.

       Figure 1 shows the Conditional Value at Risk of total pension costs at the 1 percent

level for alternative normal contribution rates and asset allocations. If the normal contribution

rate is set at 0 and all plan funds are invested in bonds, this results in the worst-case pension

costs of €28.09 billion. Increasing the contribution rate but keeping the same investment

strategy has the effect of decreasing overall pension costs. This is a consequence of the pen-

alty ξ1 levied on supplementary contributions. With no normal contributions, all pension

payments and the amortized underfunding must be financed by supplementary contributions.

Higher normal contributions that impose no additional penalty reduce the amount of more

expensive supplementary payments and therefore reduce overall worst-case plan costs.

Figure 1 here

       If, however, normal contributions are set too high, pension costs again rise. In this

situation, the plan exhibits ‘structural’ overfunding: that is, excess funds are offset by reduc-

ing future contributions and even withdrawing monies, if possible. Inasmuch as withdrawals

are also punished with penalty payments (factor ξ2), this too increases costs and makes struc-

tural overfunding undesirable. For normal contributions of 40 percent and 0 percent equities,

worst-case pension costs amount to €31.96 billion.

       Independent of the normal contribution rate chosen, adding equities to the plan’s port-

folio will at first reduce worst-case plan costs. As fund investments become more diversified,

capital market risks resulting from an undiversified pure bond investment are reduced and the

likelihood and size of possible supplementary contributions decrease. This effect is reversed,

however, when the fraction of equities in the plan’s portfolio is set too high. The investment

is no-longer well diversified and growing capital market risks again lead to rising worst-case

pension costs. When fully invested in equities, worst-case plan costs amount to €28.05 billion
                                                                                                              14




for normal contributions of 0 percent, and €32.08 billion for a contribution rate of 40 percent.

This is a striking result. Although pure equity investments are substantially riskier than pure

bond investments, worst-case pension costs in both cases are almost equal; in case of zero

normal contributions, costs are even slightly lower when holding all equities compared to the

pure bond portfolio.

        This might seem counter-intuitive, but it is attributable to the spread method used to

amortize any over- or underfunding. In case of negative capital market shocks, a funding

shortfall is not recovered by immediate supplementary contributions but rather is filled with

small additional annual contributions. 20 This leaves open the possibility that the gap could be

at least partially closed by subsequent positive developments in the capital markets. In the

event of positive capital market shocks, on the other hand, excess funds are not immediately

withdrawn in full. Substantial amounts remain in the plan for longer periods of time, creating

a buffer stock for possibly weak future investment performance. Moreover, these funds con-

tinue to be invested in the plan portfolio offering a chance of better returns in a strong market.

This argument holds particularly true in the event of low regular normal contribution rates.

Here, cashing in equity premiums is of the essence when trying to reduce expensive supple-

mentary contributions and thereby overall pension costs. 21

        The positive effects of gradually amortizing funding deviations are influential when a

fund holds either pure equity or pure bonds in the portfolio. Nevertheless, the impact is

stronger when the fund holds all equity, than all bonds. If all over- or underfunding were fully

recovered in the next period (i.e. the spread period were set to 1), worst-case pension costs


20
   This of course assumes that the plan sponsor is able and willing to sustain longer periods of the pension plan
being underfunded. As in this study the government is the plan sponsor, we take this for granted (especially
since the current system is a completely underfunded pay-as-you-go system).
21
   This is in line with Josa-Fombellida and Rincón-Zapatero (2006), who find that increasing funding deficits
trigger higher risk-taking. A case in point is the underfunded US Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation which
recently announced it would move away from a mostly bond portfolio toward a 55 percent allocation in equities
and non-traditional assets. This was justified as providing “a 57 percent likelihood of full funding within ten
years, compared to 19 percent under the previous policy.” See PBGC (2008).
                                                                                                 15




for normal contributions of 0 (40) percent would amount to € 69.12 (70.77) billion in case of

a pure equity strategy, and € 37.95 (37.25) billion when fully investing in bonds.

       Summarizing the results for the base case with a spread period of 20 years, we con-

clude that the manager seeking to control worst-case overall pension costs will select a nor-

mal contribution rate of about 20 percent and equity weights of about 40 percent.

       Next we direct our attention to contribution rate risk. Figure 2 depicts the average an-

nual contribution rate volatility, or the deviation of actual from normal contributions as a per-

cent of salary payments for different contribution rates and asset allocations. For a normal

contribution rate of 0 percent and a portfolio entirely invested in bonds, the annual contribu-

tion rate volatility is 2.88 percent which falls quickly as contributions rise to around 14 per-

cent of the payroll. A further increase in regular payments again results in rising contribution

rate volatilities which reach an annual value of 3.78 percent for a normal contribution rate of

40 percent. This pattern is intuitive since our earlier results showed that minimum volatility

(in this case constant) regular contributions of 18.7 percent of the payroll are sufficient to

fund the pension in a deterministic set-up without capital market risk. Engaging in risky in-

vestment strategies reduces the minimum volatility normal contribution rate sufficient to fund

the plan, at the price of some positive contribution rate volatility related to capital market

risks (instead of zero volatility as in the deterministic case). Lower normal contributions will

constantly require the triggering of supplementary contributions which boosts contribution

rate volatility. In turn, choosing too high a normal contribution rate leads to continuous re-

ductions in actual contributions due to amortization of asset surpluses, which also increases

contribution rate volatility.

Figure 2 here

       The impact of adding equities to the pension plan’s portfolio depends on the plan’s

funding situation. For low normal contribution rates which result in the plan being chroni-
                                                                                                 16




cally underfunded, contribution rate volatility decreases with increasing equity weights. In

case of a 0 normal contribution rate, volatility drops from 2.88 percent when the plan holds

only bonds, to 2.20 percent when the entire portfolio is held in equities. If normal contribu-

tion rates are high enough to fund or even overfund the plan, contribution rate volatility rises

with increasing equity exposure. For normal contributions of 40 percent, contribution rate

volatility will rise from 3.78 percent (pure bond investment) to 4.5 percent for all equities

portfolios, a rather moderate increase.

       This behavior is again driven by the amortizing of over- or underfunding, as spreading

the inflows can substantially reduce the impact of capital market volatility. If normal contri-

butions are low, contribution rate volatility mainly results from continuously required sup-

plementary contributions. Investing a substantial part of the plan assets in equities may offer

the chance to cash-in on higher equity premiums and thereby reduce the need for expensive

supplementary contributions. Yet this comes at the cost of increased capital market risk. Due

to the smoothing effects of the spread method applied and the generally poor funding situa-

tion, these capital market fluctuations have only minor negative impacts on the contribution

rate volatility. These are more than compensated by contribution rate volatility reducing ef-

fects of earning higher investment returns on average.

       If, in turn, the plan is sufficiently funded or even substantially overfunded, there is no

need for earning excess investment returns. On the contrary, both effects discussed above will

increase contribution rate volatility. Higher expected equity premiums will further improve

the funding situation and therefore lead to even lower actual contribution rates and increased

contribution rate volatility. In addition, possible adverse capital market shocks in combina-

tion with high levels of plan assets will cause substantial capital losses, again resulting in

increasing contribution rate volatility. For the reasons discussed above, however, the absolute

negative impact of increased capital market risk on contribution rate volatility is moderate.
                                                                                                17




       If all over- or underfunding were fully recovered in a single period (i.e. the spread pe-

riod were set to 1), contribution rate volatility would rise for all combinations of normal con-

tributions and investment strategies, especially for asset allocations with high equity expo-

sure. For normal contributions of 0 (40) percent, contribution rate volatility would come in at

6.06 (4.78) percent when fully investing in bonds, and more than twice this -- 14.59 (12.66)

percent – in the case of a pure equity strategy. This shows that the smoothing effects of the

spread method applied are particularly beneficial in the case of low normal contributions.

       Summarizing, for the base case with a spread period of 20 years, contribution rate

volatility is lowest for normal contribution rates of about 14 percent and equity weights of 0

percent.

4.2 Deriving the Optimal Contribution Rate and Asset Allocation

       The discussion of worst-case pension costs and contribution rate volatility patterns in

the previous section suggests ambiguous results with respect to the optimal combination of

normal contribution rate and asset allocation. Minimizing the Conditional Value at Risk of

overall pension costs at the 1 percent level would require contributing at a normal rate of

about 20 percent and investing about 40 percent of plan assets in equities. By contrast, focus-

ing on the volatility of the (actual) contribution rate requires normal contributions of about 14

percent and a pure bond investment allocation. Accordingly, we next derive the optimal con-

tribution and investment strategy, so as to minimize the volatility of contributions while at the

same time controlling for worst-case pension costs.

       The optimal combination of normal contribution rates and equity weights appears in

Figure 3. Two sets of indifference curves appear in the equity weight/normal contribution rate

plane. The first set of U-shaped curves, which open toward the top of the Figure, represent

combinations of normal contribution rates and equity weights that result in equal worst-case

pension costs. The 1%-CVaR of costs not to be exceeded is set to € 20.8 billion, which re-
                                                                                                18




sembles the deterministic pension costs established in section 2.3 (black solid line). Contribu-

tion rate/equity weight combinations inside this curve result in lower worst-case pension

costs, those outside cause higher costs as indicated by the two additional indifference curves

(grey solid lines).

Figure 3 here

       Next, we seek to identify the one (feasible) normal contribution rate/equity weight

strategy that will minimize contribution rate volatility subject to lying on or inside the black

solid indifference curve representing the worst-case costs (of € 20.8 billion). To this end, Fig-

ure 3 shows a second set of U-shaped indifference curves, opening to the left of the Figure,

which represent combinations of normal contribution rates and equity weights resulting in

equal contribution rate volatilities. The black solid line combines all strategies that lead to an

average annual contribution rate volatility of 1.25 percent. Combinations inside this curve

exhibit lower, those outside higher contribution rate risk.

       The optimal combination of the normal contribution rate and the equity weight can

then be determined by the point at which both black solid indifference curves are tangent to

each other. No other funding/investment combination with worst-case costs restricted to a

maximum of € 20.8 billion has lower contribution rate risk. For our base case (spread period

20 years), this optimal combination consists of contributing to the plan at a normal rate of

13.4 percent and investing plan assets in a constant-mix allocation with 40.9 percent equities

and 59.1 percent bonds.

       Worst-case costs are well-controlled in this setup, but the potential benefits of this

strategy, besides relatively stable contribution rates, become obvious when looking at ex-

pected overall pension costs. These are computed at only € 3.2 billion, substantially below

plan costs in the deterministic case (i.e. € 20.8 billion). The reduction in costs may be attrib-

uted to better funding combined with a well-diversified investment strategy. With an ex-
                                                                                                    19




pected annual portfolio return of 5.1 percent, investment income on plan assets regularly ex-

ceeds the discount rate of liabilities. While the single-period portfolio volatility of 11.1 per-

cent cannot be neglected, mean reversion characteristics in the equity returns as well as the

spread method applied keep capital market risks at a tolerable level. In this environment, ex-

cess funds are regularly built up so actual contribution rates can be reduced, and remaining

excess funds can be withdrawn, all of which will reduce overall pension costs.

       Table 2 summarizes optimal contribution and investment patterns for various spread

periods. Normal contribution rates (Row 1), equity and bond weights (Rows 2-3), the average

annual contribution rate volatility (Row 4), as well as worst-case and expected pension costs

(Rows 5-6) are presented for a short-term spread period of 1 year (Column 1), for medium-

term spread periods of 10 years and our base case (spread period 20 years) (Column 2-3), as

well as for long-term spread periods of 50 and infinite years (Columns 4-5).

Table 2 here

       Due to our restriction on worst-case costs, optimal strategies for all spread periods

exhibit a 1%-CVaR of pension costs of € 20.8 billion (Row 5). From Row 4 it can be seen

that contribution rate volatility declines monotonically for increasing spread periods, ranging

from 3.24 percent p.a. in the case of a 1-year spread period (Column 1) to 1.09 percent when

funding deviations are spread over an infinite horizon (Column 5). Contribution rate volatility

mainly results from capital market volatility leading to fluctuations in the plan’s funding

situation. Spreading funding deviations over longer horizons reduces the impact of short-term

capital market fluctuations on required contributions in any single period.

       Apart from contribution rate volatility, one must use caution when comparing any of

the other parameters included in Table 2 across different spread periods. Looking at Row 1,

one might find it striking that optimal normal contributions first drop and later increase again

with increasing spread periods. One might surmise that there is some optimal spread period
                                                                                                20




between 1-10 years that will minimize normal contributions. The fallacy of this argument is

that we do not minimize normal contributions but rather look at the volatility of overall con-

tributions. This argument also holds when comparing the other parameters. What can be seen,

however, is that, apart from very short spread periods, contribution and investment strategies

that minimize contribution rate volatility are rather stable, no matter how long the chosen

spread period. If deviations are spread over 10 years (Column 2), the optimal strategy would

require to set normal contributions at 13 percent (Row 1) and invest about 42 (58) percent of

plan funds in equities (bonds; Rows 2 & 3). The extreme case of spreading funding surpluses

or shortfalls over an infinite horizon (Column 5) would call for normal contributions of 14

percent (Row 1), or only 1 percent more than in the former case. Optimal equity exposure

would drop by less than 3 percent to about 39.5 percent (Column 5, Row 2). Contribution rate

volatility (Row 4) exhibits the same characteristics, dropping only marginally from 1.38 in

case of 10 years (Column 2) to 1.09 percent for an indefinite horizon (Column 5).

4.3 Development of Contribution Rates over Time

       We next turn our attention to the time path of contribution rates under the optimal

(normal) contribution and investment strategy. While the rate of normal contributions is

fixed, overall contributions in each period may deviate from the normal rate depending on the

funding situation of the pension plan.

       Figure 4 depicts the expected value as well as the 95%-quantile (worst-case quantile)

of overall contributions for our base case with a spread period of 20 years and penalty factors

of 20 percent. From above, recall that the optimal fixed normal contribution rate in this case

is 13.4 percent with about 41 percent of plan funds being invested in equities (Table 2, Col-

umn 3, Rows 1 & 2). Looking at the expected overall contribution rate represented by the

solid line in Figure 4, in early years the fixed normal contribution rate is insufficient to fund

accruing pension benefits. Starting from the normal contribution rate of 13.4 percent in year
                                                                                                 21




1, actual contributions rise continuously to attain a maximum of 15.19 percent in year 9.

From this point onward, overall contributions decline. With 13.09 percent, the contribution

rate drops below the fixed normal rate in year 18 for the first time and continues to fall to

about 1.4 percent toward the end of our projection.

       In the early years, the size of the funds accumulated in the plan is relatively low com-

pared to salary payments and accruing pension benefits; for instance we above computed that

deterministic contribution rate of 18.7 percent is required to fund pension benefits using the

base discount rate of 3 percent. Initial contributions fall short of that by over 5 percentage

points (almost 30 percent). Earning an expected return of about 5 percent on the small abso-

lute amount of plan assets does not suffice to cover that shortfall, so overall contributions

must be boosted due to the expected funding shortfall. Nevertheless, they rise slowly since

the immediate impact of the deficit on contributions is cushioned by the spread approach. As

the magnitude of fund assets rises, the approximately 2 percent excess return over the dis-

count rate earned by investing in risky equities and bonds should cover the difference be-

tween accruing pension benefits and contributions to fund them. In turn, overall expected

contributions fall in later periods as the pension plan holds substantial assets.

Figure 4 here

       Turing our attention to the 95%-quantile of overall contributions, represented by the

dashed line in Figure 4, we identify a comparable pattern. If capital markets underperform,

contributions rise to a higher level of about 21.8 percent in year 20. The decline in later years

is also substantially smaller than in expectation, with overall contributions falling short of the

normal contribution rate only from year 47 onwards and reaching a minimum of 11.6 percent

toward the end of our projection. The fact that contribution rates in later periods drop can be

attributed to mean reversion inherent in asset returns resulting in a considerable reduction of

return volatility over the long run.
                                                                                                  22




         Table 3 summarizes expected and 95%-quantile overall contribution rates for all

spread periods under investigation and for selected time points. In line with our earlier re-

sults, we find that the amplitude of contribution rate variation over time decreases with longer

spread periods. As one would anticipate, this is particularly important for the 95%-quantile of

overall contributions.

Table 3 here

         Looking at expected contribution rates for a one year spread period (Table 3, Row 1),

it can be seen that these rates continuously decline over time. Starting at 23 percent in year 1

(Column 1), they drop to only 0.9 percent in the last year (Column 6). In this case, the initial

contribution rate is above the one required in the deterministic case, which immediately leads

to a reduction in contribution rates. The pension plan is well-endowed from the beginning

and expected excess returns on the assets help to reduce expected overall contributions. The

downside of missing the opportunity to smooth contributions over time becomes apparent

when looking at the 95%-quantile of contributions. These may rise to a maximum of about 60

percent around year 20 (Row 6, Column 3). Over very long horizons, however, the reduction

of long-term asset volatility kicks in again and even in 95 percent of paths no additional con-

tributions are required (Row 6, Column 6).

         For spread periods from 10 years to infinity, there are only minor differences in the

optimal contribution and investment strategy. It is therefore not surprising that contribution

rate patterns over time for all other spread periods come very close to the base case discussed

above.

4.4 Further Results

         Thus far, all analyses have used the base case with a real discount rate of 3 percent,

standard expectations for equities and bonds, and penalty factors on supplementary contribu-
                                                                                                 23




tions and withdrawals of ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2. Next we vary these assumptions to explore robust-

ness.

        In the early 2000s, many pension plans faced severe financial distress due to the capi-

tal market downturn which left plan assets crumbling just when low interest rates boosted

pension liabilities. Accordingly we next analyze how our pension plan would behave in such

a ‘perfect storm’ environment. To this end, we assume that the discount rates as well as ex-

pected returns on equities and bonds fall to 1.5 percent, and expected asset returns behave

according to the low return scenario in Table 1.

        It may be recalled that under this lower discount rate, the deterministic PBO totals €

44.8 billion. Letting this be the restriction on worst-case costs and keeping the penalty factors

at ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2, neither combination of normal contributions and investment strategies will

be able to comply with this limit at the 1%-CVaR level, for any spread period. For a spread

period of 20 years, the 1%-CVaR finds its minimum at € 46.5 billion for normal contributions

of 20 percent and an equity weight of 41 percent. In fact, the 1%-CVaR restriction can only

be met by relaxing the penalty factors for funding deviations. For instance, if ξ1 = ξ2 = 0,

there are viable solutions for all spread periods under investigation. Given a spread period of

1 year, the optimal normal contribution rate would be 16.1 percent and 23 percent of fund

assets would be held in equities; this results in contribution rate volatility of 3.73 percent p.a.

Contribution rate volatilities for other spread periods are substantially lower, ranging from

1.62 percent p.a. in case of 10 years, to 0.54 percent p.a. in case of an infinite spread period.

Nevertheless, optimal contribution and investment strategies change little. Volatility-

minimizing contribution rates in these cases vary between 15.1 and 15.5 percent, while opti-

mal equity weights lie between 27 and 29 percent. Spreading funding deviations over longer

time leads to increased tolerance for capital market volatility and therefore rising appetite for
                                                                                                 24




equities. As expected return on equities still exceeds that of bonds, there is some room for

reducing contribution rates but it is small.

       Conversely, if penalty factors are maintained for incentive reasons, the only way to

generate feasible solutions requires relaxing the overall worst-case cost risk tolerance. For

instance, setting the CVaR at 5 percent, and assuming ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2 as in the base case, re-

sults in solutions comparable to those reported previously. Optimal contribution rate volatil-

ities are virtually unchanged. Imposing penalties on funding deviations, however, leads to

marginally higher contribution rates, varying between 16 and 17 percent for different spread

periods, and slightly reduced equity exposure, with equity weights ranging between 21 and

25 percent. Expected overall pension costs would come to € 23.88 billion, down by almost 50

percent with respect to the deterministic pension liability.

       Next we turn our attention to an analysis of the impact of penalizing funding devia-

tions with extra loadings. For the base scenario discount factor of 3 percent, standard expecta-

tions on asset returns, a spread period of 20 years and ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2, we learned that the op-

timal strategy includes a normal contribution rate of 13.4 percent and an equity fraction of

40.9 percent, resulting in contribution rate volatility of 1.25 percent p.a. Cutting penalties

relaxes the restriction on worst-case costs and more combinations of normal contribution rate

and asset allocation become available to the plan manager. For penalty factors of ξ1 = ξ2 = 0,

contribution rate volatility can be reduced to 0.93 percent p.a. by only contributing at a nor-

mal rate of 11.2 percent and financing possible shortfalls from costless supplementary contri-

butions. In order to meet the cost restriction, some equity investments totaling 10 percent are

still required to exploit excess returns. Otherwise, contribution volatility might be reduced

even further.
                                                                                               25




5. Conclusions

       Most public pensions in the developed world are unfunded, noncontributory, and tax-

sponsored defined benefit plans. These represent a substantial, and at present, mostly unrec-

ognized liability to taxpayers, one which threatens to grow as the workforce ages. Against

this backdrop, we evaluate ways to fund newly accrued pension benefits for the civil service

pension of the German state of Hesse, allowing the plan manager to invest fund assets in the

capital market, using strategic contribution and investment patterns that minimize contribu-

tion rate volatility while controlling for overall pension costs with respect to a CVaR cost

constraint. We show that controlling only for costs results in high regular contribution rates,

of about 40 percent of covered payroll. Controlling only on contribution rate volatility yields

more moderate contribution rates and low-risk asset allocations, but high supplementary

transfers to fill shortfalls. Combining both approaches results in moderate contribution rates

paired with substantial equity holdings.

       This research should be of interest to policymakers across Europe and the Americas,

inasmuch as many of their public sector plans face substantial funding shortfalls. Plan man-

agers should also be interested, as we have proved under plausible assumptions that they can

identify and implement a sensible balancing act between investment in equities and contribu-

tion policies, while protecting taxpayers from undue risk. A key message is that investing in

pure bond portfolios, which represents the status quo investment policy for the handful of

currently partially-funded German pension schemes, may not be the best way to exploit capi-

tal markets. Yet investing public pension money 60 percent or more in equities, as is true for

many US state pension plans, will prove too aggressive when future taxpayer consequences

are properly accounted.
                                                                                         26




References

ABP, 2006. ABP Annual Report 2006. Heerlen: ABP Investments.

Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J., Heath, D., 1997. Thinking Coherently. Risk 10 (11), 68 –
       72.

Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J., Heath, D., 1999. Coherent Measures of Risk. Mathematical
       Finance 9 (3), 203 – 228.

Blake, D, 2006. Pension Finance. Chichester: Wiley.

Bogentoft, E., Romeijn, H.E., Uryasev, S., 2001. Asset/Liability Management for Pension
      Funds Using CVaR Constraints. Journal of Risk Finance 2 (3), 57-71.

Brandt, M.W., Santa-Clara, P., 2006. Dynamic Portfolio Selection by Augmenting the Asset
       Space. Journal of Finance 61 (5), 2187-2217.

Bundesministerium des Innern, 2005. Dritter Versorgungsbericht der Bundesregierung. Ber-
      lin.

Campbell, J.Y., Chan, Y.L., and Viceira, L.M., 2003. A Multivariate Model for Strategic As-
     set Allocation. Journal of Financial Economics 67, 41-80.

Campbell, J.Y., and Shiller, R.J., 1988. Stock Prices, Earnings and Expected Dividends.
     Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.

Campbell, J.Y., and Shiller, R.J., 1991. Yield Spreads and Interest Rate Movements: A Bird’s
     Eye View. Review of Economic Studies 58, 495-514.

Campbell, J.Y., and Viceira, L.M., 2005. The Term Structure of the Risk-Return-Trade-Off.
     Financial Analysts Journal 61, 34-44.

Campbell, J.Y., and Viceira, L.M., 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for
     Long-Term Investors. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chang, S.C., Tzeng, L.Y., Miao, J.C., 2003. Pension Funding Incorporating Downside Risks.
       Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 32, 217-228.

Cochrane, J.H., 2005. Asset Pricing. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Detemple, J., Rindisbacher, M., 2008. Dynamic Asset Liability Management with Tolerance
      for     Limited   Shortfalls. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics ,
      doi:10.1016/j.insmatheco.2008.05.009.

DAV - Deutsche Aktuarsvereinigung, 2004. Herleitung der DAV-Sterbetafel 2004 R für Ren-
      tenversicherungen. Köln.

Dufresne, D., 1988. Moments of Pension Contributions and Fund Levels when Rates of Re-
       turn are Random. Journal of the Institute of Actuaries 115, 535-544.
                                                                                           27




Fama, E.F., and French, K.R., 1989. Business Conditions and the Expected Returns on Stocks
      and Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 25, 23-49.

Feldstein, M., and Ranguelova, E., 2001. Individual Risk in an Investment-Based Social Se-
       curity System. NBER Working Paper 8074.

Haberman, S., 1997a. Stochastic Investment Returns and Contribution Rate Risk in a Defined
      Benefit Pension Scheme. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 19, 127 – 139.

Haberman, S., 1997b. Risk in a Defined Benefit Pension Scheme. Singapore International
      Insurance and Actuarial Journal 1, 93–103.

Haberman, S., Butt, Z., and Megaloudi, Ch., 2000. Contribution and Solvency Risk in a De-
      fined Benefit Pension Scheme. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 27, 237-259.

Haberman, S., Day, C., Fogarty, D., Khorasanee, M.Z., McWhirter, M., Nash, N., Ngwira,
      B., Wright, I.D., and Yakoubov, Y., 2003a. ‘A Stochastic Approach to Risk Manage-
      ment and Decision Making in Defined Benefit Pension Schemes.’ British Actuarial
      Journal 9 (3), 493-618.

Haberman, S., Khorasanee, M.Z., Ngwira, B., and Wright, I.D., 2003b. Risk Measurement
      and Management of Defined Benefit Pension Schemes: A Stochastic Approach. IMA
      Journal of Management Mathematics 14, 111-128.

Haberman S., and Sung, J.H., 1994. Dynamic Approaches to Pension Funding. Insurance:
      Mathematics and Economics 15, 151-162.

Haberman S., and Sung, J.H., 2005. Optimal Pension Funding Dynamics over Infinite Con-
      trol Horizon when Stochastic Rates of Return are Stationary. Insurance: Mathematics
      and Economics 36, 103-116.

Hainaut, D., and Devolder, P., 2007. Management of a Pension Fund under Mortality and
      Financial Risks. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 41, 134-155.

Heubeck, K., and Rürup, B., 2000. Finanzierung der Altersversorgung des öffentlichen Dien-
      stes. Frankfurt: Peter Lang Verlag.

Hoevenaars, R.P., Molenaar, R.D., Schotman, P.C., and Steenkamp, T.B., 2008. Strategic
      Asset Allocation with Liabilities: Beyond Stocks and Bonds. Journal of Economic
      Dynamics and Control, doi:10.1016/j.jedc.2007.11.003.

Hoevenaars, R.P., Molenaar, R.D., and Steenkamp, T.B., 2003. Simulation for the Long Run.
      In: Scherer B. (Ed.). Asset Liability Management Tools. London: Risk Books, 177-
      210.

Hustead, E.C., and Mitchell, O.S., 2001. Public Sector Pension Plans. In: Mitchell, O.S., Hus-
      tead, E.C. (Eds.). Pensions in the Public Sector. Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-
      vania Press, 3 – 10.
                                                                                         28




Josa-Fombellida, R., and Rincón-Zapatero, J.P., 2006. Optimal Investment Decisions with a
       Liability: The Case of Defined Benefit Pension Plans. Insurance: Mathematics and
       Economics 39, 81-98.

Lee, E.M., 1986. An Introduction to Pension Schemes. Institute and Faculty of Actuaries,
       London, UK.

Maurer, R., Mitchell, O.S., and Rogalla, R., 2008a. The Victory of Hope over Angst? Fund-
      ing, Asset Allocation, and Risk Taking in German Public Sector Pension Reform. In:
      Broeders, D., Eijffinger, S., Houben, A. (Eds.). Frontiers in Pension Finance. Chel-
      tenham: Edward Elgar, 51-79.

Maurer, R., Mitchell, O.S., and Rogalla, R., 2008b. Reforming German Civil Servant Pen-
      sions: Funding Policy, Investment Strategy, and Intertemporal Risk Budgeting. PRC
      Working Paper, 2008-09.

McGill, D.M., Brown, K.N., Haley, J.J., and Schieber, S.J., 2005. Fundamentals of Private
      Pensions. 9th Ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Mitchell, O.S., McCarthy, D., Wisniewski, S.C., and Zorn, P., 2001. Developments in State
       and Local Pension Plans. In: Mitchell, O.S., Hustead, E.C. (Eds.). Pensions in the
       Public Sector, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 11 – 40.

Ngwira, B., and Gerrard, R., 2007. Stochastic Pension Fund Control in the Presence of Pois-
      son Jumps. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 40, 283-292.

Novy-Marx, and R., Rauh, J.D., 2008. The Intergenerational Transfer of Public Pension
     Promises. Working Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1156477.

Owadally, M.I., and Haberman, S., 1999. Pension Fund Dynamics and Gains/Losses due to
      Random Rates of Investment Return. North American Actuarial Journal 3 (3), 105 –
      117.

Owadally, M.I., and Haberman, S., 2004. Efficient Amortization of Actuarial Gains/Losses
      and Optimal Funding in Pension Plans. North American Actuarial Journal 8(1), 21 –
      36.

PBGC.Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 2008. PBGC Announces New Investment Pol-
     icy.      Washington,       D.C.:   PBGC.  http://www.pbgc.gov/media/news-archive/news-
     releases/2008/pr08-19.html Viewed 24/8/08.

Rockafellar R.T., and Uryasev, S., 2002. Conditional Value-at-Risk for General Loss Distri-
      butions. Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 1443-1471.

Winklevoss, H.E., 1993. Pension Mathematics with Numerical Illustrations. 2nd Ed. Phila-
      delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
                                                                                                                       29




             Table 1: Simulation Model Parameters for Stochastic Asset Case
                                     Expected Returns                                        Correlations
                                 Base case     Low return           Standard
                                  scenario      scenario            deviations          Equities     Bonds

             Equities               6.57%             5.07%          23.4%                   1
             Bonds                  4.08%             2.58%          7.02%                  0.17           1
             Source: Authors’ calculations.



Table 2: Influence of Spread Period on Optimal Contribution and Investment Patterns
                                                                       Spread period m (in years)
                                                            1        10           20            50               ∞
                                                           (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)             (5)
  (1)   Normal contributions (in %)                       23.0      13.0         13.4          13.9            14.1
  (2)   Equity weight (in %)                              45.0      42.2         40.9          39.9            39.4
  (3)   Bond weight (in %)                                55.0      57.8         59.1          60.1            60.6

  (4)   Contribution rate volatility p.a. (in %)          3.24      1.38            1.25           1.14        1.09

  (5)   1%-CVaR pension costs (in € bn)                   20.80     20.80           20.80          20.80       20.80
  (6)   Expected pension costs (in € bn)                  -0.62      2.74            3.20           3.29        3.31
Notes: Optimal contribution and investment patterns for various spread periods. Penalty factors on fund-
ing deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; High return scenario. Source: Authors’ calculations.



                           Table 3: Contribution Rates for Selected Years
                               Spread              Year     Year   Year      Year          Year     Year
                               Period                1       10     20        30            40       50
                                                    (1)      (2)    (3)       (4)           (5)      (6)

                Panel 1: Expected Contribution Rates (in %)
                  (1)          1             23.0       14.5        9.3      4.0            1.6      0.9
                  (2)         10             13.0       15.6       10.8      5.0            2.3      1.2
                  (3)         20             13.4       15.2       12.0      6.0            2.7      1.4
                  (4)         50             13.9       14.9       13.0      7.5            3.5      1.7
                  (5)          ∞             14.1       14.9       13.4      8.4            4.1      1.9

                Panel 2: 95%-Quantile Contribution Rates (in %)
                   (6)         1             23.0      47.1        59.7      29.5           0.0      0.0
                   (7)        10             13.0      20.7        25.6      22.9          17.7      9.8
                   (8)        20             13.4      18.2        21.8      20.1          16.5     11.6
                   (9)        50             13.9      16.7        19.2      18.4          15.7     12.4
                  (10)        ∞              14.1      16.3        18.2      17.7          15.5     12.7
Notes: Expected and worst-case overall contribution rates in percent of payroll in respective period in
various years for various spread periods. Penalty factors on funding deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; High return
scenario. Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                         30




           Appendix: Quarterly VAR Parameters
            rm,t         xe,t      xb,t      dpt      sprt      rnom,t

Parameter estimates
rm,t+1   -0.0338      0.0035     -0.0226   -0.2118   -0.0350    0.5455
xe,t+1   0.1267       0.0116     0.0920    1.9727    0.5572    -2.8218
xb,t+1   -0.1710      -0.0176     0.1106   -0.3946    0.9146    1.5958
dpt+1    -0.0099      0.0012     -0.0094    0.9274   -0.0169    0.0464
sprt+1   0.0467       0.0005     0.0458    -0.0196   0.9729     0.3110
rnom,t+1 -0.0268      0.0010     -0.0173    0.0434   -0.0869    0.7718

Error correlation matrix
rm,t        0.54
xe,t        -0.05       11.55
xb,t        0.19         -0.07     3.00
dpt         0.06         -0.87     0.12     0.30
sprt        0.01         0.05     -0.42     -0.10      0.62
rnom,t      0.21         -0.16     0.12     0.23      -0.35     0.15
Source: Authors’ calculations.
                                                                        31




Figure 1: Worst-Case Pension Cost Outcomes: Pre-
sent Value of 1%-CVaR Costs (€ bn).




Notes: Base case assumes spread period of 20 years; a 3% real dis-
count rate; penalty factors on funding deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; high
return scenario. Source: Authors’ computations.



 Figure 2: Pension Contribution Rate Volatility (%)




Notes: Base case assumes spread period of 20 years; a 3% real dis-
count rate; penalty factors on funding deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; high
return scenario. Source: Authors’ computations.
                                                                                                                              32




Figure 3: Pension Manager’s Optimal Contribution and Investment Strategy Indiffer-
ence Map




                Notes: Base case assumes spread period of 20 years; a 3% real dis-
                count rate; penalty factors on funding deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; high
                return scenario. Source: Authors’ computations.



           Figure 4: Total Pension Contribution Rate Profile over Time (%)
                                                  25%
                                                                Expectation
                                                                95% Quantile
                                                  20%
                 Total Contribution Rate (in %)




                                                  15%



                                                  10%



                                                  5%



                                                  0%
                                                        1   5       9     13   17   21   25     29   33   37   41   45   49
                                                                                         Year


                Notes: Total pension contributions as a percent of payroll by period.
                Base case assumes spread period of 20 years; a 3% real discount
                rate; penalty factors on funding deviations ξ1 = ξ2 = 0.2; high return
                scenario. Source: Authors’ computations.
