                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 GENDER DIFFERENCES IN MARKET COMPETITIVENESS IN A REAL WORKPLACE:
EVIDENCE FROM PERFORMANCE-BASED PAY TOURNAMENTS AMONG TEACHERS

                                               Victor Lavy

                                         Working Paper 14338
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14338


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2008




Special thanks go to Alex Levkov and Roy Mill for outstanding research assistance. I benefited from
comments of seminar participants at Boston University, Hebrew University, CESifo/PEPG 2008 conference
and the NBER 2008 Summer Institute Labor Studies conference. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Victor Lavy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender Differences in Market Competitiveness in a Real Workplace: Evidence from Performance-based
Pay Tournaments among Teachers
Victor Lavy
NBER Working Paper No. 14338
September 2008
JEL No. I2,I21,J00,J16,J18,J33

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent lab and field experiments suggest that women are less effective than men in a competitive environment.
In this paper I examine how individual performance in a real work place is affected by a competitive
environment and by its gender mix. The competition is among math, English and Language teachers
who participated in a rank order tournament that rewarded teachers with large cash bonuses based
on the test performance of their classes. The evidence suggest that the average ranking, winning rate
and awarded prize did not differ by gender nor between teachers in competition groups with only female
teachers or with both genders. I also find that the direct impact of the bonus program on students' outcomes
did not vary by male and female teachers or by the type of competitive environment in terms of gender
mix of the participants. As for mechanisms that can explain these results, I found no differences by
either gender or by the gender mix of the competition group in teachers' awareness and familiarity
with the program and its rules, and in effort and teaching methods. Women though were more pessimistic
about the effectiveness of teachers' performance pay and more realistic than men about their likelihood
of winning bonuses.


Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
91905 Israel
and Royal Holloway
University of London
and NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
I. Introduction

Recent studies (Gneezy, Niederele and Rustichini 2003; Gneezy and Rustichini 2004; Niederle and

Vesterlund 2007, Passerman 2007, Gneezy and List 2008) suggest a new 1 explanation for gender

differences in earnings: women may be less effective than men in competitive environments. These

studies test whether men and women differ in their ability to perform in competitive environments,

using young adults or children in a controlled lab setting or in sports competitions which allowed for

the precise measurement of performance, and which excluded any discrimination or expectation of

discrimination. The behavior of men and women in a competitive environment, it is argued, may differ

because of differences in skill, talent, and beliefs. 2 This hypothesis is very important in the context of

schools and teachers because of the recent expansion of performance-pay compensation schemes for

teachers in the US and elsewhere 3 and because women comprise a larger fraction of the teacher labor

market compared to other occupations with similar skills. For example, in 2006 21 percent of

employed women in Israel were teachers versus only 5 percent among employed men. In the US the

respective rates were 13 percent for women and 5 percent for men. If women are indeed less

productive in a competitive environment, it may cast doubt about the effectiveness of pay for

performance and merit pay to improve school quality and students’ academic achievements.

      In this paper I examine the hypothesis of gender differences in competitiveness in a real work

place with adult participants. In particular, I examine how individual performance is affected by the

competitive environment and by the gender mix of the competitive group. The competition is among

math, English and Language teachers who participated in a rank-order tournament that rewarded

teachers with large cash bonuses based on the test performance of their classes relative to the

1
  The past literature on the gender wage gap provided explanations that rest on gender differences in abilities and
preferences and hence in occupational self-selection (Polachek 1981) and on discrimination in the workplace,
which leads to differential treatment of men and women with equal preferences and abilities (Goldin and Rouse
2000).
2
  Gneezy, Niederele and Rustichini 2003, suggest that a competitive environment may produce differences in
behavior as subjects adjust their best choices to different strategic environments. A different explanation is based
on the argument that preferences over outcomes are not independent of the institutional setup in which they are
obtained, and in particular of the competitive nature of the institution.
3
  Most recent pay-for-performance programs for teachers in the US include Minnesota’s Q-Comp $86 million
initiative, Denver's Pro-Comp, $25 million plan, Florida’s E-Comp and STAR programs and Chicago’s $27.5
million 2006 pilot. See Lavy (2008) for more details bout these programs. A recent N.Y. Times article illustrated
this trend, commenting that “A consensus is building across the political spectrum that rewarding teachers with
bonuses or raises for improving student achievement,…can energize veteran teachers and attract bright rookies to
the profession.” The N.Y Times, EDUCATION, June 18, 2007. See Lavy (2007) for a summary of earlier
performance pay programs for teachers in the US and elsewhere.

                                                         1
performance of classes of other teachers in their school. The tournaments, one for each subject, were

part of an experiment with individual teachers’ incentives implemented in the 2001 academic year in

forty nine high schools in Israel. Teachers were awarded bonuses according to their ranking in the

tournament. Ranking was based on a value added measure calculated by the difference between the

actual mean performance of the teacher’s class and a value predicted on the basis of a regression that

controlled for the students’ and class’ characteristics, and a fixed school-level effect. Therefore

teachers were explicitly informed that they are competing against teachers of the same subject in their

own school.

        The framework of the experiment allows examining two issues. The first is whether female

performance deteriorates under competition. I will address this question by comparing female

performance in a pay-for-performance competitive tournament to that without such pay scheme. This

comparison will be based both on ranking and winning a bonus pay and in terms of improvement of

their students’ test scores. The second issue is whether the gender mix of the competition groups

affects female performance in these two dimensions. For this analysis I exploit the fact that the

competitive groups in the experiment differed in their gender mix. In some all the subject’s teachers

were female or male and in others they included both gender. This between groups variation in gender

composition allows to compare between female and male teachers’ performance in two distinct

competitive environments, in the one competing with own gender and in the other with both genders.

However, as female teachers were not assigned randomly to one of these two environments, potential

endogenous and selective sorting might be a concern. The identification strategy I propose in this

paper relies on several random occurrences that suggest that the type of the competition group is

practically random. First, none of the forty nine schools had only male or female teachers among their

overall teaching staff. For example, the proportion of female teachers in schools that had a single sex

competition group in at least one subject was 0.59 while in other schools this proportion was almost

the same, 0.61. Therefore the incidence of having only male or only female teachers in a given subject

in a school is not a particular feature of the school or teaching staff. Second, in many of the schools the

gender mix was different across the three competition groups, suggesting again that the gender




                                                    2
composition of the competition groups is not related to a particular school characteristic. This within

school variation can also be exploited for identification by allowing a regression analysis with school

fixed effects. Third, in many cases the competition group did not include all the teachers of that subject

in school because only teachers whom class was scheduled for a matriculation exam at the end of the

year were included in the program. As a result a third of the single sex competition groups were

actually a sub group of a mixed gender peer group. Therefore, within a sample that includes these

competition groups and all the mixed gender groups, the incidence of having only female or only male

teachers is actually random and this sample can be viewed as a randomized trial.

      Along with the chance occurrence of these three events, which suggests that the gender mix of

the competition groups is random, I provide evidence in the paper that the three groups of teachers

defined by the group gender mix are identical in their demographics, education, parental schooling and

also in the observable characteristics and lagged outcomes of their students. By using the within

schools variation in the type of competition groups (by adding school fixed effect to the analysis) I

also control for any potential unobservable but constant heterogeneity at the school level.

      The evidence suggest that the average winning rate and average awarded bonuses did not differ

by gender, 42.9 percent of men and 43.6 of women won a bonus. The average conditional (on

winning) bonus was $2,790 for men and $2,736 for women. Also, the ranking and bonuses won by

women did not differ, on average, between teachers in competition groups with only female teachers

and in schools with teachers of both genders. I also examine a few mechanisms in the paper that can

explain these results. I found no differences by either gender or by the gender mix of the competition

group in teachers’ awareness and familiarity with the program and its rules, and in effort in teaching

methods. However, large gender differences emerge in the expectations about success in the

competition and about the effectiveness of the incentive scheme in improving students’ achievements.

However, these relatively large male-female differences did not vary by the gender mix of the

competition environment.

      Another related and interesting question is whether the program effectiveness varied by the

gender of the teacher and by the gender mix of the competition group. Addressing this question

requires evidence about the counterfactual which I will base on a randomized comparison group of



                                                    3
schools that did not participate in the program. In an earlier paper (Lavy 2008) I demonstrated based

on this randomized trial sample that the pay for performance led to significant improvement in the pass

rate and test scores of treated students. I will show below that these productivity gains were similar for

male and female teachers and they did not vary by the gender mix of the competition group. This

evidence is consistent with the results about the equal success of female and male teachers in the

tournament, irrespective of the gender mix of their competition group. 4

      These results are different from the evidence obtained from the lab experiments and the sports’

setting but they are consistent with the findings of Antonovics, Arcidiacono and Walsh (2003) who

used the television game ‘The Weakest Link’ and found that the performance of female participants

was not affected by their opponents' gender. In a later study, Antonovics, Arcidiacono and Walsh

(2008) show that the results from the television game differed from those based on replicating the

television game in a lab experiment that used much lower stakes, and that increasing the stakes

significantly, somewhat bridged the results from the field and lab experiments. 5

      The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The following section presents the experiment, and

section III describes the empirical methodology and the results relating to the success of female

teachers in the two gender related work environments. Section IV presents evidence on the similarity

between math or English female teachers from schools that included only female teachers in these

subjects and female teachers from schools that had also male teachers of these subjects. This section

also includes the evidence regarding the resemblance between the tournament and comparison

teachers. Sections IV-V present results concerning differences by gender in effort, tournament success

and productivity. Section 6 concludes.



II. The Pay for Performance Experiment
A. The Experiment
        In early December 2000, the Ministry of Education announced a new teacher bonus

experiment in forty-nine Israeli high schools. The main feature of the program was an individual


4
  The section on the effect of pay for performance on productivity of teachers, by gender and by mix of the
competition group, is placed after the section on performance in the tournament (ranking, winning rate and
amount of bonuses) but this order is somewhat arbitrary.
5
  Differences between lab and field experiments are discussed in Harrison and List, 2004, Levitt and List, 2007a
and 2007b).

                                                       4
performance bonus paid to teachers on the basis of their own students’ achievements. The experiment

included all English, Hebrew, Arabic, and mathematics teachers who taught classes in grades ten

through twelve prior to matriculation exams in these subjects in June 2001. 6 The program included

schools that had a recent history of relatively poor performance in the mathematics or English

matriculation exams. The competition was structured as a separate rank order tournament in each

subjects and each teacher entered the tournament as many times as the number of classes he/she taught

and was ranked each time on the basis of the mean performance of each of his/her classes. The ranking

was based on the difference between the actual outcome and a value predicted on the basis of a

regression that controlled for the students’ socioeconomic characteristics, their level of proficiency in

each subject, and a fixed school-level effect. Separate regressions were used to compute the predicted

passing rate and mean score, and each teacher was ranked twice, once for each outcome (see Lavy,

2007, for more details).

        All teachers who had a positive residual (actual outcome less predicted outcome) in both

outcomes were divided into four ranking groups, from first place to fourth. Points were accumulated

according to ranking and the total points in the two rankings were used to rank teachers in the

tournament and to determine winners and awards, as follows: 30–36 points—$7,500; 21–29 points—

$5,750; 10–20 points—$3,500; and 9 points—$1,750. These awards are significant relative to the

mean gross annual income of high-school teachers ($30,000) and the fact that a teacher could win

several awards in one tournament if he or she prepared more than one class for a matriculation exam.

        The program included 629 teachers, of whom 207 competed in English, 237 in mathematics

and 172 in Hebrew or Arabic language. Three hundred and two teachers won awards — of whom 94

were English teachers and 124 were math teachers.



B. The Data
        The data I used in this study come from several administrative data files and from a survey the

Ministry conducted with the participants (teachers) in the program. An administrative data set

provided the following information on all participating teachers: gender, subject of teaching, their


6
 The matriculation (‘Bagrut’) exams are a set of national high school exams. See Angrist and Lavy (2008) for
more details and resemblance of the Bagrut program to high school exit exams in other countries.

                                                     5
school id, i.d of different classes they teach, whether they won and the award size. The teacher survey

was conducted during the summer (July-August) following the experiment. The Ministry contracted

with a private company (Taldor) to administer a telephone survey of all the teachers in the program.

All the subjects were sent a letter in advance, which explained the purpose of the survey and that they

would soon be contacted by phone by Taldor. 102 teachers were not interviewed because they could

not be contacted by phone or there phone number was not available and 45 teachers refused. 482

teachers completed the survey which represents more than 82% response rate among people whom we

were able to contact.

        The survey questionnaire included 37 questions, and usually took between 15 to 25 minutes to

complete. The survey provided the following information: the grade and credits (3, 4 and 5 credits) of

each class the teacher taught, details of his awareness and opinion regarding the program, teacher’s

subjective assessment about the likelihood that she/he would win a bonus, details about teaching

methods (tracking in class, individualized instruction and so on), whether the teacher added after

school instruction time during the year and before the matriculation exam period, whether effort and

attention was targeted to particular groups of students (weak, average and strong students) and the

following background characteristics: gender, age, years of teaching experience, highest degree

completed and the academic institution attended, marital status and number of children, country of

birth and parental      education (mother's and father's highest degree completed). Some of this

information was also available in an administrative data file that included all high school teachers in

the country and we have used it to complete information for teachers that were not interviewed in the

survey and also to compute school level means of the gender composition and also of the competition

teams in control schools.

        The data for a student's achievement in the 12th grade matriculation exams came from an

administrative file that provided the full academic records of each student for the Bagrut exams during

high school (grades 10–12) and student characteristics (gender, parental schooling, family size,

immigration status-students who recently immigrated). The information for each Bagrut exam

included its date, subject, applicable credits, and score. A complementary administrative file provided

school level information such as its id, whether it is a Jewish or an Arab school, the religious



                                                  6
orientation (secular or religious) of the Jewish schools, and each school’s matriculation rate in the

years 1999–2001.



III. Identification and Empirical Methodology

        The objective of this study is to test whether performance in the incentive tournament varied

by gender and whether it was affected by the gender mix of the competition group in school in each

subject (the ‘treatment’). Even though teachers were not assigned randomly to ‘types’ of competition

groups in terms of gender composition, a natural variation in the proportion of female teachers among

the math, English and Hebrew competition groups led in some schools to groups with only female

math, English or language teachers and in other schools to groups with mixed genders.

        Table 1 top’s panel presents the distribution of school, competition groups and male and

female teachers by type of competition groups. Forty nine schools participated in the incentive

tournament and therefore there were 49 competition groups in Math, 48 groups in English but only 35

groups in language (Hebrew and Arabic) because 14 schools replaced the language subject with one of

the other compulsory matriculation subjects. Therefore there were 132 school-subject level

competition groups of which 45 included only female teachers (223 teachers), 70 mixed-gender groups

that included in total 149 male and 294 female teachers and 17 groups of only male teachers (58

teachers). The three groups will be denoted as FO (female only), MO (male only) and FM (mixed

gender). The average group size is 5 in FO, 6.3 in FM and 3.4 in MO (see also Figure 1).

      The identification strategy is therefore based on comparing the performance of tournament

participants by the three types of competition groups (treatment). A potential problem of course is that

the non-random assignment of teachers to FO, MO or FM may have resulted in groups that are

different in aspects that may confound the effect of treatment. However, several statistics suggest that

the incidence of single sex or a mixed gender competition groups is actually random. First, all 49

schools had both male and female teachers among there staff. The school level proportion of female

teachers in schools with mixed gender competition groups was 0.61 and in schools with single sex

competition groups it was very similar, 0.59. Second, in 34 schools there were more than one group

type and only in 15 of the schools all the three groups were of the same type, 10 of them are with



                                                   7
mixed gender composition. The very low incidence (5 out of 49 schools) where all three competition

groups in a school are single sex suggests that being a single sex competition group is not correlated

with school observed and unobserved characteristics. Therefore the first identification strategy I use is

to exploit the within school variation in the type of competition groups in terms of their gender mix

and estimate models with school fixed effects. The identifying assumption is that within school

variation in competition type is random.

      Another sort of a natural experiment that I use for identification is based on the fact that in many

schools some of the English, math and languish teachers did not participate in the competition because

they did not teach during the 2001 academic year a class scheduled for a matriculation exam in June

2001. This ‘chance’ variation in timing caused in some cases the gender composition of the

competition group to be different from that of the overall teaching staff of that subject. The lower

panel of Table 1 shows that this was the case for 30 percent of the single sex competition groups. This

proportion is 26 percent for the female only competition group (in 12 of the 45 female only

competition groups the roster of all teachers in that subject was actually of mixed gender) and 55

percent for the male only competition group. Based on this natural experiment I can define a sub

sample of groups where the overall teaching staff of a given subject is of mix gender, but in some

cases the competition group is FO or MO. The identifying assumption is that within this sub sample

the competition type is random and therefore treatment assignment is a result of randomized trial. The

limitation of this strategy is, however, that the randomized trial sample includes only 12 FO groups

and only 9 Mo groups.

         The rich data available allow checking how similar are the three competition groups

in various samples and in many dimensions; including teachers’ demographics, their

schooling attainment and its quality, their parental schooling, and also a range of background

variables of their students and school (including lagged achievements that preceded the

experiment).



A. Evidence on the Validity of the Identification Strategy: Balancing Tests




                                                    8
      The key assumption for the identification strategy outlined above is that the distribution of

teachers across the three types of groups is random. To assess the ‘observable’ part of this assumption

I check whether the various characteristics of the teachers, their students and schools are correlated

with the three treatment indicators. If teachers are indeed randomly assigned to one of the three teams

types, I would expect to find no significant correlation. Table 2 presents the “balancing tests” for

teachers’ background, namely a comparison of teachers’ characteristics between the three treatment

groups. Since the first identification strategy is based on within school comparison, the balancing tests

are also based on regressions that include school fixed effects. I present first in column (1) the mean of

all male teachers and in column (2) the female-male difference. Male teachers are on average 44 years

old, have 18.5 years of teaching experience, are married in 82% of cases, have 1.4 children, 15.2%

have a teaching certificate with a degree (not a BA) from a teacher’s college, 42.1% have a BA degree,

33.9% an MA degree and 8.8% a PhD. The mean of father's years of schooling is 10.7 and the

respective mother’s mean is 10.0. As seen in column (2) there are no differences between male and

female teachers except in terms of age and years of teaching experience. Female teachers are four

years younger and therefore have correspondingly about three years less teaching experience. Fewer

women have a PhD degree but this gap is compensated by higher proportion of women with an MA

degree. It is important to note that there is no significant difference in salary rank by male and female

teachers: women mean rank is lower by 8 percent but it has an estimated large standard error. The

salary rank indicator has values from 1 to 17 and most teachers are in ranks 3 and 4.

      Column 3 presents the means of teachers from only female groups and column 4 presents the

differences between these means and the respective means of female teachers in mixed gender groups.

There are no differences at all between these two groups. This perfect within school balancing between

these two groups of female teachers is central in this paper because the main hypothesis of interest

concerns a comparison between these two groups.

      Column 5 presents the differences between the means of female and male teachers in mixed

gender groups of teachers. Again, these two groups look identical except for the difference in age and

years of teaching experience that were seen in column 2.




                                                    9
      Columns 6-7 present the comparison of male teachers in MO teams to male teachers in FM

teams. The two groups are identical in terms of their demographic characteristics. However, male

teachers in FM groups have a lower proportion of teachers with an MA degree but higher proportion of

B.A and PhD degrees. A more significant difference is the significantly higher father’s years of

schooling among male in FM though this difference is not observed for mother’s years of schooling.

      Table 2A replicates the balancing tests and analysis for the quasi randomized trial sample. The

results are very similar to those presented in Table 2 except that in the comparison of male teachers in

MO and FM groups, the first group has older and more experienced teachers.



IV. Results

A. Simple Differences in Performance by Gender and by Competition Group Types

    I use the following three measures of teacher's performance: an overall ranking of a teacher in the

tournament, a 0/1 indicator of winning a bonus and the amount of the bonus. There are two rankings of

teachers, one in the competition based on the pass rate and one based on the average score. Since these

two rankings are highly correlated, I only use the percentile ranking of their average. However, the

results are identical when I use each of the two base rankings instead of their mean.

    Table 3 and Figures 2-3 present the frequency distribution of the overall and the within

competition-type proportion of winners. The win rate ranges from zero to 0.8. There are 12 groups (4

of the FM type, 7 of FO and 1 of MO) where none of the participants won an award. Table 4 presents

the mean for these three performance measures by gender and by type of competition groups. On

average, men and women had a similar success rate in the tournament. The mean ranking of men was

50.3 and that of women 50.4 and the negligible difference between the two is not significant. There are

also no gender differences in ranking based on the pass rate or on the test score. This can also be seen

in Figures 4 and 5 that present the Kernel density of the pass rate and the mean score residual on which

the respective ranking is based. Among men 42.5 percent won an award while for women the

respective rate was 42.9. The mean bonus for men is $1,203 and for women it is $1,216. The average

award conditional (on winning) among men was $2,790 and among women it was $2,736.




                                                   10
    Examining the respective gender differences in each of the three tournaments (English, math and

language) separately yields very similar results. Columns 3-4 present a performance comparison of

female teachers in FO and FM competition groups. The mean outcomes are marginally higher in the

FM group: mean ranking is 51.0 versus 49.8 in FO group, proportion winners is almost 10 percent

higher in FM (44.9 versus 40.1) and the mean bonus is 20 percent higher in FM ($ 1,297 versus

1,080). In the next section I test whether these differences in favor of the FM group are statistically

significant and whether they remain positive in a controlled comparison.

      The comparison between male teachers in MO and FM suggest marginal positive differences in

favor of MO teachers but these are very small and most likely not significant different from zero as

seen in the next section.



B. Controlled Regression Estimates of Gender Differences by Competition Group Type

          Our major interest in this paper is whether female and male teachers reacted differently to

competition and to the gender mix of the competition group. For this purpose I estimate the following

model:



         Rijs = αs + β Xijs + γ Fi +δ FOis +θMOis +φEijs + λMijs + εijs                    (1)


where R is a teacher’s performance measure, X is a vector of teacher’s characteristics, F denotes a

female teacher, FO and MO are indicators of female only and male only competition groups,

respectively, E and M are discrete indicators for English and math teachers, respectively, and αs are the

school fixed effects. The main parameters of interest are δ and θ.

    Table 5 presents parameter estimates of regressions where the dependent variables are the three

principal performance measures, teacher’s ranking, whether a bonus was won and its amount. Column

1 presents the mean outcome for men (the constant in the regression) and the simple female difference.

The specification presented in column 2 includes also dummy indicators for math and English

tournaments and in column 3 the specification includes as well the two treatment indicators, FO and

MO, and the group left out is the mixed gender groups (FM).




                                                       11
    No significant treatment effect for the two treatment indicators is estimated for all three

performance measures (column 3). The FO estimates are negative but all three have large estimated

standard errors. The highest t-statistic (-1.6) is that of the mean rank performance measure. The

estimates of the MO group are positive for all three measures but they are very small and have large

estimated standard errors, therefore they can be viewed as practically zero.

    In column 4 I present estimates from a specification that includes also teachers' characteristics

(including all the background variables presented in Table 2) as controls. The treatment effect

estimates are still not different from zero. The estimates of the control variables are presented in Table

6. The only variable that is significant in this specification is the teacher’s salary rank (highest rank is

1 and lowest is 17) and it has a negative sign, implying that the higher the teacher's salary, the better is

the teacher’s performance in the tournament. Since salary rank is mostly a function of age, years of

teaching experience and education, the estimate of the rank variable captures most likely the effect of

variation in salary rank determined by unobserved heterogeneity to the researcher but one that is

observed by the school headmaster. When these other determinants of salary rank are dropped from

the equation the effect of the rank variable is still negative, though smaller by about 30 percent and

less precisely measured thought it is still significant or marginally significant. The implication of this

result is that financial incentives are more effective among teachers who were promoted beyond the

rank they deserve based on their age and their formal schooling. The ‘unobservables’ that account for

the higher salary rank are also positively correlated with its success in the tournament and they perhaps

capture unobserved teacher’s quality. Allowing for the ‘salary rank’ variable to vary by gender shows

that among women this negative effect is marginally larger (‘more negative’) but the difference from

the estimated effect for men is not statistically significant.

    Another interesting result to note is that the teacher’s schooling parameter estimates are all

negative and not significant except for the indicator of an MA degree. When the salary rank variable is

dropped from the regression the negative estimated effects of teacher’s schooling are still negative and

not significant. This pattern is consistent with previous findings of studies that estimated education

production functions and found no significant relationship between teachers’ schooling levels and

students’ achievements.



                                                     12
        I also estimated a specification where the treatment effects were allowed to have different

effects in each of the three subjects. The basic results were unchanged and therefore these results are

not reported here.

        Column 5 reports estimates from a regression that included also school fixed effects. Any

potential effects of school level variables are accounted for in this specification and the estimates are

based on within school variation in the type of the competition groups in the three subjects. The

estimates of the FO and MO indicators change signs in comparison to estimates without school fixed

effects but given their estimated standard errors they remain statistically not different from zero

        Columns 6-8 report estimates from regressions of a specification similar to those of column 3-

5, respectively, but the FO and MO indicators were replaced by a continuous measure of the

proportion of female teachers in the competition group and its interaction with the female indicator.

The estimates of these two variables are never statistically significant in any of the specifications for

each of the three outcomes.

        Table 5A reports results based on the quasi randomized trial sample. The pattern of estimates

is very similar to those presented in Table 5. The only exception is the estimated effect of FO on the

bonus size which is now positive and significantly different from zero. Since this positive effect is not

paralleled by a similar effect on the rank and probability of winning, I tend to discount it and view it as

spurious.



B. Gender Related Differences in Program Awareness and Response by Gender composition of

Competition Teams

        A post program survey with teachers added information about their awareness to the program,

their opinion about its efficacy in improving students' achievements and about teaching methods and

additional effort. I find no differences by gender in program awareness and knowledge of its details.

90.1% of men and 91.7% of women responded that they knew about the program and 66.3% of men

and 67.9% of women said that they received an explanation about it. However, only 51.2% of women

and 47.4% of men thought the explanation they received was satisfactory and yet, 62.2% of men and

59.6% of women claimed that they are sufficiently familiar with the ranking criteria for teachers and



                                                    13
for bonus winning. These results are presented in the first column in each of panels A-D in Table 7 and

their overall pattern does not reveal any gender related differences in these program related variables.

        The respondents’ answers the questions about teaching methods do not reveal as well any

differences between male and female teachers (first column of panels E-H). For example, 59.3% of

male and 54.9% female teachers said that they relied on individualized instruction, 54.7% of male

teachers and 52.8% of female teachers grouped their students by ability during lessens. None of these

minor gender differences were significant. However, almost all teachers (98.8% of male and 93.8% of

female) reported that they adopted their pedagogy to their students, yet the implied small gender

difference is still significantly different from zero.

        Another dimension of similarity between men and women teachers is in terms of their effort.

The questionnaire asked teachers "during the academic year did you add additional instruction beyond

the regular school hours?" and teachers had to choose one of the following: "1. No 2. Yes, during the

period before the matriculation exam 3. Yes, throughout the year". Among male teachers 81.9% chose

answers 2 or 3 while the respective rate for female teachers was 80.1%. Men added on average per

week 2.55 hours while women slightly less, 2.12 hours per week, but there were no differences in how

this additional instruction time was targeted to students of different abilities. An almost equal

proportion (61% and 62.7%) of male and female teachers reported that the additional, voluntary,

instruction time was their own initiative. These results are presented in the first column of panels’ I-K

of Table 7.

        In contrast to the above similarities by gender, I find large gender differences in the teachers’

opinion about the program and about of their chances of winning a bonus: 75.8% of the male teachers

thought that the program would lead to improvements in their students’ achievement while only 60 %

of the female teachers shared this view. The implied 15 percentage point difference is significantly

different from zero. 7 Furthermore, 3 out of 4 men (76.3%) thought that they would win a bonus, but

only 3 out of 5 female teachers (61.0%) had such trust in their winning ability. This 20 percent gap in

‘self-confidence’ (a difference of 15.3 percentage points relative to 76.3%) is significantly different

from zero. Two important points should be noted with respect to this evidence. First, that women




                                                         14
assessment of their prospects for success in the tournament is more accurate and closer to the actual

mean win rate (43 percent for women and men) and so the gap between men and women in self

assessment of winning reflects the over confidence of men. Second, despite the fact that women have

more accurate expectations about their ability, I found no difference in performance by gender.

Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) report a similar result, that men are substantially more overconfident

and that there are no gender differences in performance (in a lab experiment where the task was to

solve simple two digit addition problems). However, they concluded that this gender gap in self

confidence played an important role in explaining the gender gap in competitive tournament entry, as

73 percent of the men selected the tournament incentive scheme, while only 35 percent of the women

made this choice. In the teachers’ tournament studied in this paper participants were not offered an

alternative to the competitive incentive scheme.

         The second to fourth column in each of the panels in Table 7 reports estimates of the effect of

the type of the competition groups (FO, MO and FM) based on the first four specifications used in

Table 5. Two results should be noted. Firstly, the conditional gender differentials effects are not very

different from the unconditional differences reported above. Secondly, the basic patterns of similarity

or differences between men and women teachers do not vary with the nature of the competition group

with only the following exception. The self confidence of male teachers in winning a bonus is much

higher in only male groups than in mixed gender groups.



V. Does Program Effectiveness Vary by Teacher’s Gender and by Type of Competition Group?

        A related question is whether the impact of the program on students' achievements was

different by teacher’s gender and by the gender composition of the competition group. In an earlier

paper (Lavy 2008) I evaluated the effect of the program on the two criteria outcomes that were used

to measure teacher's performance, the average score and the pass rate in the exam, and also on the

test taking rate of students. The design of the program enabled the implementation of a randomized

trial identification strategy based on two features of the program: assignment of schools to the




7
 This doubt about the effectiveness of pay for performance may be viewed as consistent with the findings of
Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) that women prefer fix to piece rate compensation.

                                                    15
program based on a threshold function of an observable and a measurement error in this variable. 8

The results indicated that incentives increased student achievements by increasing the test taking rate

as well as the conditional pass rate and test scores in math and English exams, but mainly for students

in the lower half of the ability distribution as measured by their lagged achievements in high school.

These improvements appeared to result from changes in teaching methods, after-school teaching, and

increased responsiveness to students’ needs and not from artificial inflation or manipulation of test

scores.

          In this section I rely on the randomized trial sample of treatment and control schools that I

used in Lavy (2007). I first allow for heterogeneous treatment effect by the indicators FO and MO so

as to examine if the effectiveness of the program was different in FO or MO groups in comparison to

FM groups. Unlike the first part of the paper where estimation was based on samples of teachers, here

the unit of observation is the student. To allow for a larger sample and more efficient estimation of the

heterogeneity in treatment effect (by FO, MO and FM), I pool the English and math students' samples

as I did in studying teachers’ performance in the previous section. I therefore first replicate the basic

estimation of Lavy (2007) based on a sample that pools together the English and math samples and

than estimate a model that allows for the main effect of FO and MO as well as interactions between

these two variables and the program treatment.



A. Balancing Tests by the Gender Composition of Competition Teams

      I first checked whether the various characteristics of the students and schools in the randomized

treatment samples are correlated with the three treatment indicators of the competition types groups.

Table 8 presents these balancing tests. Column 1 presents the means of student characteristics in

groups of only female teachers and columns 2 presents the differences between these means and the

respective means of students in groups with both male and female teachers. Overall the two groups of

students are very similar in school and student characteristics and also in terms of lagged achievements

in English and math. The only meaningful difference is in the proportion of students in Arab schools.

8
  Schools were included in the program if their 1999 matriculation rate was equal or lower than a critical value
(45 percent). The administrators of the program, unaware that the assignment variable used was measured with
error, assigned some schools to the program mistakenly. As the measurement error was essentially random and


                                                      16
      Column 3 presents the means of student characteristics in groups of only male teachers and

columns 4 presents the differences between these means and the respective means of students in

groups with both male and female teachers. There are no significant differences between the two

groups in school level outcomes such as the mean Bagrut rate in the two years prior to the program.

There are also no significant differences in lagged outcomes in math and English. However there are

large differences in parental schooling and number of siblings and also in lagged mean overall

achievements such as lagged total credits and lagged mean score. These differences resemble the

differences found among teachers of these students, again suggestion caution in interpreting the

evidence about the comparison of male teachers in MO and FM competition groups.



B. Program Impact Differences by Gender Composition of Competition Groups
        Table 9 presents the estimated effects of the program for the three types of competition

groups. As in Lavy (2007), the estimates are based on panel data that pool the 2000 and 2001 cohorts

of students for difference in differences estimation. Columns 1-4 presents estimates using the sample

of students in the lower half of the ability distribution and columns 5-8 presents the estimates for the

upper half sample. Columns 1 and 5 presents average treatment effect estimates for all types of

competition groups. These results suggest that the program had a significant effect on the outcomes

of students in the lower half, and zero effect on students in the upper half of the ability distribution.

For lower half students the program raised the test taking rate by 7.2%, the test pass rate by 12.4%

and the average score by 6.85 points. These are relatively large effects and the largest is that on the

pass rate which was raised by almost 25 percent. On the other hand the respective estimates for the

upper half are all practically zero. These results are very similar to those reported in Lavy (2007)

where the estimation was done separately for math and English while here I pooled the two samples

together.

        Based on the estimates in columns 2-4 and 6-8 I conclude that the program was equally

effective or ineffective in the three types of groups defined by their teachers’ gender composition.

This similarity is almost perfect in terms of the size of the estimated parameters except for the


unrelated to the potential outcome, many of the schools not too far from the threshold were assigned to treatment
at random. See Lavy (2007) for more details.

                                                       17
estimate of the effect on test taking in the MO group which is practically zero while in the FO and

FM groups it is about 8% in both. For example, at the bottom half of the distribution the point

estimates of the effect on the pass rate is identical for all three groups, 12.4, 12.9 and 11.6% in FO,

MO and FM, respectively. The effect on the test score of students in the lower half is also identical

for all three groups, 6.7, 6.9 and 7.0, respectively. The estimated effect for all three outcomes for the

upper half is not significantly different from zero for all three types of competitions. However, I

should note that the mean of the outcomes for the control group are marginally lower in the mixed

gender group, especially in the 1st and 2ed quartiles which implies that the effect size are larger in the

FM group than in the FO and MO groups. For example, the program improved the testing rate by 13

percent in the FM group and by 10 percent in the FO group. For the pass rate the respective rates are

29 and 19 and for the average score they are 18 and 14. This evidence implies that on average the

program was marginally more effective in FM groups than in FO or MO groups. However, given the

estimated standard error of these estimates, the hypothesis that these estimates are not different from

each other cannot be rejected.

        The remaining open question is whether female teachers in FO groups were on average less

effective than female teachers in FM groups and the respective questions for male teachers.



B. Program Impact Differences by Teacher Gender and by Composition of Competition Groups

        The results presented above suggest that the effect of providing incentive to teachers was

equally successful in raising students’ achievements in groups with only female teachers and in

groups with both male and female teachers. In this section I examine whether female teachers in both

groups were also equally effective. For answering this question it is sufficient focusing only on the

sample of treated schools as there is no need to compare it to evidence from a comparison group.

This approach allows doing the analysis not only for the randomized trial sample of 18 treated

schools but also for all the 49 treated schools. I estimate the following model:

Yijs = αs + β Xijs + γ Fi + δ FOis +θMOis +φEijs + λMijs + εijs
                                                                                             (2)

Where Y is student’s outcome and all other notations is identical to that in equation 1.




                                                      18
        In Table 10 I present estimates based on the sample of the lower half of the lagged score

distribution. I focus on this sample because, as shown above, the program had no effect on students in

the top half in any of the competition groups. Columns 1-2 present estimates based on the

randomized sample of 18 treated schools and columns 3-4 present results based on all 49 treated

schools. Columns 1 and 3 are derived based on a specification without any controls (except a subject

main effect for math) and columns 2 and 4 show estimates from a specification that includes as

controls school and student level background characteristics. These models are estimated for the three

outcomes; the testing rate (panel A), the pass rate (panel B) and the average score (panel C).

        The first row in each panel presents the estimates of the differences between female teachers

in female only competition groups and female teachers in mixed gender competition groups. The

second row in each panel presents the estimates of the differences between female teachers in mixed

gender competition groups and male teachers in these groups. The third row in each panel presents

the differences between male teachers in male only groups and mixed gender groups.

        The overall pattern of the estimates shows no significant differences between female teachers

in FO and FM groups. This result is seen in both of the samples, the randomized trial and the full

sample, and it is not sensitive at all to whether controls are included in the regressions. The average

test rate is 0.918 and there is no difference between female teachers in the FO and FM groups (panel

A column 1). Adding controls does not change this equality; the mean test rate is lower by 0.001 in

FO than in FM but this infinitesimal difference has a standard error of 0.018. The average pass rate

for female teachers is higher by 0.023 (s.e. 0.031) in FO than in FM. The average test score for

female teachers is higher by 3.44 (s.e. 2.73) in FO than in FM.

        Another interesting result is that there are no differences at all between male and female

teachers in FM competition groups. The controlled estimates are all positive, indicating higher effects

of female teachers on students’ achievements, but they are very small and not significantly different

from zero. For example, the estimated effect on average test score of female teachers in FM groups is

higher than that of male teachers in these groups by 3.44 (s.e. 2.73) but it is not significantly different

from zero.




                                                    19
        The results based on the full sample replicates precisely the results from the randomized

sample, reinforcing the conclusion that female teachers in FO are as effective as female teachers in

FM groups and also as male teachers in FM groups.

        A similar analysis comparing male teachers in MO and FM groups show no differences in

simple means between the two groups in the randomized and in the full sample. However, adding the

controls to the regressions reveal some advantages in the pass rate and mean test score in favor of the

former group of teachers. Given the small size of the MO group and the basic imbalance in

characteristics between male teachers and their students in the two groups, I think it is hard to draw

firm conclusions about productivity differences between them.



VI. Conclusions

        In this paper I addressed empirically the question of whether there are gender differentials in

performance in a competitive setting in the form of a tournament, when women compete against men.

A rank order tournament set the competitive environment where teachers compete against their

colleagues in school on the basis of measured improvements in the academic achievements of their

students and they are financially rewarded accordingly. As far as I am aware, this study is the first to

test the hypothesis of gender differences in competitiveness based on evidence from a real work

place. I find no overall differences in performance of female and male teachers and no such

differences by the competitive environment in terms of gender composition. 9

        These results are different from most recent lab experiments that addressed the same

question, perhaps because in the real world most tasks are not completed instantaneously and workers

have time to plan, receive feedback, observe rivals and adjust strategy and actions. Another

difference is that the competition studied in this paper is based on the regular activity of the

participants for which they are educated and trained for and therefore female teachers may have more

self confidence and are less intimidated in competing against male rivals. Of course, there is always

the possibility that the results differ because they are based on heterogeneous populations.



9
  Recent interesting and related evidence suggests that young women respond more effectively than young men
to achievement awards. Angrist and Lavy, 2007, show such results for senior high school students and Angrist
and Oreopoulos, 2007, for first year college studetns.

                                                    20
        The evidence presented in this paper is important because women comprise a larger fraction

of the teacher labor market compared to other occupations with similar skills. If women are indeed

less productive in a competitive environment, it may cast doubt about the effectiveness of introducing

pay for performance and merit pay programs in schools. Many of these programs, whose rationale is

the notion that incentive pay may motivate teachers to improve their performance, are based on

explicit or implicit ranking within schools and they introduce competition, often among male and

female teachers. I should qualify, however, that the finding reported here reflect short term

adjustment of teachers but it is possible that a performance pay scheme may have in the longer term

an effect through sorting on composition of the teaching staff. Women may be more likely to leave

the teaching profession under such pay compensation system.

        A question might be raised about the external validity of the findings presented above to

other occupations as teachers, especially male, might be different from others in the labor force. It

can also be argued in this regard that it is easier for teachers to collude and behave strategically as the

group of participants is relatively small and therefore caution is called for in discussing the lessons

from this study for other occupations. However, as noted earlier, the teaching profession is an

important and large segment of the labor force, especially for women, and therefore the evidence is

important regardless of its potential generalization.




                                                    21
References

Angrist J. and V. Lavy, (2007) “The Effect of High-Stakes High School Achievement Awards:
         Evidence from a Group-Randomized Trial” forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Angrist J. D. Lang and P. Oreopoulos (2007) “Incentives and Services for College Achievement:
         Evidence from a Randomized Trial” forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Applied
         Economics.
Antonovics Kate, Peter Arcidiacono, and Randall Walsh, "Competing Against the Opposite Sex" (June
         1, 2003). Department of Economics, UCSD. Paper 2003-08.
________, “The Effects of Gender Interactions in the Lab and in the Field,” forthcoming, Review of
         Economics and Statistics.
Blau, Francine, and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Gender Differences in Pay,” Journal of Economic
         Perspectives, XIV (2000), 75–99.
Gneezy, U, M. Niederle, and A. Rustichini, "Performance in competitive environments: Gender
        differences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2003, p. 1049-1074.
Gneezy, U., and A. Rustichini, "Gender and competition at a young age," American Economic Review
        Papers and Proceedings, May 2004, 377-381.
Gneezy, U, K.L. and List, John. (2008) “Gender Differences in Competition: Evidence from a
         Matrilineal and a Patriarchal Society.” forthcoming, Econometrica.
Goldin, Claudia, and Cecilia Rouse, “Orchestrating Impartiality: The Impact of “Blind” Auditions on
          Female Musicians,” American Economic Review, XL (2000), 715–742.
Harrison, G. and J. List, “Field Experiments," Journal of Economic Literature, December
         2004, 42(4), 1009-55.
Lavy, V. “Evaluating the Effect of Teachers’ Group Performance Incentives on Students
        Achievements.” Journal of Political Economy, 10 (6), December 2002, 1286–1318.
Lavy, V. “Using Performance-Based Pay to Improve the Quality of Teachers”, The Future of Children,
        Spring 2007, 87-110.
Lavy, V. (2008) “Performance Pay and Teachers’ Effort, Productivity and Grading Ethics”,
         forthcoming, American Economic Review, [an earlier version is NBER WP 10622, 2004].
Levitt, Steven and John List, “What Do Laboratory Experiments Measuring Social Preferences Tell Us
        About the Real World?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2007, 21(2), 153-74.
Levitt, Steven and John List, “Viewpoint: On the Generalizability of Lab Behaviour to the Field,"
        Canadian Journal of Economics, May 2007, 40(2), 347-70.
Niederle, Muriel, and Lise Vesterlund, “Do Women Shy Away From Competition? Do Men Compete
         Too Much?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2007. 122(3), 1067-1102.
Paserman Daniele, “Gender Differences in Performance in Competitive Environments: Field Evidence
         from Professional Tennis Players.” CEPR Working Paper, 2007.
Polachek, SolomonW., “Occupational Self-Selection: A Human Capital Approach to Sex Differences
         in Occupational Structure,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXIII (1981), 60– 69.




                                                22
                   Table 1 - Distribution of Participants and Competition Groups by Gender Composition of Groups
                                                                        Competition Group Type
                                               Female Only      Male Only                   Mixed Gender                         Total
                                                                                Female          Male           Total
                                                     (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)               (6)
   Number of participants*                          223             58            294            149           443                724

   Number of competition groups                      45              17                                              70           132

   Number of schools with all groups                 4               1                                              10             15
   under the same category*
                                                Comparing Group Type Classification by Competition Participants and by
                                                                        Roster of Teachers
   Female only group by teachers roster
     Number of participants*                        164
     Number of groups                                33
     Number of schools with all groups in             3
     the same category by competition/roster

   Male only group by teachers roster
    Number of teachers                                               32
    Number of groups                                                  8
    Number of schools with all groups in                              0
    the same category by competition/roster

   Mixed gender group by teachers roster
    Number of teachers                               59              26                 294             149         443
    Number of groups                                 12               9                                              70
    Number of schools with all groups in              0               1                                              10
    the same category by competition/roster


Notes:
* The number of participants (724) is larger than the number of teachers because some teachers participated in the tournament with more
than one class.
** Number of schools in tournament = 49
                                     Table 2 - Balancing Tests of Teachers' Characteristics by Type of Competition Groups
                                                                              Mean of          Difference        Difference   Mean of     Difference
                                           Mean of         Difference         Female        (Female in FO -  (Female in FM    Male in   (Male in FM -
                                             Male       (Female - Male)        in FO         Female in FM)    - Male in FM)    MO        Male in MO)
                                              (1)              (2)               (3)                (4)               (5)       (6)            (7)
Age                                          44.0            -3.963             43.1              -1.10             -4.22      38.9           0.57
                                            (1.44)           (1.05)                              (1.34)            (1.25)                   (1.93)
Years of Teaching Experience                 18.5            -3.131             17.9              -1.25           -3.166       14.0          -0.21
                                            (1.49)           (1.23)                              (1.13)            (1.45)                   (2.25)
Married                                      .821             -.068             .807               .049             -.088      .741           .092
                                            (.037)           (.046)                              (.062)            (.055)                   (.098)
Number of Kids                               1.43             .146             1.276              -.001              .198      1.98          -.263
                                            (.172)           (.164)                              (.171)            (.177)                   (.561)
Highest Diploma Completed
      Teaching Certificate                     .152              -.030         .147             .028              -.052        .080           .091
                                              (.033)            (.046)                        (.041)             (.057)                     (.133)
      B.A Degree                               .421              .057          .424            -.053               .111        .560           .104
                                              (.042)            (.052)                        (.059)             (.061)                     (.170)
      M.A Degree                               .339              .078          .395             .013               .036        .340          -.264
                                              (.050)            (.063)                        (.063)             (.062)                     (.122)
      Ph.D Degree                              .088              -.105         .034             .012              -.095        .020           .069
                                              (.035)            (.042)                        (.021)             (.036)                     (.121)
Salary Rank                                    3.15              -.261         2.972            .072              -.326        2.91         0.727
                                              (.190)            (.219)                        (.171)             (.235)                     (.542)
Mother's Years of Schooling                    10.7              0.34          11.5           -0.952               .535        9.17           1.53
                                               0.51             (.522)                        (.653)             (.513)                    (1.675)
Father's Years of Schooling                    9.99              1.14          11.7            -.620               1.28        7.87           3.05
                                              (.579)            (.599)                        (.735)             (.644)                     (.638)
Teaches 10th Grade                             .150              .006          .193             .072               .014        .155          -.032
                                              (.031)            (.029)                        (.079)             (.026)                     (.045)
Teaches 11th Grade                             .174              -.005         .193            -.014               .018        .121           .062
                                              (.037)            (.033)                        (.065)             (.035)                     (.060)
Teaches 12th Grade                             .676              -.001         .614            -.057              -.033        .724          -.030
                                              (.042)            (.042)                        (.088)             (.040)                     (.080)
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. FO = Female Only group
MO = Male Only group
FM = Mixed gender group
                Table 2A - Balancing Tests of Teachers' Characteristics by Type of Competition Groups in Quasi-Randomized Trial Sample
                                                                            Mean of       Difference         Difference    Mean of       Difference
                                       Mean of          Difference          Female    (Female in FO -     (Female in FM    Male in     (Male in FM -
                                          Male       (Female - Male)         in FO     Female in FM)       - Male in FM)     MO         Male in MO)
                                           (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)         (6)            (7)
Age                                       44.9            -4.144              42.2            -0.68             -4.22        38.8           3.43
                                         (1.51)           (1.17)                             (0.90)            (1.25)                      (1.72)
Years of Teaching Experience              19.3            -3.048              18.3             0.47           -3.166         13.3           3.70
                                         (1.58)           (1.36)                             (0.92)            (1.45)                      (1.40)
Married                                   .840             -.079              .746             .012             -.088        .769           .117
                                         (.037)           (.051)                             (.098)            (.055)                      (.062)
Number of Kids                            1.35             .166               1.15            -.047              .198        2.16           .071
                                         (.180)           (.169)                             (.186)            (.177)                      (.635)
Highest Diploma Completed
      Teaching Certificate                   .175              -.046             .182             .031               -.052          .136              .153
                                            (.039)            (.055)                            (.052)              (.057)                          (.179)
      B.A Degree                             .392              .128              .568             .133                .111          .545              .023
                                            (.046)            (.060)                            (.068)              (.061)                          (.197)
      M.A Degree                             .336              .002              .227            -.157                .036          .318             -.313
                                            (.055)            (.063)                            (.089)              (.062)                          (.183)
      Ph.D Degree                            .098              -.084             .023            -.006               -.095          .000              .137
                                            (.040)            (.033)                            (.055)              (.036)                          (.136)
Salary Rank                                  3.21              -.340             3.36             .280               -.326          3.04              .942
                                            (.213)            (.218)                            (.411)              (.235)                          (.830)
Mother's Years of Schooling                  10.8              0.76              11.0            -1.21                .535          7.13              3.37
                                             .602             (.529)                            (.669)              (.513)                          (2.27)
Father's Years of Schooling                  10.2              1.56              11.4            -.854                1.28          6.76              3.70
                                            (.648)            (.618)                            (.933)              (.644)                          (.757)
Teaches 10th Grade                           .171              -.001             .237             .077                .014          .308             -.079
                                            (.036)            (.031)                            (.126)              (.026)                          (.135)
Teaches 11th Grade                           .183              .005              .068            -.116                .018          .115              .037
                                            (.037)            (.033)                            (.044)              (.035)                          (.100)
Teaches 12th Grade                           .646              -.004             .695             .038               -.033          .577              .043
                                            (.043)            (.043)                            (.103)              (.040)                          (.193)
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. FO = Female Only group
MO = Male Only group
FM = Mixed gender group
3. The regressios are based on a sample that exclude groups for which both the roster and the competition classification of the group is female only or male
only
   Table 3 - Frequency Distribution of Proportions of Winners by Type of
                            Competition Group
Proportion              Type of Competition Group
of winners        Mixed         Female-only       Male-only        Total
   .000              4                7               1              12
   .143              1                0               0               1
   .200              0                1               0               1
   .250              2                4               1               7
   .273              0                1               0               1
   .286              2                0               0               2
   .308              1                0               0               1
   .333             13                5               5              23
   .364              1                0               0               1
   .368              1                0               0               1
   .375              1                3               0               4
   .400              6                4               1              11
   .417              1                0               0               1
   .429              1                1               0               2
   .444              3                0               0               3
   .455              1                0               0               1
   .500             15               15               8              38
   .556              1                0               0               1
   .571              1                0               0               1
   .600              4                1               0               5
   .615              2                0               0               2
   .667              6                3               1              10
   .727              1                0               0               1
   .750              1                0               0               1
   .800              1                0               0               1
Total              70               45              17             132
                         Table 4 - Competition Ranks, Proportions of Winners and Bonuses
                                                                     Female                        Male
                                Female         Male
                                                              in FO          in FM         in MO          in FM
                                  (1)           (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)

Mean Rank                        50.5          50.3           49.8           51.0           50.9           50.0

 Rank in the Test Pass-Rate      50.4          50.6           49.9           50.7           50.7           50.5
 Competition
 Rank in the Test Score          50.6          50.0           49.8           51.2           51.2           49.5
 Competition

Proportion Winners               .429          .425           .404           .449           .431           .423

 Bonus: $1,750                   .246          .232           .247           .245           .190           .248

 Bonus: $3,500                   .133          .145           .117           .146           .207           .121

 Bonus: $5,750                   .041          .034           .036           .044           .034           .034

 Bonus: $7,500                   .010          .014           .004           .014           .000           .020

Mean Bonus ($)                   1,203         1,216          1,080          1,297         1,254          1,201

Number of participants             517           207              223           294            58           149
Note: The bonus figures are based on the exchange rate at the date the program was announced, December 2000 (4
NIS per 1 USD)
                   Table 5 - Estimates of Effects of the Gender-Mix of Competition Groups on Teachers' Performance
                          (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)            (7)                (8)
                                                                          Mean Rank
Constant                 50.3          48.5             48.4         54.4          56.0         48.5           55.5                57.1
                        (1.11)        (1.60)          (1.81)       (9.48)        (12.2)       (1.85)         (9.64)               (13.0)
Female                   .205          .477             1.05        -.070         -.047         7.90           2.68                4.12
                        (1.49)        (1.65)          (2.18)       (2.76)        (3.10)       (5.04)         (5.64)               (6.69)
FO Group                                               -.831        -.133         1.80
                                                      (1.28)       (1.54)        (1.96)
MO Group                                                .995         2.00        -.011
                                                      (2.11)       (2.07)        (2.40)
Female Prop. in Group (FPG)                                                                     1.55          -1.67                -.647
                                                                                              (4.09)         (4.39)               (5.48)
FPG * Female                                                                                   -9.94          -3.48                -4.94
                                                                                              (6.48)         (6.61)               (8.43)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √             √              √              √              √              √
Individual Controls                                                     √              √                             √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                   √                                            √

                                                                          Winning a Bonus
Constant                  .425           .393           .397           .364          .442            .387           .355           .390
                         (.026)         (.028)         (.033)         (.179)        (.234)          (.037)         (.168)         (.231)
Female                    .004           .014           .029           .024          .036            .143           .114           .163
                         (.031)         (.032)         (.048)         (.054)        (.059)          (.105)         (.111)         (.122)
FO Group                                               -.036          -.034          .007
                                                       (.041)         (.043)        (.044)
MO Group                                                .008           .012         -.037
                                                       (.041)         (.054)        (.063)
Female Prop. in Group (FPG)                                                                           .042          -.007           .083
                                                                                                    (.073)         (.109)         (.128)
FPG * Female                                                                                         -.180          -.132          -.186
                                                                                                    (.124)         (.130)         (.148)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √             √              √              √              √              √
Individual Controls                                                     √              √                             √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                   √                                            √

                                                                         Bonus Size (NIS)
Constant                  4,865         4,797          4,865          4,444        5,986            4,622          4,770          5,337
                          (368)         (643)          (703)         (2,359)      (2,617)           (713)         (2,163)        (2,669)
Female                    -52.4          212            470            31.8         18.0             950           -492           -483
                          (405)         (420)          (548)          (610)        (666)           (1,126)        (1,302)        (1,546)
FO Group                                               -635           -474          731
                                                       (541)          (587)        (596)
MO Group                                                103            504          -386
                                                       (633)          (686)       (1,178)
Female Prop. in Group (FPG)                                                                          566           -568            943
                                                                                                   (1,207)        (1,445)        (1,804)
FPG * Female                                                                                        -1,207          540            768
                                                                                                   (1,407)        (1,574)        (2,039)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √             √              √              √              √              √
Individual Controls                                                     √              √                             √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                   √                                            √

Observations                724            724            724            683            683           724             683           683
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. Regressions in columns (4) and (7) include controls for age, teaching experience, salary rank, overall school's proportion of female
teachers, marital status, number of children, education, parents' education, and grade.
3. Regressions in columns (5) and (8) include the same controls as in columns (4) and (7), and also school fixed-effects.
 Table 5A - Estimates of Effects of the Gender-Mix of Competition Groups on Teachers' Performance in Quasi-Randomized Trial Sample
                          (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)         (8)
                                                                         Mean Rank
Constant                 49.9            47.6         47.9          58.5         58.0           46.2          56.7        60.0
                        (1.22)          (1.77)       (1.96)       (9.98)        (14.0)        (2.15)        (10.0)      (14.4)
Female                   .797            .833         1.00         -.437         .009           11.9          5.75        5.81
                        (1.84)          (1.90)       (2.15)       (2.76)        (3.12)        (6.62)        (7.14)      (9.04)
FO Group                                             -2.04         -.806         .698
                                                     (1.25)       (1.91)        (2.50)
MO Group                                             -.942         -1.17         2.38
                                                     (2.92)       (2.87)        (3.40)
Female Prop. in Group                                                                           4.51          1.03       -1.30
                                                                                              (4.82)        (5.39)      (7.04)
FPG * Female                                                                                   -16.5         -8.68       -8.57
                                                                                              (9.14)        (9.40)      (12.2)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √              √              √              √             √              √
Individual Controls                                                      √              √                            √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                    √                                           √

                                                                          Winning a Bonus
Constant                  .417           .386           .395           .399          .438            .352           .351           .340
                         (.032)         (.035)         (.036)         (.203)        (.282)          (.052)         (.192)         (.301)
Female                    .025           .027           .028           .011          .038            .179           .129           .145
                         (.042)         (.041)         (.048)         (.053)        (.058)          (.126)         (.136)         (.161)
FO Group                                               -.037          -.012          .084
                                                       (.054)         (.065)        (.054)
MO Group                                               -.030          -.043         -.007
                                                       (.040)         (.064)        (.103)
Female Prop. in Group                                                                                 .094           .049           .168
                                                                                                    (.086)         (.136)         (.192)
FPG * Female                                                                                         -.239          -.170          -.170
                                                                                                    (.163)         (.178)         (.214)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √              √              √              √             √              √
Individual Controls                                                      √              √                            √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                    √                                           √

                                                                          Bonus Size (NIS)
Constant                  4,743          4,757          4,879          5,363        6,482            4,237         5,619          6,073
                          (383)          (788)          (862)         (2,575)      (2,928)           (819)        (2,379)        (3,304)
Female                     308            405            452           -30.2         112              942          -988           -1,937
                          (484)          (479)          (548)          (625)        (696)           (1,364)       (1,643)        (1,755)
FO Group                                                -679           -223         1,448
                                                        (756)          (963)        (642)
MO Group                                                -378            162         1,707
                                                        (834)          (970)       (1,359)
Female Prop. in Group                                                                                 1,188        -483           1,214
                                                                                                    (1,298)       (1,638)        (2,328)
FPG * Female                                                                                         -1,201        1,356          2,895
                                                                                                    (1,907)       (2,219)        (2,360)

Subject Main Effects                       √              √              √              √              √             √              √
Individual Controls                                                      √              √                            √              √
School Fixed Effects                                                                    √                                           √

Observations                528            528            528            492            492           528             492           492
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. Regressions in columns (4) and (7) include controls for age, teaching experience, salary rank, overall school's proportion of female
teachers, marital status, number of children, education, parents' education, and grade.
3. Regressions in columns (5) and (8) include the same controls as in columns (4) and (7), and also school fixed-effects.
4. The regressios are based on a sample that exclude groups for which both the roster and the competition classification of the group is
female only or male only
                        Table 6 - Estimates of Effects of Teachers' Characteristics in the Teachers' Performance Equations
                                                  Mean Rank                              Won                                Bonus
                                         No FE                  FE            No FE              FE              No FE              FE
                                                 (1)                 (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
Math Teacher                                   .575               1.944           -.016             .030           -321.0             433.4
                                            (1.460)             (2.357)          (.043)           (.053)          (707.0)           (668.8)
English Teacher                                .851               1.188           -.035            -.012          -1212.2           -1006.3
                                            (2.242)             (3.178)          (.051)           (.063)          (874.2)           (971.3)
Proportion of Female Teachers                 -4.09                                .003                               -166
in the School                                (3.86)                              (.086)                           (1,345)
Age                                            .249                .288            .007             .009              60.8             64.5
                                             (.237)              (.316)          (.004)           (.006)            (53.6)           (68.0)
Years of Teaching Experience                   .110                .135           -.002            -.002              24.5             25.6
                                             (.300)              (.409)          (.005)           (.007)            (71.4)           (91.7)
Salary Rank                                   -1.88               -1.87           -.024            -.024              -372             -358
                                             (.675)              (.754)          (.012)           (.014)             (132)            (149)
Number of Kids                                 .123                .049            .005            -.002             -62.4             -162
                                             (.913)              (1.06)          (.016)           (.019)             (200)            (229)
Married                                       -4.07               -3.55           -.054            -.030              -714             -318
                                             (3.50)              (3.89)          (.058)           (.066)             (786)            (869)
B.A Degree                                    -5.13               -5.45           -.072            -.107              -893             -918
                                             (3.99)              (4.54)          (.067)           (.078)             (960)          (1,095)
M.A Degree                                    -11.6               -12.4           -.177            -.217           -2,730            -3,134
                                             (4.48)              (5.08)            .078             .088          (1,102)           (1,231)
Ph.D Degree                                   -7.64               -6.38           -.019            -.072           -2,362            -1,835
                                             (8.33)              (9.26)          (.161)           (.161)          (1,694)           (1,923)
Mother's Years of Schooling                    .328                .319           -.009            -.008             -1.64             20.0
                                             (.511)              (.585)          (.009)           (.011)             (146)            (164)
Father's Years of Schooling                   -.379               -.424            .003             .002              95.6             66.7
                                             (.560)              (.638)          (.010)           (.011)               131              148
Teaches 11th Grade                             1.12               -.488            .030             .019             -.176             -896
                                             (4.18)              (4.83)          (.079)           (.089)          (1,214)           (1,428)
Teaches 12th Grade                             2.42                .930            .122             .089               617              122
                                             (4.10)              (5.03)          (.084)           (.097)          (1,246)           (1,400)
Observations                                    683                 683             683              683               683              683
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. These are estimates of the covariates from the regression in columns (4) and (5) of Table 5
                                                Table 7 - Estimates of the Effects on Program Awareness, Effectiveness and on Teachers' effort and Pedagogic Adjustments

                                 A. Teacher Aware of the Tournament                          B. Received Explanation about the Tournament                                C. Explanation was Satisfying
                           (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)              (9)             (10)            (11)                (12)
Constant                 .901              .925            .989             .972            .663            .683           1.026            0.82             .474              .503            .491                .211
                       (.024)            (.035)          (.131)           (.150)          (.045)          (.073)          (.276)          (.301)           (.056)            (.082)          (.273)              (.322)
Female                   .016              .004           -.007            -.020            .016            .084            .056           -.027             .038              .157            .136                .127
                       (.028)            (.032)          (.030)           (.031)          (.052)          (.052)          (.069)          (.071)           (.063)            (.074)          (.084)              (.095)
FO Group                                   .016            .025             .037                           -.142           -.122           -0.00                              -.194           -.196               -.146
                                         (.040)          (.041)           (.048)                          (.075)          (.073)          (.071)                             (.085)          (.085)              (.088)
MO Group                                  -.029           -.032            -.075                            .031           -.027           -.338                               .176            .270               -.109
                                         (.055)          (.056)           (.066)                          (.099)          (.104)          (.109)                             (.121)          (.127)              (.097)
Subject Main Effects                      √                √               √                               √               √               √                                   √               √                 √
Individual Controls                                        √               √                                               √               √                                                   √                 √
School Fixed Effects                                                       √                                                               √                                                                     √
Observations             608                  608              576             576          605                605             573             573           601                   601             569               569

                                  D. Knows the Criteria for Winning                            E. Worked with Students in Small Groups                                F. Worked with Students Individually
                         (13)             (14)              (15)            (16)            (17)           (18)             (19)             (20)            (21)              (22)             (23)               (24)
Constant                 .622             .728              .904            .537            .686           .605             .844             .624            .593              .564             .819               .721
                       (.052)           (.104)            (.223)          (.307)          (.044)         (.079)           (.229)           (.298)          (.039)            (.070)           (.222)             (.276)
Female                  -.026            -.007             -.048           -.087           -.058          -.060            -.012            -.010            .042             -.004            -.004              -.007
                       (.055)           (.067)            (.083)          (.087)          (.049)         (.063)           (.073)           (.077)          (.050)            (.059)           (.074)             (.076)
FO Group                                 -.079             -.039            .044                          -.012            -.022            -0.04                              .031             .022              -.062
                                        (.085)            (.083)          (.107)                         (.054)           (.055)           (.080)                            (.082)           (.089)             (.114)
MO Group                                 -.056             -.093           -.270                           .010            -.070            -.112                             -.083            -.121              -.328
                                        (.127)            (.116)          (.129)                         (.094)           (.102)           (.136)                            (.079)           (.093)             (.119)
Subject Main Effects                      √                √               √                               √               √               √                                   √               √                 √
Individual Controls                                        √               √                                               √               √                                                   √                 √
School Fixed Effects                                                       √                                                               √                                                                     √
Observations             600                  600              568             568          608                608             576             576           608                   608             576               576

                                 G. Divided Students in Class by Level                      H. Adjusted Teaching Methods to Student's Level                          Notes:
                         (25)               (26)            (27)            (28)            (29)            (30)           (31)             (32)
Constant                 .547               .387            .768            .239            .988            .976           .907           1.074                      1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
                       (.056)             (.075)          (.199)          (.256)          (.008)          (.017)         (.085)           (.102)                     the school level.
Female                  -.019              -.006            .009           -.000           -.050           -.048          -.052            -.062                     2. Regressions in the third and fourth columns of
                       (.068)             (.075)          (.071)          (.077)          (.016)          (.015)         (.023)           (.029)                     each sub-table include controls for age, teaching
FO Group                                    .025            .040            .068                           -.055          -.071            -0.08                     experience, salary rank, overall school's
                                          (.069)          (.074)          (.082)                          (.024)         (.022)           (.020)                     proportion of female teachers, marital status,
MO Group                                    .160            .042            .080                           -.034          -.007            -.017                     number of children, education, parents' education,
                                          (.101)          (.089)          (.122)                          (.027)         (.031)           (.032)                     and grade. Regressions in the fourth column of
                                                                                                                                                                     each sub-table also include school fixed effects.
Subject Main Effects                      √                √               √                               √               √               √
Individual Controls                                        √               √                                               √               √
School Fixed Effects                                                       √                                                               √
Observations             608                  608              576             576          608                608             576             576
                                                                                                      Table 7 - continued.

                                   I. Added After School Instruction                                       J. Number of Hours Added                                  K. Adding Instruction was Teacher's Initiative
                           (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)              (5)                (6)            (7)               (8)              (9)            (10)            (11)                (12)
Constant                 .819            .810            .998              1.105            2.551               3.637          5.311             13.84             .605            .611             .583                .893
                       (.039)          (.058)          (.188)              (.211)           (.735)            (1.517)        (3.274)           (3.556)           (.052)          (.074)           (.268)              (.247)
Female                  -.018            .012            .057               -.002            -.436              -.280          -.617            -1.768             .017            .046             .108                .042
                       (.043)          (.063)          (.070)              (.067)           (.832)            (1.100)        (1.330)           (1.595)           (.056)          (.068)           (.070)              (.074)
FO Group                                 .013           -.006                .004                                .122          -.203              0.04                            -.032            -.056               -.058
                                       (.056)          (.057)              (.061)                              (.774)         (.962)           (1.670)                           (.059)           (.060)              (.049)
MO Group                                 .081            .061                .035                                .821           .791            -1.847                            -.063            -.095               -.154
                                       (.060)          (.065)              (.084)                             (1.343)        (1.764)           (2.635)                           (.097)           (.087)              (.121)
Subject Main Effects                    √                √                 √                                   √               √                √                                  √                √                 √
Individual Controls                                      √                 √                                                   √                √                                                   √                 √
School Fixed Effects                                                       √                                                                    √                                                                     √
Observations             607                607              575               575            179                  179             168              168             608                608              576               576

                   L. Teacher Thinks Program Will Improve Student's Achievements                 M. Teacher Thinks He will Win an Award                               N. Teacher Thinks He will Multiple Awards
                        (13)            (14)            (15)            (16)                  (17)            (18)            (19)                (20)             (21)             (22)            (23)                (24)
Constant                .758            .693          1.348             .769                  .763            .799          1.260                 0.51             .321             .261           .254                 .251
                      (.046)          (.071)          (.196)          (.284)                (.044)          (.057)          (.154)              (.326)           (.048)           (.067)         (.262)               (.358)
Female                 -.158           -.118           -.147           -.166                 -.153           -.180           -.201               -.238            -.065            -.071           .008                -.011
                      (.044)          (.051)          (.067)          (.074)                (.052)          (.066)          (.073)              (.073)           (.064)           (.086)         (.086)               (.105)
FO Group                                .037            .050            .073                                  .050            .092                0.15                              .092           .080                 .312
                                      (.051)          (.051)          (.056)                                (.059)          (.060)              (.072)                            (.073)         (.080)               (.103)
MO Group                                .185           -.018            .049                                  .039           -.133               -.186                             -.001          -.088                -.087
                                      (.077)          (.079)          (.129)                                (.073)          (.074)              (.142)                            (.105)         (.111)               (.159)
Subject Main Effects                    √                √                 √                                   √               √                √                                  √                √                 √
Individual Controls                                      √                 √                                                   √                √                                                   √                 √
School Fixed Effects                                                       √                                                                    √                                                                     √
Observations              548              548               520             520               485              485               461              461               317               317              304              304
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level.
2. Regressions in the third and fourth columns of each sub-table include controls for age, teaching experience, salary rank, overall school's proportion of female teachers, marital status, number of children, education,
parents' education, and grade. Regressions in the fourth column of each sub-table also include school fixed effects.
Table 8 - Balancing Tests of Students' and School Characteristics by Competition Group Types in
                                         Treated Schools
                                            Mean of     Difference       Mean of     Difference
                                              FO        (FO - FM)         MO         (MO - FM)
                                               (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)
                                   A. School Characteristics
Religious school                              .283          .044            .486         .258
                                                          (.147)                       (.292)
Arab school                                   .036         -.159            .514         .411
                                                          (.124)                       (.257)
Lagged "Bagrut" rate                          .460          .001            .436        -.026
                                                          (.034)                       (.044)
Two-years Lagged "Bagrut" rate                .514          .023            .497        -.001
                                                          (.023)                       (.031)
                                    B. Student Background
Father education                              11.0        .914              8.01        -2.65
                                                        (.630)                         (.855)
Mother education                              11.2        1.13              7.56        -3.14
                                                        (.713)                         (.678)
Number of siblings                            2.70       -.283              4.15         1.39
                                                        (.405)                         (.626)
Gender (male=1)                               .490       -.047              .624         .113
                                                        (.058)                         (.078)
Immigrant                                     .012       -.004              .024         .011
                                                        (.008)                         (.022)
Asia-Africa ethnicity                         .259        .048              .159        -.075
                                                        (.039)                         (.085)
                               C. Student Lagged Achievements
Math credits gained                          .381         .158              .195        -.088
                                                        (.173)                         (.140)
English credits gained                       .066        -.044              .073        -.025
                                                        (.021)                         (.071)
Total credits attempted                      5.86         1.23              3.93        -1.22
                                                        (.652)                         (.624)
Total credits gained                         4.66         .935              2.91        -1.24
                                                        (.537)                         (.336)
Average score                                63.3         2.19              51.1        -11.9
                                                        (2.32)                         (1.92)

Observations (FO, FM, MO, Total)              1,702        3,031            508         5,241

Groups (FO, FM, MO, Total)                        13           17             6           36
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parenthesis are adjusted for school level clustering.
2. The schools status of nationality and religiosity does not change. Any change in the means across
years reflects relative changes in the number of students in a cohort.
3. MO = Male teachers only FO = Female teachers only FM = Both female and male teachers
4. The sample consists of 2001 students in the 18 Randomized Treatment schools
              Table 9 - DID Estimates of the Effect of Teachers' Bonuses on Math and English Outcomes by Competition Group Types
                                             1st and 2nd Quartiles                                         3rd and 4th Quartiles
                           All gender         Estimates by teachers' gender comp         All gender        Estimates by teachers' gender comp
                             comp's          Mixed        Female-only     Male-only        comp's          Mixed        Female-only   Male-only
                               (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
Testing rate
 Control group mean            .680           .648            .728           .830            .957           .940           .980            .971
 Treatment effect              .072           .083            .076           .015            .005           .000           .015            -.006
                              (.034)         (.040)          (.034)         (.038)          (.021)         (.026)         (.017)          (.020)
Pass rate
  Control group mean           .509           .444            .621           .649            .884           .845           .937            .899
  Treatment effect             .124           .129            .120           .116            .009           .005           .037            -.103
                              (.038)         (.040)          (.046)         (.056)          (.022)         (.028)         (.019)          (.052)
Average score
 Control group mean            41.4           37.4            48.1           53.3            71.3           71.0           71.8            70.8
 Treatment effect              6.85           6.74            6.89           6.97            0.92           0.21           2.92            -2.53
                              (2.58)         (2.47)          (3.65)         (4.22)          (2.10)         (2.86)         (1.82)          (3.01)

N                               9,682            5,687           3,092           903            10,286           6,222        3,452          612
Notes:
1. Standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the school level.
2. Observations were weighted with frequency weights in order to have similar number of students in control and treatment schools within each group
of schools with close true matriculation rate.
3. The by-gender-composition estimates are taken from a single regression with three interaction variables of treatment and gender-composition dummy.
The regression includes the gender-composition dummy as main effect.
4. School Fixed-Effects are included.
5. Student level controls include a set of dummy variables for the number of siblings and father and mother education, the school's lagged mean
matriculation rate, a dummy for Asia-Africa ethnic background, immigration status, gender dummy, the number of credit units attempted, the average
score in those attempted units, overall credit units awarded, and credit units awarded for the subject in question only.
6. All regressions include a control for math main effect
                   Table 10 - Differences in Mean Students Outcomes by Teacher's Gender
                                            18 RT Schools                            All Schools
                                  No Controls        With Controls         No Controls       With Controls
                                        (1)                  (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                                                 Testing rate
Females in FO - Females in FM          .000                -.001                .006              -.010
                                     (.028)               (.018)              (.022)             (.017)
Females in FM - Males in FM            .009                -.015                .051               .014
                                     (.021)               (.017)              (.028)             (.020)
Males in MO - Males in FM             -.003                 .021               -.018               .038
                                     (.023)               (.021)              (.023)             (.018)
constant                               .918                 .906                .841               .560
                                     (.022)               (.089)              (.026)             (.052)

                                                                      Pass rate
Females in FO - Females in FM           .029                  .023                 .019                 -.000
                                       (.049)               (.031)                (.040)               (.030)
Females in FM - Males in FM             .012                 -.017                 .060                  .036
                                       (.033)               (.021)                (.031)               (.028)
Males in MO - Males in FM               .058                  .144                 .018                  .098
                                       (.050)               (.042)                (.050)               (.037)
constant                                .794                  .896                 .712                  .574
                                       (.049)               (.132)                (.032)               (.062)

                                                                    Average score
Females in FO - Females in FM           2.52                   3.44               2.242                1.129
                                       (4.86)                (2.73)               (3.26)               (2.54)
Females in FM - Males in FM             0.93                  -1.55                3.75                 2.22
                                       (4.20)                (2.87)               (2.56)               (2.19)
Males in MO - Males in FM               7.60                 13.52                 2.25                 8.67
                                       (4.80)                (3.52)               (4.13)               (2.64)
constant                                60.0                   67.0                55.0                 45.3
                                       (5.45)               (11.36)               (2.58)               (4.82)

Observations                            2,911                 2,911                 7,378                7,378
Notes:
Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the school level
Regressions in columns (1) and (3) include a control for math main effect
Regressions in columns (2) and (4) include controls for one and two year lagged school mean score, attempted
Bagrut credits and score, awarded Bagrut credits (total and in subject), ethnic origin, student gender and the math
main effect.
                                 Figure 1: Distribution of Group Size by Competition Groups

            .2     .15
 kdensity num_teachers
.05        .1
            0




                         0                           5                                 10         15
                                                         Number of Teachers in Group

                                                             FO               FM
                                                             MO               All groups



                                        Figure 2: Distribution of Winning Proportion
            .3
            .2
Fraction
            .1
            0




                             0                  .2                      .4                   .6   .8
                                                            Proportion of Winners


                             Figure 3: Distribution of Winning Proportion by Competition Groups
            32
 kdensity won
1           0




                         0                 .2                         .4                    .6    .8
                                                            Proportion of Winners

                                                                 FO                 MO
                                                                 FM
Figure 4.A: Kernel Density of Mean Score Residual Figure 4.B: Kernel Density of Mean Score Residual Figure 4.C: Kernel Density of Mean Score Residual




   -60     -40     -20         0    20       40     -60     -40     -20          0    20          40        -40     -20            0       20       40
                           x                                                 x                                                 x
            Female in FO           Female in FM               Female in FM           Male in FM                   Male in FM               Male in MO



Figure 5.A: Kernel Density of Mean Pass Residual Figure 5.B: Kernel Density of Mean Pass Residual Figure 5.C: Kernel Density of Mean Pass Residual




    -.6     -.4     -.2        0     .2      .4       -.6    -.4     -.2         0    .2     .4        -1             -.5              0                .5
                           x                                                 x                                                 x
            Female in FO           Female in FM               Female in FM           Male in FM                   Male in FM               Male in MO
