                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MANAGERIAL INCENTIVES AND VALUE CREATION:
                        EVIDENCE FROM PRIVATE EQUITY

                                             Phillip Leslie
                                              Paul Oyer

                                        Working Paper 14331
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14331


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




We thank Ben Beder, Marco Beltran, Christopher Jung, William Vijverberg, and Alex Wong for research
assistance, and thanks to Bengt Holmstrom and Steve Kaplan for helpful feedback. We are also very
grateful to a number of executives at private equity firms for giving us insights into their business
practices. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Phillip Leslie and Paul Oyer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Managerial Incentives and Value Creation: Evidence from Private Equity
Phillip Leslie and Paul Oyer
NBER Working Paper No. 14331
September 2008
JEL No. G3,J33,L20,M52

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the differences between companies owned by private equity (PE) investors and similar
public companies. We document that PE-owned companies use much stronger incentives for their
top executives and have substantially higher debt levels. However, we find little evidence that PE-owned
firms outperform public firms in profitability or operational efficiency. We also show that the compensation
and debt differences between PE-owned companies and public companies disappear over a very short
period (one to two years) after the PE-owned firm goes public. Our results raise questions about whether
and how PE firms and the incentives they put in place create value.


Phillip Leslie
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
pleslie@stanford.edu

Paul Oyer
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
518 Memorial Way
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
pauloyer@stanford.edu
1        Introduction


Ostensibly, private equity (PE) firms buy companies, fix them, and then sell them. How is it
that PE firms are able to do this and why were the companies unable to fix themselves in the first
place? The mantra in the literature is that PE firms mitigate managerial agency problems—
they create value by improving management.1 Three mechanisms are emphasized: (i) greater
debt disciplines managers, (ii) enhanced governance, and (iii) increased managerial incentives.
In this study we examine the changes in managerial incentives caused by PE firms.


        Managers as owners is a pillar of the PE approach. But how does the ownership of managers
differ between public companies and PE portfolio companies, where managers in both cases have
stock options and incentive plans of some kind? Kaplan (1989) first documented differences in
the share of CEO equity ownership between publicly traded firms, and firms that had undergone
a management buyout. Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990) provide a similar analysis, but no
prior study has examined these effects on post-1990 buyouts, as we do here. It is important
to examine more recent data because the buyout market in the 1990s and 2000s operates quite
differently from the 1980s (as discussed by Cao and Lerner, 2007), and also because there is
reason to believe public corporations may have adopted some of the practices of PE companies.


        We compare managerial incentives at public companies with PE-owned companies, using
data for U.S. firms during the period 1996 to 2006. A key challenge in this research is obtaining
data on managerial incentives at PE portfolio companies, which are not required to disclose
such information. Our approach is to collect data on companies that have PE owners and
undergo an IPO (sometimes referred to as a reverse LBO). In such cases the PE-owned firms are
required to disclose the same information as a public company for the two years prior to the IPO.
The dataset covers 144 such companies. We then go on to measure whether PE-owned firms
outperform their public counterparts in profitability and operational efficiency and to determine
if any differences between PE-owned firms and public firms persist after PE owned firms go
public. This is important because of a debate as to whether PE firms, in fact, create value or
capture value (from pre-buyout investors and employees, say).2
    1
        See Jensen (1986 and 1989).
    2
        See, for example: Davis, et al, (2008), and Guo, Hotchkiss and Song (2008).




                                                          1
      Numerous papers study executive compensation in public companies.3 However, there is very
little research on managerial incentives at private companies.4 Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001)
argue that many public corporations actually adopted the beneficial PE practices in the 1990s,
driven by two changes: (i) innovation in information and communication technology made capital
markets more efficient (i.e., enhanced disciplining); and (ii) deregulation increased the rewards
to restructuring.5 Others are more skeptical, such as Bebchuk and Fried (2004) who argue that
managerial power continues to drive executive compensation in most public corporations, to the
detriment of shareholders.


      Since there is reason to expect public companies have adopted some of the practices of PE
in the years since Kaplan’s study, and also because it is conceivable that PE has significantly
evolved, it is timely to assess whether these differences in managerial incentives have persisted.
Furthermore, we seek to examine broader evidence on managerial incentives than simply the
fraction of equity owned by the CEO (although that is one important measure).


      We find that, as conventional wisdom and economic theory suggest, top executive incentives
are much stronger at PE-owned companies than at comparable publicly traded companies. More
specifically, relative to his counterpart at a publicly traded company in the same industry with
similar observable characteristics, the highest paid executive at a PE-owned firm owns approx-
imately twice as large a share of the firm, earns about 12% less in base pay, and receives a
substantially larger share of his cash compensation through variable pay. These differences do
not exist at companies before they are bought by PE firms, suggesting that these differences
are the result of PE ownership. We do not find, however, that PE-owned firms are substan-
tially more successful than comparable public firms in operating metrics such as return on assets
(ROA), operating income, or headcount. While the incentives given to PE-owned firms’ man-
agers keep their companies operating at average levels of profitability and efficiency, we do not
find evidence that they create significant excess profits. Finally, we show that any differences
between PE-owned firms and public firms quickly disappear after PE-owned firms execute an
IPO. Within a year of the IPO, the previously PE-owned firm has managerial incentives and
debt levels similar to comparable public firms.
  3
    See Murphy (1999) for a detailed review of the literature.
  4
    Exceptions include Kaplan (1989), Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990) and a case study by Baker and
Wruck (1989).
  5
    See also Hermalin (2005).




                                                  2
    In the next section we describe anecdotal evidence about the range of managerial incentives
implemented by PE firms in their portfolio companies. In Section 3 we summarize the data
used in our study. Section 4 then contains our analysis of the differences in managerial incen-
tives between public corporations and PE-owned companies. In Section 5 we examine evidence
concerning operational differences, and in Section 6 we explore the longevity of high managerial
incentives once a PE-owned firm undergoes an IPO. Section 7 concludes.




2    Institutional Background on PE Firms


In this section we provide an overview of some of the key changes that PE firms implement
in managerial compensation at their portfolio companies. The information in this section is
based on interviews we performed with a half dozen experienced executives at several leading
PE firms. The purpose of including this information is to expand our understanding beyond the
limited set of facts we are able to study in the formal empirical analysis. It is common in the
literature on private equity to propose that enhanced managerial incentives are a major driver
of value creation. However, we are unaware of any paper that provides a description of what
“enhanced managerial incentives” entails, other than the evidence provided by Kaplan (1989)
and Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), showing that the fraction of equity owned by the CEO
tends to increase. While this is an important feature (which we also examine), the interviews
we summarize below clearly indicate that increasing CEO equity is one piece of a more complex
set of changes.


    Enhanced equity participation is not limited to the CEO. Not surprisingly, all members of
the senior management team (Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operations Officer, Chief Technical
Officer, and so forth) also obtain significant equity stakes in almost every instance. However,
PE firms tend to seek even broader participation. Typically, the top 20 to 80 managers in
an acquired company obtain significant equity. The number may vary according to the kind
of business: manufacturing firms tend to involve fewer managers in equity participation, while
service firms tend to involve more managers. It is not unusual to have 150 or more participating
managers. One PE executive told us of a deal that included 500 managers in the equity program.


    A very important aspect of the equity programs is that managers are required to contribute


                                               3
capital—managers purchase the equity with their own personal funds. One interviewee explained
that equity sharing is less about compensation of managers than it is about investment by
managers. Arguably, this feature is why managerial equity programs are the cornerstone of the
PE model which transforms managers as agents into managers as owners.


   Exposing managers to downside risk may be as important for motivating managers as the
potential upside. However, the interviewees also emphasized that requiring managers to invest
themselves helps to reveal information (as in Lazear, 2005.) If any manager is unwilling to make
a significant investment (often described as an investment on par with their home) then it is
crucial to understand why. Is it because of personal financial limitations? If so, the PE firm
will find creative ways to help the manager invest. Or is it because the manager has private
information about the business that brings into question future profitability? Hence, increased
equity participation of managers may be as important for mitigating adverse selection as it is
for overcoming moral hazard.


   Alongside equity investments by managers are stock options which are granted in proportion
to the initial investment by managers (although not necessarily the same proportion for all
managers in a firm). It is typical for a CEO to obtain two to three times their initial equity
in options. Options vest uniformly, often over five years. There may be some controversy
surrounding CEO options in particular, since other managers may obtain lower multiples than
the CEO, which can be interpreted as a form of kick-back for CEOs to push the deal. A simple
example of a CEO equity package is as follows. Suppose the PE firm acquires the target company
for $8 billion, with 50% leverage (i.e. $4 billion in equity, and $4 billion in debt). Suppose the
PE firm expects to sell the business for $16 billion, yielding a 200% return on equity (ROE).
The CEO may invest $5 million of his personal wealth (which is often a rollover of the equity
previously owned in the company) and obtain three times that in options for a total stake of
$20 million. With 200% ROE, the CEO obtains $60 million upon exit. CEO ownership may
increase when competition among PE firms for deals is intensified.


   PE firms also expend significant effort re-designing cash bonus structures for managers.
The changes are customized to specific businesses, but are generally said to involve an increase
in the performance weighting and amended performance criteria. It is unclear if the overall
level of cash bonuses is increased, but it is probably not decreased. Some interviewees at PE



                                                4
firms asserted the changes they implement should have already been done by the firms.6 Other
interviewees said that such changes reflected strategic re-direction. Others again emphasized
that the changes in bonus structures were not necessarily better, and indeed may be worse
in some dimensions. This could be because PE firms are not expert in utilizing non-financial
measures that encourage leadership development, for example. According to the interviewees,
salaries are largely unchanged.


    There is an interesting question concerning the role of exit: does the fact that PE firms intend
to exit (after five years, say) enhance or diminish the effectiveness of managerial incentives? On
the one hand, managers and investors both obtain a liquidity event at the same time, providing
alignment around timing. In contrast, with public companies managers may divest sooner than
investors would prefer. On the other hand, there can be disagreement between managers and
the PE firm concerning the details of exit. For example, managers may prefer not exiting via
an IPO, since they are required to hold stock for a minimum period, delaying their liquidity
event. Several interviewees made the compelling point that PE firms tend to favor managers
when discord arises, since it is essential to maintain a reputation for treating managers well.


    It would be ideal to obtain data on all managers equity investments, option grants, and
bonus structures, in order to formally analyze/verify the generality of the anecdotal evidence
discussed here. By its very nature, it is difficult to obtain information on the practices of private
equity firms for a broad sample, let alone such confidential details of managerial incentives.7 In
the next section we describe the data utilized in our formal analysis, which has some obvious
limitations we shall discuss. However, the advantage of our dataset is that we have information
about 144 PE-owned companies with a clear selection criteria, allowing readers to evaluate the
generality of our findings.
   6
     Consistent with this view, prior research has noted the difficulty of changing compensation structures, and
that such changes are more likely in the face bankruptcy or other dramatic changes in ownership structure—people
are more willing to accept change when they feel less secure in their jobs. See, for example, Schaefer (1998).
   7
     Indeed, even for public companies this level of detail is not usually available.




                                                       5
3    Data Summary


We used CapitalIQ to generate lists of two types of firms that have time periods where they
are owned by a PE firm and other periods where they are publicly traded (and, therefore,
must disclose financial and compensation data). First, we looked at all firms that, according
to CapitalIQ, underwent a leveraged buyout (LBO) between 1996 and 2004, and completed an
IPO after the LBO but before the end of 2005. We dropped firms that we determined to be
venture capital-backed (rather than PE-backed). This is our PE-owned companies sample. In
the analysis below, we clarify when we use information about these firms during the private
ownership phase and when we use information about these firms after they have gone public.
There are 144 firms in this group. Table 1 shows the number of LBOs and IPOs by year for the
PE-owned companies in our dataset. Most LBOs are early in the sample period, which is to be
expected given the firm must go public by 2005. The IPOs build over the sample years, with a
distinct drop during the weak stock market of 2001–2003.


    The second type of firm in our dataset, which we refer to as the going private group, is all
firms that CapitalIQ lists as having a “going private transaction” between the beginning of 1998
and October of 2007, and for which there is some compensation data available in Standard and
Poors’ ExecuComp database. There are 89 firms in this group. The annual rate at which firms
enter this group went up dramatically in 2004–2006 because of the wave of large PE-backed
purchases. These larger firms were more likely to be included in ExecuComp. Table 1 shows
the annual rate of going private for firms in this group.


    For the PE-owned firms, we downloaded the names of all executives and all compensation
information listed by CapitalIQ. We supplemented the compensation information with data from
Standard and Poors’ ExecuComp database in the few cases where it held relevant information.
In most cases, we used firms’ proxy statements to fill in compensation information. This com-
pensation data is matched to accounting and stock return data from Compustat and CRSP,
respectively.


    The PE-owned companies in our sample are a subset of all PE-owned businesses. Strömberg (2008)
finds that only 13% of PE exits between 1970 and 2007 are via an IPO, which is a necessary
condition to enter our sample. One concern is that our sample is not representative of all PE-



                                                6
owned companies. Although we are unaware of a particular reason why managerial incentives
at PE-owned firms that have an IPO would be different than other PE-owned firms, this is an
important caveat to our research.


   A more important concern relates to selection.      The fact that we do not observe pre-
acquisition incentives for our sample of PE-owned companies raises the question that PE ac-
quirers may target companies with already high managerial incentives. Hence, a finding that
PE-owned companies have high managerial incentives may be due to selection, rather than a
causal effect due to changes that are implemented by the new owners. Our second group of
firms—the going-private sample—allows us to control for selection because we see the charac-
teristics of firms that are attractive to PE firms but are not yet owned by them.


   We were only able to identify five companies that went from public to private and back to
public in the time frame of our analysis. We refer to these firms as the public-PE-public group.
This sample is too small for formal analysis, but we use one company in this group (Petco) for
illustrative purposes.


   We also generated a comparison sample that includes all firm-years in ExecuComp that are
not in one of the other two samples. ExecuComp oversamples large firms (it includes the entire
Standard and Poors’ 500), so the comparison sample firms are larger, on average, than the two
PE samples. We limit the comparison sample to a subset of smaller firms that more closely
match those in the other samples for some of our analysis.


   To understand the logic of our identification strategy, note that we had hoped to make
more use of the public-PE-public group (or, as Cao and Lerner (2007) refer to them, “reverse
LBOs”) by analyzing firms’ PE ownership stage relative to both a pre-LBO and post-IPO stage.
However, the sample size using our time frame and criteria is simply too small. This is because,
as Strömberg (2008) shows, only 6% of PE owned companies were stand-alone public firms
before a PE firm bought them. Using two recent prominent investments by Texas Pacific Group
(TPG) as examples, Burger King was part of a large British conglomerate and J. Crew Group
was private and largely owned by the founder’s family before TPG invested in them. As a result,
when these companies later went public, it was not possible to track their compensation and
performance from a public stage to a private stage and back to a second public phase.




                                               7
        Further complicating this non-comparability issue is the fact that, as already noted, only
13% of PE owned firms leave PE ownership through IPO. As a result, we focus on differences
between firms in their private phase and those that are public as our estimate of differences
between PE-owned firms and public firms. Then we look at differences between public firms
and firms that are about to go private, to see if there are systematic differences between public
firms and firms that have a PE-owned stage when both groups are publicly held.


        Table 2 shows summary statistics for all four groups of firms in our dataset. As expected,
the comparison sample is noticeably larger by most measures than any of the other groups. The
difference is not as large in the medians, however, because PE firms make fewer investments in
the largest corporations that drive up the average size of public firms.


        The table shows summary statistics for three measures of managerial incentives for each
sample. Each measure corresponds to compensation for the executive with the highest salary
at each company in any given year (invariably the CEO).8 “Executive Ownership” in the table,
which we refer to as fraction of the firm’s stock owned by the highest paid executive below, is
the number of shares that the executive either owns outright or holds options to buy divided
by the number of shares outstanding. “Non-Salary Cash Pay” (or variable pay share of cash
compensation below) is all cash pay that is not the executive’s base salary divided by total cash
compensation.




4        Managerial Incentives in Private Equity Owned Businesses


As noted in the introduction, one view of PE firms is that they create value in the businesses
they acquire as a result of improved management. Some of the improvement may stem from
management turnover, but the literature tends to emphasize the role of reduced agency costs.
That is, PE mitigates the principal-agent problem between managers and owners via a combi-
nation of higher debt levels, enhanced monitoring, and increased incentives. It is conceivable
these three factors are complementary, substitutes, or simply additive in their combined effect
on firm performance.
    8
    CapitalIQ does not provide position information. We are in the process of gathering position information for
the PE-owned sample (it is available for the other samples in ExecuComp) for use in future drafts.




                                                       8
       To illustrate the changes in managerial incentives that take place when a PE firm acquires a
public company, consider the example of Petco and the equity ownership of CEO Bruce Devine,
as depicted in Figure 1. This example is one of the five firms in the public-PE-public group
discussed above. Between 1995 and 1999, during the initial public phase, Devine owned about
2% of the equity. After Petco was taken private in 2000, Devine’s ownership share sharply
increased to about 10%. Petco undertook an IPO in 2002 and Devine’s share was immediately
reduced to about 7%, and then continued to fall after that. Devine stepped down as CEO in
2004 but continued as Petco’s Chairman. By 2006, he owned about 4% of Petco. When Petco
went private again in 2006, Devine’s role in the company had been reduced and he did not
increase his stake. PE ownership is associated with higher top management ownership in the
case of Petco. We will show below that this example is representative of PE-owned firms.


       To examine these effects more generally, we estimate the following specification:

                    Yit = α + Xit0 β + θ1 P rivateEquityit + θ2 GoingP rivateit + it                        (1)

in which Yit is one of the three measures for managerial incentives (discussed in Section 3) at
firm i in year t, and X is a vector of control variables that includes observed firm characteristics
(assets, sales, market capitalization, employees, cash/assets), 2-digit SIC dummies, and year
dummies. There are two key variables of interest. First, P rivateEquityit is a dummy equal to
one for companies that are owned by a PE firm. We only include these firms in the last year
before they go public (that is, while they are still owned by PE firms.) Second, GoingP rivateit
is a dummy equal to one for public companies in their last year before being acquired by a PE
firm. Lastly, α, β, θ1 and θ2 are coefficients to be estimated, and  is an error term that contains
unobserved factors which also affect incentives.


       Identification of θ1 is based on cross-sectional variation. Even though the dataset includes
a time-dimension, for the reasons explained in Section 3 we do not observe the same company
before and after going private. Hence, we are unable to include firm fixed effects for the PE-
owned sample, which would have been helpful to control for unobserved heterogeneity.                 9   Clearly,
PE firms do not randomly select their targets. For our purposes, a biased estimate of θ1 will
arise if there are firm-specific unobservable factors that are correlated with managerial incentives
and the attraction to PE firms.
   9
    Firm fixed effects are of no use for the GoingP rivateit sample because we only observe these firms when they
are public.


                                                       9
      Three factors which are likely to be important determinants of PE acquisitions, which may
also affect managerial incentives are: cash reserves, industry factors (such as availability of
profitable investments), and macroeconomic factors (such as interest rates).10 The above spec-
ification includes controls for cash, industry dummies, and time dummies, which control for
these three factors, respectively. Hence, θ1 is identified from within-industry and within-year
variation.


      In addition, the inclusion of GoingP rivateit in equation (1) provides us with a diagnostic
for whether the estimate of θ1 is picking up a causal effect of PE, or if θ1 is due to selection—PE
firms choosing to acquire public companies with already high managerial incentives. Specifically,
if θ1 = θ2 then public companies that are acquired by PE firms tend to have the same level of
incentives, in the year before going private, as do PE-owned firms (prior to IPO). And if θ2 = 0
then public companies that are acquired by PE firms tend to have the same level of incentives,
in the year before going private, as do public firms that do not go private.


      The estimates for variations on the above specification are reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5.
Each of these tables corresponds to one of the three measures of managerial incentives that were
explained in the prior section. For all specifications in these three tables, an observation is an
executive-year combination. Also, every specification in these tables includes year dummies.



4.1      Fraction of Ownership by the Highest Paid Executive


The dependent variable in Table 3 is the Fraction of Stock Owned by the Highest Paid Executive.
Controlling only for year effects, in column (1) we report that the highest paid manager in a PE-
owned business tends to have 4.8 percentage points more equity than the highest paid managers
in public companies. Adding industry dummies in column (2) reduces this difference by a small
amount, to 4.4%. Including controls for observed firm characteristics in columns (3) and (4)
reduces the difference—with the full set of controls and industry dummies, we estimate the
highest paid manager in a PE-owned business has 3.3 percentage points more equity (on average)
than their counterpart in public companies.11 Columns (5) and (6) show specifications that drop
all firm/years (from each group) where the firm employs more people than the 75th-percentile
 10
      See Jensen (1989).
 11
      The estimate is significantly different from zero with 99% confidence.



                                                         10
PE-owned firm employs. The results are basically unchanged, which indicates that the findings
are robust to the exclusion of large firms. Recall from Table 2 that the mean level of executive
ownership (for the highest paid executive) in the comparison sample of public corporations is
3.4%. Hence, the estimate of 3.3% more ownership associated with PE represent a dramatically
higher level of managerial incentives—100% higher. As a reality check on the data, note that
the coefficient on Log(Assets) in all columns of Table 3 is negative and significant, picking up
the expected size effect (managers tend to have a smaller fraction of ownership in larger firms).


   As mentioned above, the coefficient on GoingP rivate (θ2 ) indicates whether private equity
firms choose targets that already have relatively strong incentives. In the results of the full
specification presented in column (4) of Table 3, we report that θ̂2 is insignificantly different
from zero. This indicates that public companies that are acquired by PE firms tend to have
the same level of incentives, in the year before going private, as do public firms that do not go
private. Unsurprisingly then, we also find that θ̂2 is significantly different from θ̂1 , indicating
that public companies that are acquired by PE firms tend to have significantly lower level of
incentives, in the year before going private, than PE-owned firms.


   To better examine the differences between PE and public companies in the distribution of
management ownership, rather than just conditional means, Figures 2 and 3 show kernel density
estimates of distributions of executive ownership. Figure 2 shows the empirical distributions for
each type of firm without conditioning on any other variables. Figure 3 shows the distributions of
executive ownership for each type of company conditional on the full set of controls. Specifically,
Figure 3 graphs the distributions of the residuals from a regression identical to the one in
column 4 of Table 3, except that the regression excludes P rivateEquity and GoingP rivate
from the set of explanatory variables. Comparing the distributions in both figures leads to the
same qualitative conclusion: compared to public companies, the distribution of equity owned by
the highest paid executive in PE-owned businesses has greater variance, and puts more weight on
high levels of ownership. In more quantitative terms, in Figure 3 (with controls) the interquartile
range of equity ownership is 8.3% for PE-owned firms, and 3.7% for public corporations. Also,
in Figure 3, the 75th-percentile is 4.1 percentage points higher for PE-owned firms than public
firms.


   Our estimates likely understate the differences between PE-owned firms and other firms



                                                11
because we treat shares and options the same in our analysis.12 Options make up a larger part
of ownership for the comparison group than for the PE-owned group. But note that each option
creates somewhat less incentive and has less value than a share because the price may be below
the strike price when the executive wants to exercise the option.


       Overall, the regression results in Table 3, as well as Figures 2 and 3, make it clear that top
executive ownership is significantly larger (both statistically and economically) in PE-owned
firms than at typical publicly-held corporations.



4.2      Salary of Highest-Paid Executive


The second measure of managerial incentives we examine is salary. We expect firms that want to
provide stronger incentives would pay lower salaries to their executives for at least two reasons.
First, when expected payouts from incentives are high, then (assuming the risk premium is not
too great) the firm will want to lower base pay so as to keep compensation costs down. Second,
lower salaries increase incentives of risk averse workers by increasing the likelihood of low pay
(where marginal utility with respect to income is particularly high). We again estimate versions
of equation (1), but now with the dependent variable: Log(Salary of Highest Paid Executive).
Table 4 contains the results. The number of observations is reduced by three from the above
analysis, because there are three firms with zero salary (and the dependent variable is in logs).


       Columns (1) and (2) show that salaries are 42-45% lower at PE-owned companies than public
corporations, conditional only on year and industry dummies. Much of this difference is simply
because the PE-owned firms are smaller, however. The results for the complete set of controls
are given in column (4): we estimate that, on average, the salary of the highest paid executive
at PE-owned companies is 11.9% lower than for similar public companies. Again, in columns (5)
and (6) we verify that this finding is robust to excluding large firms in the sample.


       The estimated coefficient on the GoingPrivate dummy is insignificantly different from zero
in all specifications in Table 4. This provides further confidence that the differences in incentives
we are finding at PE firms compared to public firms is a causal effect, rather than a selection
  12
    Again, we are somewhat limited by the detail of the compensation and ownership data in CapitalIQ. For the
PE-owned sample, we know how many options the executive holds but we do not have details on the date of
expiration, strike price, etc.


                                                     12
effect.



4.3       Variable Pay Share of Cash Compensation


The third measure of managerial incentives we examine is the Variable Pay Share of Cash
Compensation, defined as: (total cash compensation – salary) / (total cash compensation). Cash
compensation includes salary and bonuses. Hence, the measure is essentially bonuses. Firms that
provide higher incentives will utilize more bonuses, because bonuses are a contingent payoff. We
again estimate versions of equation (1), but now with the dependent variable: Variable Pay Share
of Cash Compensation. Table 5 contains the results. The number of observations is reduced by
one from the analysis of equity ownership because there is one executive-year combination with
zero total cash compensation.


    The results are presented in Table 5. The difference in variable pay share between PE firms
and public companies is significant (with 95% confidence) in all columns. In the full specification
reported in column (4), we find that PE-owned businesses tend to provide 12.6% higher variable
pay shares than public companies. Recall from the discussion of anecdotal evidence in Section 2
that our interviewees did not have a strong sense of whether bonuses would be higher at PE-
owned companies.


    The PrivateEquity coefficient changes when firm controls are added because larger firms
pay more overall and, given that executives are risk averse, can put more compensation at
risk. Relative to the large public firms in the control sample, PE-owned firms have both lower
salaries and lower incentive-based cash compensation, so that the fraction that is variable works
out about the same for both groups. However, relative to public firms of the same size, PE-owned
firms have lower salaries and more variable cash compensation.


    The estimated coefficient on the GoingPrivate dummy is insignificantly different from zero
in specifications (1) to (4) in Table 5. This variable, however, is significantly positive and
similar to the PrivateEquity coefficient specification in columns (5) and (6). This suggests that,
excluding the large firms they acquire, PE firms tend to acquire companies that provide already
high bonuses. This is the only measure of incentives, specification, and subsample for which we
found any evidence of a selection effect on incentives.


                                                13
4.4   Heterogeneous Effects


The above analysis focuses on mean differences in managerial incentives between PE-owned and
public companies. However, these differences may also depend on other interesting factors. For
instance, there is reason to expect that the differences between public corporations and PE-
owned businesses have decreased over time, as public companies learn to mimic the practices of
PE firms. Or as Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001) argue, public firms have been catching up with
PE practices during the 1990s, driven by: (i) innovation in information and communications
technology made capital markets more efficient (i.e., enhanced disciplining); and (ii) deregula-
tion increased the rewards to restructuring. We therefore ask whether the gap in managerial
incentives between PE companies and public companies has been shrinking over time?


   To examine this possibility, we generalize the specification in equation (1) to allow θ1 and θ2
to have different values in the years 1996–2001 and 2002–2005. In Table 6 we report the results
for two different measures of managerial incentives: fraction of equity owned by the highest paid
executive, and salary of the highest paid executive (the first two measures examined above). In
each case we report the estimates for the coefficient on PrivateEquity interacted with a group
dummy. In column (1) it is apparent that the difference between PE and public companies in
terms of equity ownership has not changed over time. However, in column (2) of the table it is
apparent that the average difference in salary has increased over time, in contrast to what we
expected. Hence, the evidence does not indicate convergence over time in managerial incentives
between public and PE-owned companies.


   A second form of heterogeneity we explore is size effects: is the gap in managerial incentives
between PE companies and public companies different for big versus small companies? This is of
interest because agency costs are likely to be higher in larger companies (e.g. harder to monitor)
and incentives may create more risk for a CEO in a larger company. Also, there is a trend
towards bigger PE acquisitions. In columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 we report estimates for the
equity ownership and salary measures, for the largest 25% of PE-owned firms, and the smallest
25% of PE-owned firms. The measure of size is based on the number of employees (of the PE-
owned company). For both measures, we find that incentives in PE-owned companies, relative
to public companies, are greater in large firms. An explanation for this finding is that agency
problems are greater in large companies, leading PE firms to implement stronger incentives.


                                               14
       A third form of heterogeneity relates to differences across PE firms, which may differ in the
degree to which they emphasize managerial incentives versus other mechanisms such as replacing
management, enhanced oversight, and the importance of debt.13 In other words, how homoge-
neous are the practices of PE firms, and how substitutable are they? As a basic test of such
differences, we ask whether top-tier PE firms tend to implement different managerial incentives
than other PE firms? To identify the top-tier PE firms, we adopt the “power list” in the March
5, 2007, issue of Fortune: Blackstone, KKR, Carlyle, TPG, Bain Capital, Providence Equity
Partners, Apollo Advisors, Warburg Pincus, Cerberus, and Thomas H. Lee. In columns (5)
and (6) of Table 6 we show that the differences in managerial incentives between the top-tier
PE firms and non-top-tier firms are insignificant. This is far from conclusive, but it suggests
that different PE firms tend to implement similar changes at the firms they acquire.



4.5      Summary


To summarize the key results in this section, we find that, relative to public corporations, PE-
owned firms: (i) provide the highest paid executive with 3.3 percentage points more equity (that
is, approximately twice as much); (ii) 11.9% lower salary; and (iii) 12.6% higher variable pay
share. These estimates are all based on a specification in which we control for year dummies,
industry dummies, and various observed firm characteristics. Our analysis also indicates these
estimates are not driven by selection effects and can plausibly be interpreted as the causal impact
of PE ownership.


       How do these results compare to prior research? Kaplan (1989) did not analyze salaries and
variable pay shares, but did analyze equity shares. Studying buyouts between 1980 and 1986,
Kaplan found that mean pre-buyout CEO equity share was 7.1% and the mean post-buyout
CEO equity share was 14.7%—an increase of 7.6%, or roughly twice the mean ownership of pre-
buyout CEOs.14 Compared to the data used in this study, the average level of equity ownership
by the CEO is much higher, both before and after going private. However, the proportional
change is roughly similar in both studies—around two times greater ownership share as a PE
portfolio company.
  13
     See Cressy, Munari and Malipiero (2007) for a related analysis of differences in PE performance based on the
degree of specialization.
  14
     Conditioning on the sub-sample of CEOs that were present before and after the buyout, Kaplan found that
equity shares increased from 6.4% to 14.5%, on average.


                                                       15
    Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990) study 72 companies that had an IPO between 1976 and
1987, and had previously undergone an LBO (similar to our sample design). They find the mean
fraction of equity owned by the CEO was 17.7% when private, and 12.7% when public. The
level of these magnitudes is more in-line with Kaplan (1989), but the proportional differences
are lower than in our study (and in Kaplan, 1989).




5    Operational Differences Between Private Equity Owned
     Businesses and Public Corporations


Having shown that PE firms significantly (statistically and economically) increase managerial
incentives relative to public companies, based on U.S. data for the period 1996 to 2004, the
question naturally arises as to whether there are corresponding improvements in operational
performance? This question has actually received much more attention in the literature than
the changes in managerial incentives by PE firms. Indeed, there are numerous papers, with a
wide range of results, looking for evidence of value creation by PE firms. In Table 7 we present
a summary of this literature. Conclusions depend on what measure, time period, geographic
location of the sample is used and how the sample is constructed (type of acquisition and type
of exit). In this section we also examine this kind of evidence for our sample.


    Although not a measure of performance, as a reality check on the data, we first analyze
the changes in the importance of debt. We analyze the debt-assets ratio instead of the more
conventional debt-equity ratio, because negative equity is not uncommon in the data. Again,
using Petco as an example, Figure 4 shows that PE ownership is associated with a dramatic
increase in debt. Petco’s debt returned to its pre-PE level slowly over a few years after it went
public again. We will again show that Petco is reasonably typical of other PE-owned firms.


    To examine changes in debt for the broader sample, we regress the debt-assets ratio on
the same controls as column (4) in Tables 3 to 5. The results are provided in column (1) of
Table 8. As expected, we find that PE ownership causes an average increase of 51.1% in the debt-
assets ratio. We also find that the debt-assets ratio in going-private companies is insignificantly
different from the public company control sample, indicating that this effect is not driven by
selection.


                                                16
   We now turn to measures of profitability and operational efficiency. First, Figure 5 shows
ROA at Petco over its various forms of ownership. The graph indicates that, if anything, Petco
was less profitable during its years under PE ownership. A trend up in profits ended when the
firm was bought by TPG and Leonard Green in 2000, and another one began after the firm was
returned to public ownership. However, Petco’s ownership coincided with a recession, so it is
important to look at this in a regression context where we can control for time effects.


   Using the same regression framework and controls we used for the debt-assets ratio and the
incentive measures, we examine the following performance measures: Return on Assets (ROA),
EBITDA / (Total Assets), Sales Per Employee, and Employees / (Total Assets). The results
for each of these dependent variables are reported in columns (2) to (5) of Table 8. The only
one of these measures to show a significant (and positive) effect from PE ownership is Sales Per
Employee. In this case, there is also no significant difference between the going-private firms
and the public controls.


   Sales Per Employee aside, the general message of the analysis in this section is that we
find little evidence of PE causing performance improvements. As shown in Table 7, this is
not unprecedented in the prior research. We also looked at the correlation between the level
of incentives and these measures of profits and efficiency, without finding any obviously strong
relationships. Thus far, we have not found any evidence that the increased incentives we doc-
umented in the prior section improve bottom-line performance. While one might suspect that
this is because the firms that go into PE ownership are often turnarounds and their PE owners
are successful in returning them to financial health, this would imply that firms in our going
private sample would be underperforming their peers at the time we measure them. We see no
evidence to support that idea. While this lack of evidence of operational efficiency advantages
of PE ownership could be caused by the limits of using accounting data to compare public and
private companies, by outliers, or other data issues, it is puzzling that our finding of significant
increases in incentives is not accompanied by performance improvements.




                                                17
6       Longevity of Increased Incentives after IPO


One of the virtues of our dataset is that we focus on PE-owned companies that undergo an IPO,
which allows us to examine changes after the firm transitions from private to public. So we
now analyze the longevity of the higher degree of managerial incentives once these companies
go public. There are at least a couple of reasons why this is interesting. If the higher degree
of managerial incentives during the private ownership phases, rapidly fall after IPO (or reverse
buyout), then it suggests PE firms do not implement long-lasting organizational changes in the
companies they acquire. Also, PE firms have been criticized by some commentators for “quick
flips”: buying companies and selling them shortly after (in one year, say) for a large profit. The
suggestion is that one year is too short a time to implement real or permanent improvements in
an organization, so the profit must stem from either underpaying for the company or overselling
it to the new owners. However, if managers continue to maintain high equity stakes in their
company after the IPO, then this suggests the IPO valuation may not be artificially high, because
the managers also have significant wealth at stake.


    To examine the longevity of managerial incentives following reverse buyouts, we generalize
equation (1) in the following way:
                                 4                              −1
            Yit = α + Xit0 β +
                                 X                              X
                                        θj P rivateEquityit +          θk GoingP rivateit + it .   (2)
                                 j=−1                           k=−5

Instead of including only the first available observation for PE-owned firms that go public,
we now include annual observations for the year before the IPO and each subsequent year up
to four years after the IPO. The θj ’s capture how managerial incentives (or other dependent
variables) evolve at these firms from just before the IPO until four years after. Similarly, instead
of including only the last public year for the going private sample, we now include all available
years and the θk ’s track how incentives evolve in the years leading up to the purchase by a PE
firm.


    Rather than present regression coefficients, we graph the θ’s and corresponding 95% confi-
dence intervals. Figure 6 shows the θ’s from a regression that estimates equation 2 with fraction
ownership of the highest paid executive as the dependent variable and all the control variables
used in column 4 of Table 3. The graph shows that the θk ’s are generally small for all years
leading up to firms going private and there is no obvious trend before PE investments. The evo-

                                                    18
lution of the PE-owned sample (and the θj ’s), however, shows that executive ownership drops
quickly and substantially right after the IPO. Managerial ownership is very high before the IPO
and at the time of the IPO, but quickly drops to levels similar to public firms. This suggests
that whatever incentives PE firms put in place for managers of the companies they own last only
as long as the PE ownership lasts. The firms do not appear to put in place different incentive
systems that outlive the PE investment.


      Figure 7 presents similar time trends for the salary of the highest paid executive. Again, the
θk ’s are small, insignificant, and do not exhibit a trend leading up to the PE investment. The
PE-owned firms again revert to compensation systems that are equivalent to those of public
companies, though salary takes longer (three to four years) to reach public company levels than
stock ownership does. Again, it appears that any incentive changes made by PE investors are
only in place during the PE phase.


      To the best of our knowledge, no prior study has examined the longevity of managerial
incentives following reverse buyouts. However, several prior studies have also examined the
longevity of firm performance after reverse buyouts. Most recently Cao and Lerner (2007) find
that reverse buyouts tend to outperform (measured by ROA) IPOs for up to five years, and this
is robust throughout the period 1980 to 2002.15


      In Figure 8 we confirms that the capital structure effects of private equity (that is, more
debt relative to public firms) is also limited to the PE phase. Debt-asset ratios are much higher
immediately before and around the time of the IPO but revert to typical public company levels
within a year or two. Finally, Figure 9 looks at trends in the one operational measure where we
found some reason to think PE owned firms perform well—sales per employee. The individual
year θj ’s and θk ’s are measured with considerable error, so we do not want to read too much
into this graph. But, taking the θk coefficients at face value, it appears that PE firms buy firms
that are trending down in terms of sales/employee. Also, to the extent that firms emerge from
PE ownership with high sales/employee, that effect appears to dissipate over a few years.


      Overall, the graphs and the corresponding regressions in this section suggest that, while there
are some important differences between PE-owned firms and comparable public companies, these
differences are limited to the period in companies’ lives when they are owned by PE firms. We
 15
      See also the references cited in Cao and Lerner (2007).


                                                         19
do not find evidence that these firms put in place incentive systems or operational efficiency
that outlives their ownership.




7    Conclusion


As Murphy (1999) remarks in the first sentence of his article: “Few issues in the history of the
modern corporation have attracted the attention garnered by executive compensation in United
States companies.” But nearly all of that research concerns public companies, and there is good
reason to believe managerial incentives are quite different in private firms—increased managerial
incentives are often cited as one of the key drivers of value creation in companies taken private
(PE buyouts). A number of questions immediately arise. Do PE firms in fact increase managerial
incentives? If so, by how much? How deep do increased incentives tend to go in such companies?
Are there other differences with public ocmpanies in terms of how incentives are structured?
Why don’t public companies provide similar incentives? Are public companies moving in this
direction? How important is increasing managerial incentives as a driver of value creation in PE-
owned companies? When the PE owner exits (by IPO, say) are the higher incentives enduring?
These are core questions for understanding the mechanisms by which PE firms create value
and generate returns for their investors. Furthermore, these questions are just as relevant to
understanding the causes and consequences of executive compensation in public corporations.


    Using data from 144 companies that were owned by PE investors and subsequently went
public during the period 1996 to 2005, we study differences in incentives, capital structure, and
operational performance between PE-owned companies and comparable public corporations.
Our research provides a more current and broader analysis of the changes in managerial incen-
tives that take place in private equity buyouts of public companies than the prior literature. In
doing so, we make progress on some of the above questions, although certainly not all.


    We find that top managers of PE-owned firms have substantially higher-powered compensa-
tion contracts than their counterparts at public companies: executives at PE-owned firms own
more equity, have lower salaries, and get more of their annual cash compensation in variable
pay than managers at public firms. Executives at firms that are public but about to get bought
by PE firms exhibit no such differences relative to other public firms, suggesting that PE firms


                                               20
implement these incentive contracts, rather than selecting firms that already use high-powered
incentives. We also verify that PE firms hold much more debt than otherwise comparable public
firms (not surprisingly).


      We showed that these differences between PE-owned and public firms do not extend to
most measures of operational efficiency and they are quickly undone when firms return to public
ownership. These results raise questions about the value created by private equity. Why are high
powered incentive contracts valuable to PE firms if they do not correspond to higher returns,
and why are public shareholders willing to pay PE firms handsome profits for the firms they
take public if these firms quickly take on the characteristics of similar public firms?


      While it is puzzling that increased managerial incentives in PE-owned companies are seem-
ingly not associated with improved performance, it should be noted that the question of whether
managerial incentives matter has not been resolved in the broader human resources literature
(see the discussion in Murphy, 1999).16 It is conceivable that managerial incentives are not a
primary determinant of profits (at least within the range of incentives we observe.) If they were,
and if PE firms are somehow uniquely capable of increasing incentives in ways that public firms
are unable to, then PE activity might be less sensitive to debt market conditions than it appears
to be (see Axelson, et al, 2008).17




 16
      See also Hall and Liebman (1998), and Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999).
 17
      See also the indirect evidence presented by Bargeron, et al (2007).


                                                     21
References

Axelson, U., T. Jenkinson, P. Strömberg, M.S. Weisbach (2008): “Leverage and Pricing in
    Buyouts: An Empirical Analysis,” Mimeo.

Baker, G.P. and K.H. Wruck (1989): “Organizational Changes and Value Creation in Leveraged
    Buyouts: The Case of The O.M. Scott & Sons Company,” Journal of Financial Economics,
    25, 163–90.

Bargeron, L., F. Schlingemann, R.M. Stulz, and C. Zutter (2007): “Why Do Private Acquirers
    Pay So Little Compared to Public Acquirers?” NBER Working Paper, w13061.

Bebchuk, L.A. and J.M. Fried (2004): Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of
    Executive Compensation, Harvard University Press.

Cao, J. and J. Lerner (2007): “The Performance of Reverse Leveraged Buyouts,” forthcoming
    in Journal of Financial Economics.

Cressy, R., F. Munari and A. Malipiero (2007): “Playing to their Strengths? Evidence that
    Specialization in the Private Equity Industry Confers Competitive Advantage,” forthcom-
    ing in Journal of Corporate Finance.

Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Lerner, and J. Miranda (2008): “Private Equity and
    Employment,” Mimeo.

Desbrieres, P. and A. Schatt (2002): “The Impacts of LBOs on the Performance of Acquired
    Firms: The French Case,” Journal of Business Finance and Accounting, 29(5), 695-729.

Guo, S., E.S. Hotchkiss and W. Song (2008): “Do Buyouts (Still) Create Value?” Mimeo.

Hall, B. and J. Liebman (1998): “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 112(3), 653–91.

Harris, R., D.S. Siegel, and M. Wright (2005): “Assessing the Impact of Management Buy-
    outs on Economic Efficiency: Plant-Level Evidence from the United Kingdom,” Review of
    Economics and Statistics, 87(1), 148–53.

Hermalin, B. (2005): “Trends in Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance, 60(5), 2351–84.

Himmelberg, C.P., R.G. Hubbard, and D. Palia (1999): “Understanding the Determinants of
   Managerial Ownership and the Link Between Ownership and Performance,” Journal of
   Financial Economics, 53, 353–84.

Holmstrom, B. and S.N. Kaplan (2001): “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity in the
    United States: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
    15(2), 121–44.



                                            22
Jensen, M.C. (1986): “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,”
    American Economic Review, 76(2), 323–29.

Jensen, M.C. (1989): “Eclipse of the Public Corporation,” Harvard Business Review, September-
    October, 61–74.

Kaplan, S. (1989): “The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance and
    Value,” Journal of Financial Economics, 24, 217–54.

Lazear, E.P. (2005): “Output-Based Pay: Incentives or Sorting?” in S.W. Polachek (ed.),
    Research in Labor Economics, vol. 23, 1–25.

Lichtenberg, F.R. and D.S. Siegel (1990): “The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on Productivity
    and Related Aspects of Firm Behavior,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 165–94.

Meuleman, M., K. Amess, M. Wright, and L. Scholes (2008): “Agency, Strategic Entrepreneur-
   ship and the Performance of Private Equity Backed Buyouts,” Mimeo.

Murphy, K.J. (1999): “Executive Compensation,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (ed.s), Hand-
   book of Labor Economics, vol. 3, 2485–563.

Muscarella, C.J. and M.R. Vetsuypens (1990): “Efficiency and Organizational Structure: A
   Study of Reverse LBOs,” Journal of Finance, 45(5), 1389–413.

Ravenscraft, D.J. and F.M. Scherer (1987): “Life After Takeover,” Journal of Industrial Eco-
    nomics, 36(2), 147–56.

Schaefer, S. (1998): “Influence Costs, Structural Inertia, and Organizational Change,” Journal
    of Economics and Management Strategy, 7(2), 238–263.

Strömberg, P. (2008): “The New Demography of Private Equity,” Globalization of Alternative
     Investments, Working Papers Volume 1, World Economic Forum.

Smith, A.J. (1990): “Corporate Ownership Structure and Performance: The Case of Manage-
    ment Buyouts,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 143–64.

Vinten, F. (2007): “The Performance of Private Equity Buyout Fund Owned Firms,” Mimeo.

Weir, C., P. Jones, and M. Wright (2008): “Public to Private Transactions, Private Equity and
    Performance in the U.K.: An Empirical Analysis of the Impact of Going Private,” Mimeo.

Wright, M., S. Thompson, and K. Robbie (1992): “Venture Capital and Management-Led
    Buy-Outs: European Evidence,” Journal of Business Venturing, 7(1), 47–71.

Wright, M., N. Wilson, and K. Robbie (1997): “The Longer Term Performance of Management
    Buy-Outs,” Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, 555-569.




                                             23
                               Table 1. Timing of Ownership Transitions


                                         Private Equity                  Going Private
                                       Acquisition     IPO                 Acquisition
                      1996                  25           9
                      1997                  20          13                       2
                      1998                  21          10                       9
                      1999                  28          17                       5
                      2000                   9          15                       5
                      2001                  10          12                       2
                      2002                  13           6                       2
                      2003                  10          29                       4
                      2004                   8          33                      14
                      2005                                                      30
                      2006                                                      16
                      Total                144          144                     89




“Private Equity” sample includes firms where CapitalIQ indicates a major investment by a private equity firm
(“acquisition”) and a subsequent IPO between 1996 and 2005. “Going Private” firms are companies that CapitalIQ
indicates had a “going private” transaction in 1998 or later, and that are in the ExecuComp database for at least
one year between 1995 and 2006.




                                                       24
                                       Table 2. Summary Statistics


                                       Private Equity        Going Private      Comparison Sample
          Firms                                144                   89                  2555
          Firm/Years                           662                  711                 19,768
          Assets                              $832               $3,728                $14,983
                                              [335]              [1,091]                [1,733]
                                            (1,522)              (6,587)               (77,480)
          Sales                               $671               $2,455                 $5,326
                                              [279]              [1,053]                [1,259]
                                            (1,324)              (3,561)               (15,854)
          Market Capitalization               $874               $3,107                 $7,662
                                              [562]                [902]                [1,735]
                                            (1,065)              (5,100)               (23,895)
          Employees                           3,640              18,747                 18,800
                                             [1,602]             [7,100]                [4,803]
                                            (6,562)             (36,574)               (59,152)
          Cash/Assets                         6.9%                10.9%                 16.2%
                                             [3.3%]              [6.2%]                 [9.0%]
                                            (10.2%)             (13.0%)                (17.8%)
          Executive Ownership                8.76%                5.29%                 3.44%
                                            [5.53%]             [2.26%]                [1.77%]
                                           (14.77%)             (7.42%)                (5.59%)
          Salary                             $405K               $688K                  $721K
                                            [$376K]             [$675K]                [$654K]
                                           ($190K)              ($312K)                ($377K)
          Non-Salary Cash Pay                42.4%                35.1%                 43.6%
                                            [46.2%]             [41.1%]                [49.2%]
                                            (23.1%)             (26.6%)                (24.4%)


See notes to Table 1 for description of sample in each column. “Private Equity” firm characteristics are for
year after IPO. “Going Private” firm characteristics are for last full year as a public company. “Comparison
Sample” firm characteristics are for 2004. Firm characteristic information is in $millions. ‘Pay information is for
all available executive-years. “Non-Salary Cash Pay” is the fraction of an executives cash compensation that is
not salary: (total cash compensation - salary)/ total cash compensation. Sample medians are in brackets and
standard deviations are in parentheses.




                                                        25
                   Table 3. Effect of Private Equity on Fraction of Stock Owned
                                     by the Highest Paid Executive



                              (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)
 PrivateEquity              0.0476       0.0437      0.0343      0.0326         0.0275         0.0226
                           (0.0055)     (0.0054)    (0.0053)    (0.0052)       (0.0066)       (0.0064)


 GoingPrivate               0.0188       0.0100      0.0135      0.0094         0.0026         -0.0008
                           (0.0070)     (0.0068)    (0.0067)    (0.0066)       (0.0118)       (0.0113)


 Log(Assets)                                         -0.0084     -0.0102        -0.0085        -0.0083
                                                    (0.0005)    (0.0008)       (0.0008)       (0.0012)


 Cash/Assets                                         0.0131      0.0139         0.0102         0.0138
                                                    (0.0028)    (0.0031)       (0.0037)       (0.0042)


 Log(Sales)                                          -0.0036     -0.0027        -0.0023        -0.0034
                                                    (0.0008)    (0.0010)       (0.0011)       (0.0013)


 Log(Employees)                                      0.0036      0.0038         0.0028         0.0031
                                                    (0.0005)    (0.0007)       (0.0010)       (0.0011)
 2-digit SIC dummies           no          yes         no            yes         no             yes
 Sample                       All          All         All           All     Drop Largest   Drop Largest
 R2                         0.0087       0.0744      0.0755         0.1241      0.0484         0.1366
 Observations               20,001       20,001      20,001         20,001      9,680          9,680




Each regression includes dummies for the years 1995 through 2006.




                                                     26
           Table 4. Effect of Private Equity on Log(Salary of Highest Paid Executive)



                              (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)
 PrivateEquity              -0.4474      -0.4163     -0.1338     -0.1188        -0.1024        -0.0917
                           (0.0413)     (0.0390)    (0.0286)    (0.0271)       (0.0328)       (0.0312)


 GoingPrivate               -0.0216      -0.0119     0.0276      0.0113         0.0096         -0.0141
                           (0.0526)     (0.0494)    (0.0362)    (0.0341)       (0.0582)       (0.0547)


 Log(Assets)                                         0.0756      0.1015         0.1008         0.1201
                                                    (0.0026)    (0.0040)       (0.0037)       (0.0056)


 Cash/Assets                                         -0.0109     -0.0072        0.0624         0.0638
                                                    (0.0150)    (0.0160)       (0.0185)       (0.0201)


 Log(Sales)                                          0.0999      0.0970         0.0970         0.0888
                                                    (0.0042)    (0.0050)       (0.0055)       (0.0062)


 Log(Employees)                                      0.0509      0.0362         0.0124         0.0164
                                                    (0.0029)    (0.0036)       (0.0049)       (0.0055)
 2-digit SIC dummies           no          yes         no            yes         no             yes
 Sample                       All          All         All           All     Drop Largest   Drop Largest
 R2                         0.0745       0.1931      0.5626         0.6163      0.4032         0.4819
 Observations               19,998       19,998      19,998         19,998      9,680          9,680




Each regression includes dummies for the years 1995 through 2006.




                                                     27
        Table 5. Effect of Private Equity on Variable Pay Share of Cash Compensation



                               (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)            (5)                (6)
 PrivateEquity               0.0430       0.0464      0.1346       0.1259         0.1235             0.1122
                            (0.0206)     (0.0200)    (0.0194)     (0.0190)       (0.0217)           (0.0213)


 GoingPrivate                -0.0163      -0.0015     0.0155       0.0095         0.1186             0.1007
                            (0.0261)     (0.0253)    (0.0245)     (0.0239)       (0.0385)           (0.0374)


 Log(Assets)                                          0.0228       0.0113         0.0171             0.0158
                                                     (0.0018)     (0.0028)       (0.0025)           (0.0038)


 Cash/Assets                                          0.1120       0.1105         0.1316             0.1246
                                                     (0.0102)     (0.0112)       (0.0122)           (0.0137)


 Log(Sales)                                           0.0494       0.0546         0.0617             0.0573
                                                     (0.0028)     (0.0035)       (0.0036)           (0.0042)


 Log(Employees)                                       -0.0203      -0.0119        -0.0261            -0.0209
                                                     (0.0020)     (0.0025)       (0.0033)           (0.0037)
 2-digit SIC dummies            no          yes          no          yes             no                yes
 Sample                        All          All         All          All      Drop Largest       Drop Largest
 R2                          0.0485       0.1209      0.1629       0.2128         0.1124             0.1765
 Observations                20,000       20,000      20,000       20,000          9,680              9,680




Variable pay share of cash compensation is defined as (total cash compensation - salary) / (total cash compensa-
tion). Each regression includes dummies for the years 1995 through 2006.




                                                      28
                  Table 6. Heterogeneity in Private Equity Effects on Ownership



                                (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)
 Dependent Variable          Ownership      Salary     Ownership         Salary       Ownership        Salary
 Group 1                        Post-2001 IPO              Top 25% Employees             Top 10 PE Firm
                              0.0363       -0.1621         0.0562        -0.1016         0.0458       -0.1197
                              (0.0076)     (0.0394)      (0.0103)       (0.0532)        (0.0099)      (0.0512)


 Group 2                     2001 or earlier IPO       Bottom 25% Employees                 Other Firm
                              0.0343       -0.0768         0.0368        -0.0540         0.0313       -0.1158
                              (0.0072)     (0.0371)      (0.0105)       (0.0541)        (0.0062)      (0.0317)




Each regression is based on the same specification as in column 4 of Tables 3 (odd columns of this table) or 4
(even columns) with the PrivateEquity variable broken into at least two groups. Top 10 PE firm in columns 5
and 6 includes the ten private equity firms on the Power List in the March 5, 2007 issue of Fortune: Blackstone,
KKR, Carlyle, TPG, Bain Capital, Providence Equity Partners, Apollo Advisors, Warbarg Pincus, Cerberus, and
Thomas H. Lee. Note that Groups 1 and 2 differ at 12% level in column 2, 19% significance level in column 3,
and 22% level in column 4.




                                                      29
                            Table 7. Previous Findings on the Impact of Buy-Outs on Profitability and Productivity



                                                        Operational Performance
        Ravenscraft and Scherer (1987)                  3% decrease in operating income/assets
        Kaplan (1989)                                   20% increase in operating income/assets, and >28% increase in net cash flow/sales
        Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990)                   6% increase in TFP
        Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990)                Increase in operating income/assets
        Smith (1990)                                    3-6% increase in operating income/assets
        Wright et al (1992)                             Significant increase in profit
        Wright et al (1997)                             1-3% increase in ROA




30
        Desbrieres and Schatt (2002)                    Decrease in operating income/assets
        Harris et al (2005)                             >70% increase in TFP
        Cressy et al (2007)                             5% increase in ROA
        Vinten (2007)                                   4% decrease in ROA
        Guo, Hotchkiss and Song (2008)                  12% increase in EBITDA/sales
        Meuleman et al (2008)                           Insignificant change in ROCE
        Weir, Jones and Wright (2008)                   Mixed evidence on ROCE, and insignificant change in ROE




     TFP: total factor productivity. ROA: return on assets. EBITDA: earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. ROCE: return on capital
     employed. ROE: return on equity.
                     Table 8. Effect of Private Equity on Operational Measures



                                  (1)            (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)
 Dependent Variable         Debt/Assets         ROA          EBITDA/Assets       Sales/Emp       Emp/Assets

 PrivateEquity                 0.5154          0.0129            0.0156             131.80          -0.0010
                              (0.0199)        (0.0164)          (0.0111)            (68.58)         (0.0017)


 GoingPrivate                  0.0349          0.0137            0.0040             -61.80          -0.0012
                              (0.0250)        (0.0206)          (0.0142)            (86.26)         (0.0022)
 R2                            0.3187          0.0921            0.2378             0.1240           0.1449




Each regression includes controls similar to those in column 4 of Tables 3 to 5, except column 4 which excluded
controls for sales and employees, and column 5 which excludes the asset control variable. Note: PrivateEquity
and GoingPrivate are different at 1% significance level in column 1, and at the 8% significance level in column 4.




                                                        31
                                                                 Figure 1: Fraction of Petco Owned by CEO



                                    12%


                                           Devine joined Petco as CEO in                                           March 2004: Devine
                                           August, 1990. He also became                                          steps down as CEO but
                                                chairman in 1994.                                                   remains Chairman

                                    10%




                                    8%                                                                                                   July 2006: Barclays and
Fraction owned by Brian K. Devine




                                                                                                                                          Goldman Sachs take
                                                                                                                                           Petco private again




                                    6%




                                    4%




                                    2%
                                                                                                    Feb 2002:
                                                                           May 2000: TPG and        Petco goes
                                                                           Leonard Green take         public.
                                                                              Petco private.


                                     0%
                                    10/28/1995   3/11/1997     7/24/1998       12/6/1999    4/19/2001    9/1/2002      1/14/2004    5/28/2005      10/10/2006      2/22/2008




                                                                                                 32
Figure 2: Kernel Densities of Unconditional Distributions of Fraction of Equity Owned
              by Highest Paid Executive in PE and Public Companies




                                         33
     Figure 3: Kernel Densities of Conditional Distributions of Fraction of Equity Owned
                  by Highest Paid Executive in PE and Public Companies




Conditional on same controls as Table 3, column (4).




                                                       34
Figure 4: Debt-Assets Ratio at Petco




                35
Figure 5: ROA at Petco




         36
                                             Figure 6: Executive Ownership at PE-Backed Companies



                         0.09



                         0.08



                         0.07



                         0.06



                         0.05          Coefficients for Public to PE Sample
                                     relative to comparison sample, with 95%
Regression Coefficient




                                                 confidence Intervals
                                                                                                                       Coefficients for PE to Public Sample
                         0.04                                                                                        relative to comparison sample, with 95%
                                                                                                                                 confidence Intervals

                         0.03



                         0.02



                         0.01



                            0
                                 5+ pre-   4 pre-LBO 3 pre-LBO 2 pre-LBO 1 pre-LBO PE period 1 pre-IPO        IPO   1 post-IPO 2 post-IPO 3 post-IPO 4 post-IPO
                                  LBO
                         -0.01



                         -0.02
                                                                                Year relative to IPO or LBO




                                                                                    37
                                                 Figure 7: Executive Salary at PE-Backed Companies



                          0.1




                         0.05




                            0
                                 5+ pre-   4 pre-LBO 3 pre-LBO 2 pre-LBO 1 pre-LBO PE period 1 pre-IPO        IPO   1 post-IPO 2 post-IPO 3 post-IPO 4 post-IPO
                                  LBO
Regression Coefficient




                         -0.05




                          -0.1
                                     Coefficients for Public to PE Sample
                                   relative to comparison sample, with 95%
                                               confidence Intervals

                         -0.15




                                                                                                                        Coefficients for PE to Public Sample
                          -0.2                                                                                        relative to comparison sample, with 95%
                                                                                                                                  confidence Intervals




                         -0.25
                                                                                Year relative to IPO or LBO




                                                                                    38
                                                    Figure 8: Debt/Assets at PE-Backed Companies



                         0.8



                         0.7



                         0.6



                         0.5

                                      Coefficients for Public to PE Sample
                                    relative to comparison sample, with 95%
Regression Coefficient




                         0.4
                                                confidence Intervals
                                                                                                                       Coefficients for PE to Public Sample
                                                                                                                     relative to comparison sample, with 95%
                                                                                                                                 confidence Intervals
                         0.3



                         0.2



                         0.1



                           0
                                5+ pre-   4 pre-LBO 3 pre-LBO 2 pre-LBO 1 pre-LBO PE period 1 pre-IPO        IPO   1 post-IPO 2 post-IPO 3 post-IPO 4 post-IPO
                                 LBO

                         -0.1



                         -0.2
                                                                               Year relative to IPO or LBO




                                                                                    39
                                               Figure 9: Sales Per Employee at PE-Backed Companies



                         300




                         200




                         100
                                       Coefficients for Public to PE Sample
                                     relative to comparison sample, with 95%
Regression Coefficient




                                                 confidence Intervals
                                                                                                                       Coefficients for PE to Public Sample
                                                                                                                     relative to comparison sample, with 95%
                                                                                                                                 confidence Intervals
                           0
                                5+ pre-   4 pre-LBO 3 pre-LBO 2 pre-LBO 1 pre-LBO PE period 1 pre-IPO        IPO   1 post-IPO 2 post-IPO 3 post-IPO 4 post-IPO
                                 LBO




                         -100




                         -200




                         -300
                                                                               Year relative to IPO or LBO




                                                                                   40
