                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAN AN INCREASED BUDGET DEFICIT
                        BE CONTRACTIONARY?


                        Martin Feldstein



                     Working Paper No. l43)4




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBERs research program
in Taxation and project in Government Budget. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 1/1434
                                                   August 1984




              Can an Increased Budget Deficit Be Contractionary?



                                   ABSTRACT



      The present paper shows how a negative fiscal multiplier is possible
in a two—sector economy that is otherwise similar to the traditional one—
sector Keynesian analysis. The key to this surprising possibility is that
an increased budget deficit changes the sectoral balance of demand. A
reduction of taxes or an increase in transfer payments raises the demand
for consumer goods. At the same time, the rise in the interest rates that
results from the deficit causes a fall in the demand for investment goods.

      In the one—good economy assumed in both Keynesian and monetarist
theories, the intersectoral shift of demand is of no consequence. But when
consumer goods and investment goods are explicitly distinguished, the change
in the sectoral pattern of demand causes separate changes in the prices of
the two kinds of goods. As a result, the overall price level can rise even
if the total real volume of output declines. The rise in the overall price
level implies a reduction in the real value of the money stock. The con—
tractionary effect of the decline in the real money stock can more than
offset the direct expansionary effect of the increased deficit. The net
effect of the increased deficit can therefore be to reduce real GNP. The
paper analyzes the conditions which affect the likelihood that the fiscal
multiplier is negative.

      It is important to distinguish this demand composition reason for a
negative multiplier from two other possibilities that have previously been
discussed: (1) the adverse effect of budget deficits on business "confi—
dence" and (2) the contraction of current demand that occurs if anticipated
future budget deficits raise real long—term interest rates.



                                           Martin Feldstein
                                           National Bureau of Economic Research
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, MA 02138

                                              (617) 868—3905
              Can An Increased Budget Deficit Be Contractionary?

                                 Martin Feldstein*


          The fiscal multiplier is the centerpiece of Keynesian economics.

Ever since Keynes, students have learned, and governments have relied upon,

the proposition that an increase in the government deficit causes a rise in

real GNP and employment.

          Monetarists have challenged the importance of the fiscal multiplier

by noting that an increase in nominal GNP is possible only if there is an

increase in the stock of money   or   in velocity. With the stock of money   fixed
and velocity quite unresponsive to the fiscal stimulus, an increase in the

deficit will have little effect on nominal income and therefore on real

income. In Keynesian terms, with a relatively inelastic LM curve and a rela-

tively elastic IS curve, an increased deficit will raise the rate of interest

thereby depressing investment and offsetting most of the direct stimulative

effect of the deficit on real GNP. In the extreme case of a constant velocity

of money (a vertical LM curve), the rise in the rate of interest completely

offsets the fiscal stimulus and nominal GNP remains unchanged. It is impor-

tant to note that although economists disagree about the relevant parameter

values and therefore about the size of the fiscal multiplier, within this fra-

mework it is clear that the multiplier is non—negative; an increase in the

budget deficit either increases real GNP or leaves it unchanged.




* Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper is part of the NBER study of The Government
Budget and the Private Economy.
                                      —2—


            The so—called Ricardian equivalence proposition (Bailey 1911 and

Barro 19714) reinforces the monetarist conclusion that the fiscal multiplier is

small or zero. If current individuals collectively act as if any deficit

implies an equal increase in their personal liabilities (either directly or to

offset the liabilities of their heirs), the stimulative effect of the deficit

would be offset by increased personal saving. The empirical magnitude of this

effect is questionable for a number of reasons (Feldstein, 1982, Feldstein and

Pellechio, 1979). But, regardless of the importance of this effect, it remains

true that the implied fiscal multiplier is non—negative.

           In a slightly broader framework, however, a negative fiscal multiplier

is possible. An increase in the budget deficit can reduce real GNP in an eco—

nonty that produces more than one kind of product. The present paper shows how

a negative fiscal multiplier is possible in a two—sector economy.

           Before presenting this analysis and discussing its implications, it

is useful to distinguish this source of a negative multiplier from two quite

different reasons that have been adduced as possible causes of a "perverse"

response to fiscal policy. In testimony (e.g., Feldstein 1983) and in the

1983 Economic Report of the President, I indicated how projected future budget

deficits could reduce current economic activity by raising real long—term

interest rates. The higher real long—term interest rates would depress

current investment. Since the deficits would only occur in the future, their

stimulating effects would also only occur in the future. The net result might

well   be an increase of future real GNP but a decline of near—term real GNP.1




         1Blanchard (1983) provides a formal analysis of a alternative way in
which future deficits can depress current GNP.
                                        —3-.



In this context, the "contemporaneous't fiscal multiplier is positive but the

"expectational" fiscal multiplier may be negative.

            A second possible source of a negative fiscal multiplier is that an

increase in the budget deficit nay undermine "business confidence" and there-.

fore reduce the willingness of businesses to invest. Even if there is no

increase in real interest rates, this fall in investment could ure than off-

set the fiscal stimulus. Proponents of this argument rarely offer any expla-

nation of the reason for the decline in business confidence.2 Presumably,

businessmen might fear that prolonged deficits could lead to a cycle of infla-

tionary expansion followed by- deflationary contraction or to subsequent

increases in business taxes. Similarly, measures to reduce the budget deficit

could stimulate confidence by showing that the government was prepared to take

politically unpopular steps in order to improve future economic prospects. It

is also possible, however, that an increased deficit could strengthen business

confidence if businessmen believe that there is a positive fiscal multiplier

and that the fiscal stimulus will help to achieve economic recovery. In

short, if   business   expectations are correct, it   is difficult   to attribute a

predictable   and independent effect to the impact of the change in the deficit
on business confidence or expectations.




           2See Stein (1983) for a skeptical   summary   of   the repeated uses of
this   argument during the past 50 years.
               The Fiscal Multiplier in a Two—Sector Econosr

         An increased budget deficit changes the sectoral balance of demand.

A reduction of taxes or an increase in transfer payments raises the demand for

consumer goods. At the same time, the rise in the the interest rates that

results from the deficit causes a fall in the demand for investment goods.

          In the one—good economy assumed in both Keynesian and nionetarist

theories, the intersectoral shift of demand is of no consequence. But when

consumer goods and investment goods are explicitly distinguished, the change

in the sectoral pattern of demand causes separate changes in the prices of the

two kinds of goods. As a result, the overall price level can rise even if the

total real volume of output declines. The rise in the overall price level

implies a reduction in the real value of the money stock. The contractionary

effect of the decline in the real money stock can more than offset the direct

expansionary effect of the increased deficit. The net effect of the increased

deficit can therefore be to reduce real GNP.

          A simple special case can explicitly demonstrate this possibility of

a negative fiscal multiplier. Assume first that the increased deficit raises

real consumption and the price of consumer goods. Assume next that, because

of downward price rigidity, the price of investment goods does not fall even

if the demand for investment goods declines. This assumption is unnecessarily

restrictive and will be relaxed in the analysis that follows. These two

assumptions together imply that the increase in the budget deficit raises the

overall price level. As a final assumption, assume that the change in the

deficit does not alter velocity. With a fixed stock of money, nominal GNP is
                                     —5—


therefore unaffected by the increase in the deficit. Since the price level

has increased, real GNP must therefore decline. In this case, the fiscal

multiplier is inevitably negative.

          It is clear from the example that two assumptions assured the nega-

tive multiplier: first the downward price rigidity implies that the overall

price level must rise when the demand for consumer goods expands and, second,

the extreme monetarist assumption of constant velocity converts the rise in

the price level into a decline in real GNP. The following more general analy-

sis shows that neither of these extreme assumptions is a necessary condition

for a negative fiscal multiplier.

          Consider a two sector extension of the simplest traditional

Keynesian model of the economy in which total real purchases of consumer goods

(c) is the sum of household consumption (CH) and government purchases of con-

sumer goods (CG):


(1)
          CCH+CG.
Real purchases of investment goods (I) is the sum of business investment (IB)

and government investment (IG):


(2)         =        +
                'B

It will be convenient to choose units of measurement so that the initial pri-
ces of consumption goods and investment goods are both equal to one. With

this convention, total real output (or real GNP) in the economy can be defined

as:
                                              —6-.



(3)       X=C+I.
          Household         consumption is a function of real disposable income, the

difference between real GNP and the net taxes (T) collected by the government:


()        C11 =



Business investment is a function of the real rate of interest (r):


          'B =     ip(r).

          If PC IS the price of consumer goods and p1 is the price of invest-

ment goods, nominal GNP is:


(6)       1 =         + p11.

The equality of the demand for money with the exogenously fixed supply of

money is given by:


(T)       PCC + p1I =        v(r+i)   •   M



where i is the expected rate of inflation and v(r+i) indicates that velocity

is a function of the nominal rate of interest. The analysis that follows

assumes that the expected rate of inflation remains unchanged even when a

fiscal stimulus causes a one—time change in the price level.

          The price of each type of good is a nondecreasing function of the

demand for (and output of) that type of good:



(8)            =
                   llc(c),                                         0
          PC                                                 no
                                                        —7—



and


 (9)       p1 =    II(I),                                                             >     a.


Allowing a more general price response in which each price is a function of

both demands would complicate the algebra without altering the fundamental

results of the analysis.

          These 9 equations are sufficient to define the equilibrium values

for the 9 endogenous variables: C,                              'B' X, Y, r, PC and p1. Our
                                                   CH,
interest is in the value of the fiscal multiplier; for the sake of concrete-

ness, the system will be solved for dX/dT, the multiplier with respect to a

change in tax revenue. For this purpose the 9 equation system can be reduced

to two equations in just X and r. First, from equations 1 through 5:


(10)      X =          +        + (X—T) +       p(r)
                  CG       'G

Equations I through 9 then imply:


(ii)   IIC(CG +    (x—T))        •
                                     (CG
                                           +   (x—T))   +
                                                            i'g     +    iJ(r))   •
                                                                                      (IG
                                                                                            +    p(r))   =   v(r+i)   .   M.


          Totally differentiating these two equations yields:


(12)      (1—')dx —         iJdr     = —4'dT


and



(13)      (cn +                      + ((14 + p1)t          —   Mv')dr   =        — (Cll     +
                                             —8-.



It   will simplify interpretation to write the price response elasticities as

     =           and    =              With this notation and with the choice of units
         dc/pc              1ll1/p1.
to make the initial values of PC and p1 equal to one, equations 12 and 13 can

be solved for the fiscal multiplier with respect to a tax change:


              dX =             I*(nC       ii)   + M v']
(i)4)
                     h[(i+i) + (14')(l+n1)T - (1-')M          '




              Before commenting on this general expression, it may be helpful to
return to the special case discussed above in which the price of investment

goods is constant (n = 0) and velocity is completely inelastic Cv' =           0).   In

this case 14 becomes



(15)
              dX =   ______________      > 0
                               + (i-')
                     '(1+n)
since 0 <         < 1 is the marginal propensity to consume. In this case an

increase in taxation raises real GNP, an unambiguously negative fiscal

multiplier. The reason for this, as explained before, is that the tax reduc-

tion raises consumption and consumer prices, thereby raising the price level.

Since velocity is constant, nominal GNP remains unchanged and real GNP must

fall.

              This explanation suggests that the fiscal multiplier will be nega-

tive if nominal GNP is constant (that is, v' = 0) even if the price of invest-

ment goods falls as long as the relative increase in the price of consumption

goods exceeds the corresponding decline is the price of investment goods.

From     equation 1)4 it follows directly that, with v' =     0,
                                                 —9—


                               • (r —r     )
(16)              =
                               ÷                    > O•
                                   (14')(l+n1)

              More specifically, the fiscal multiplier is negative if the elasti-

city of consumption goods price function exceeds the elasticity of the invest-

ment goods price function.3 This price response condition is likely to be

satisfied whenever prices (or inflation) is sticky in a downward direction.

It is also likely to be satisfied if the consumption goods industry is

operating close to capacity while there is substantial slack in the investment

goods industry. It is clear that a sufficiently large and sustained tax

reduction will eventually produce the kind of unbalanced recovery in which this

elasticity condition is satisfied.

              It is now time to return to the general fiscal multiplier presented

in equation 14. I will now assume as "normal"               conditions   that v' < 0 and

41' <   0,   i.e., that both nney demand and real investment are inversely related

to the rate of interest. What are the further conditions that imply a nega-

tive fiscal multiplier, dX/dT > 0?               It is clear that if the price response

condition        >    holds,   the numerator is equation iI is negative. Since both

of the terms in the denominator are negative, the difference between them can

be either positive or negative. The denominator as a whole is more likely to

be negative (and therefore the fiscal multiplier also negative) under three

conditions:




         3Recall that, prices and quantities have been normalized by choosing
units so that prices of both goods are initially equal to one.
                                      —10—


          (1) A low interest sensitivity of the demand for money. In the

traditional analysis, this reduces the positive effect of fiscal expansion.

In the current two—sector analysis, it also implies that the price rise

induced by fiscal expansion will cause a greater rise in the interest rate and

therefore a greater contraction of investment demand. If the rise in the

interest rate is enough, total demand will decline.


          (2) A high elasticity of investment demand with respect to the real

interest rate. For any   given   increase in the interest rate, this causes a

greater reduction in investment and therefore in total demand. Again, the

same factor that reduces the positive effect of fiscal expansion also

increases the likelihood of a negative fiscal multiplier.


          (3) A.high elasticity of price, especially the price of consumer

&oods, with respect to an increase in product demand. The high price elasti-

city implies a greater rise in the overall price level and therefore a greater

reduction in real money balances and in real economic activity.


          It is worth emphasizing that the three conditions that increase the

likelihood of a negative fiscal multiplier are the same conditions that reduce

the value of the positive fiscal multiplier in the traditional one—sector

model. They corresond to an inelastic LM function, an elastic IS function,

and a responsiveness of the price level to the fiscal stimulus. Of course, in

the one—sector model it is not possible to obtain a negative fiscal

multiplier. In a one—sector model, all prices are equal and therefore fl0
                                                 —11—


With this restriction, equation 114 becomes:


 17
             dx —            -4             <O
                     (i—')   +
                                 M •   v
This is exactly the basic positive fiscal multiplier that can be derived in

the one—sector LM—IS model with the price level an increasing function of total

output..

            Even in the two—sector model, the extreme conditions of the simplest

Keynesian analysis —— a liquidity trap or completely inelastic investment

demand —— can preclude a negative fiscal multiplier. As v' tends to infi-

nity, we obtain the Keynesian liquidity trap case in which equation 114 implies

dX/dT =    —'/(i—4),     the simplest textbook multiplier for a tax increase.

Similarly, when investment demand is completely inelastic i' = 0 and dX/dT

again equals —4'/i—'.


                                   Some General Implications

            The long—term adverse consequences of sustained budget deficits are

well known: an increased national debt that must be serviced by distortionary

taxes and a reduced volume of capital accumulation. Moreover, when budget

deficits raise the level of real interest rates, they thereby increase politi—

cal and bureaucratic pressures for a nore inflationary monetary policy. In

addition to these long—run and             cumulative   disadvantages, discretionary fiscal

policies may    be   destabilizing because of the unpredictable timing of the eco—

nomys response to fiscal and monetary policies.

            Despite these disadvantages, policy officials are tempted to use
                                       —12—



"temporary" increases in budget deficits to try to stimulate economic activity
whenever    the econorxr is operating at less than full   capacity.   The analysis of

the present paper demonstrates a new, and I believe significant, risk in using

an increased budget deficit to stimulate economic activity: a fiscal expan.-

sion that produces a lopsided recovery may raise the overall price level and

reduce real activity and employment.

             The risk of a negative fiscal multiplier is a reason for caution in

using fiscal policy but does not imply that there is never a role for discre-

tionary fiscal policy. The present analysis shows that the multiplier is most

likely to be positive, and therefore a fiscal expansion useful, when a very-

low initial level of capacity utilization implies that prices are likely to be

less sensitive to increased demand. Conversely, the fiscal stimulus of

reduced taxation or increased government spending is most likely to be coun-

terproductive when there is a high initial level of capacity utilization in

the industries that produce goods and services purchased by consumers and the

government.

             More generally, the results of the present paper show that a two—

sector framework for analyzing the effects of monetary- and fiscal policies may

yield insights that are obscured by the traditional one—sector macroeconomic

models. Further analysis in such an expanded framework seems to be clearly

warranted.


July l984
                                   Bibi log raphy



Bailey, M.J. (1971), National Income and the Price Level, New York: McGraw
     Hill.

Barro, H. (l971), "Are Government Bonds Nets Wealth?," Journal of Political
     Economy 82, 6, 1095—1117.

Blanchard, O.J. (1983), "Current and Anticipated Deficits, Interest Rates
     and Economic Activity,'t NBER Working Paper No. 1265, Cambridge: National
     Bureau of Economic Research.

Economic Report of the President (1983), Washington: U.S. Government Printing
     Office.

Feldstein, M. (1983), "Budget Deficits, Economic Activity and Net Capital
     Formation," Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee of the
     U.S. Congress, November 8, 1983.
Feldstein,   M. (1982), "Government Deficits   and Aggregate Demand," Journal
     of   Monetary Economics, 9, 1—20.

Feldstein, M. and A. Pellechio (1979), "Social Security and Household Wealth
     Accumulation: New Microeconometric Evidence," Review of Economics
     and Statistics.
Stein,    H. (1983), Presidential Economics, New York: Simon and Schuster.
