                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   LANDED INTERESTS AND FINANCIAL UNDERDEVELOPMENT IN THE UNITED
                               STATES

                                           Raghuram G. Rajan
                                           Rodney Ramcharan

                                          Working Paper 14347
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14347


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2008




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Lakshmi Aiyar, Shawn Cole, Stijn Claessens, Oded Galor, Mark Rosenzweig,Jeremy
Stein, as well as participants in seminars at the IMF, the NBER Political Economy, Corporate Finance,and
Growth Workshops, Northwestern University, the University of Chicago and the WFA Meetings for
comments. Rajan benefited from grants from the Stigler Center for the Study of the State and the Economy,from
the Inititiative on Global Markets, and from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Raghuram G. Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Landed Interests and Financial Underdevelopment in the United States
Raghuram G. Rajan and Rodney Ramcharan
NBER Working Paper No. 14347
September 2008
JEL No. G20,O16,O43

                                             ABSTRACT

Landed elites in the United States in the early decades of the twentieth century played a significant
role in restricting the development of finance. States that had higher land concentration passed more
restrictive banking legislation. At the county level, counties with very concentrated land holdings tended
to have disproportionately fewer banks per capita. Banks were especially scarce both when landed
elites' incentive to suppress finance, as well as their ability to exercise local influence, was higher.
Finally, the resulting financial underdevelopment was negatively correlated with subsequent manufacturing
growth. We draw lessons from this episode for understanding economic development.


Raghuram G. Rajan
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rajan@chicagogsb.edu

Rodney Ramcharan
International Monetary Fund
Research Department
700 19th St. NW
Washington, DC 20431
RRamcharan@imf.org
        What are the factors that cause differences in the development of the financial sector

across the world? Some researchers have emphasized elevated demand such as the need for

war finance, others the political institutions a country develops, others the origins of a

country’s legal system, and yet others the constituencies or interest groups that emerge in a

country. 2 Many of these theories have been tested using cross-country data. The problem,

though, is that the causal factors are so closely intertwined at the country level that it is hard

to tell them apart.

        One way to make progress is to look within a country, across regions. By holding

political institutions and legal institutions relatively constant, we can focus attention on

factors that vary across regions, specifically, constituencies or interest groups. While such a

focus will tell us little about the importance of broad political institutions or legal origins on

financial development, it can tell us a lot about the importance of the role of local

constituencies.

        In this paper, we explore how the structure of banking across counties in the United

States was shaped in the early part of the twentieth century by local agricultural interests. We

focus on banks because they were, and in many areas, still are, the most important source of

local finance. Likewise, we focus on the influence of agricultural interests because

agriculture was still a key sector at that time in the U.S. economy, and agricultural interests



2
  On the importance of war for finance (and vice versa), see, for example, Brewer (1989) and Peach (1941), on
the origins of finance in political development, see, for example, North and Weingast (1989), on the legal
origins of finance, see La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1997, 1998), and on the role of
constituencies or interest groups, see, for example, Benmelech and Moskowitz (2006), Bordo and Rousseau
(2006), Haber and Perotti (2007), Haber (2005a,b), Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2006), Pagano and Volpin
(2005), Perotti and Von Thadden (2006), Rajan and Zingales (2003a, b), and Sylla (2005).



                                                                                                                2
were a powerful political constituency (Stock (1994)3. In addition, we believe we can isolate

exogenous factors that determined the nature of agricultural interests.

         Specifically, counties varied in the extent to which land holdings were concentrated

or widely distributed. In part, the distribution of land holdings was driven by rainfall, with

large-scale plantation-like agriculture being favored in areas with high rainfall, and small

scale farming in areas with moderate rainfall. Therefore, in some counties, a few large

farmers held much of the land, while in other counties land was widely dispersed among

many smaller farmers. Large, wealthier landowners might have had specific interests vis a

vis bank structure, and the economic and political power to implement those interests, so we

might expect to see a correlation between the concentration of land ownership and banking

structure.

         What kind of structures might powerful landowners favor? Given their economic

power, they typically had significant interests in the local bank as well as the local store (see,

for example, Ransom and Sutch (1972), Wiener (1975)). Clearly, they would prefer to limit

competition from other banks, especially large out-of-state ones. Furthermore, to the extent

that small farmers and tenant farmers in the area had to buy on credit, the landlord’s local

monopoly over credit would force these small farmers to buy from the landlord-controlled

store at exorbitant prices.4 In other parts of the country, claims of rent extraction also


3
 In addition to banking and finance, the influence of agricultural interests extended across a range of policies
during this period, including federal tariff and transportation policies, as well as anti trust legislation and fiscal
policy (Sanders (1999)).
4
  Ransom and Sutch (1972, p123) detail the methods used by large Southern landowners, who typically were
also merchants, to manipulate the supply of credit in order to extract rents from small farmers—the peonage
system. For instance, “The merchant established two sets of prices or cash prices and credit prices. The cash
price applied only if the goods were paid for when received. The credit price was always substantially above the
cash price, thus assuring the merchant a rate of return on his loan. The farmer, for his part, had little choice. By
the middle of the growing season he was invariably out of cash, and therefore had to charge his purchases.”



                                                                                                                         3
coincided with concentrated control of the local banking system. 5 Such control was often

detrimental. For example, large landowners controlled much of Florida’s banking system

during the 1920s, and their attempts to channel credit into real estate, often by bribing state

regulators, contributed to Florida’s banking crash of 1926 [Vickers (1994)].

         Even if the landlord did not directly own the local bank, given his own wealth and

creditworthiness he might benefit if access to finance was made difficult for others – through

limitations on bank competition and restrictive laws on pledging collateral or charging

interest (see later). He would then enjoy a competitive advantage, for instance by being able

to buy land cheaply when small farmers were hit by adversity, or having privileged access to

loans in the midst of a prolonged drought. He might also prevent the emergence of alternative

centers of economic power and status, such as manufacturers, by limiting their access to

finance [Chapman (1934)].

         Along these lines, Calomiris and Ramirez (2004) argue that unit banking laws (that is,

laws preventing in-state banks from opening multiple branches, and out-of-state banks from

entering the state) provided large farmers with insurance during periods of agricultural

distress. Specifically, large national banks or state banks with branches could more easily

foreclose on loans and transfer capital to less distressed areas. By preventing such

reallocation, unit banking laws provided borrowers insurance. Of course, wealthier farmers




5
  In North Dakota for example, banking reform was a key platform of the Socialist/Populist party. And after
winning the 1916 gubernatorial race with the help of small farmers, the party created the United States’ first
state owned bank, the Bank of North Dakota. The bank’s charter begins: “Nor is it strange that under these
conditions private interests sometimes take advantage of the needs of the people to keep down the prices of
farm products, and exorbitantly to advance the prices of the things the farmers had to buy and the rates of
interest for farm loans…the only permanent remedy lay in state ownership and control of market and credit
facilities [Bank of North Dakota (1920), Lipset (1951)].



                                                                                                                 4
would benefit more from keeping capital “in-house”, and Calomiris and Ramirez indeed find

more restrictions in states with greater farm wealth.

       In all this discussion, large land owners benefit through their control over finance if

there are many small landowners to squeeze or deprive, but not if all land owners are large.

Hence what matters in the discussion that follows is the concentration of land holding, not

the average size of land holdings.

       It is, of course, possible to argue that instead of focusing on preserving his share of a

small local pie by limiting bank competition and access, the large landowner might have

been better off increasing the size of the local pie, even if his share were diminished. For

instance, greater access to finance would draw more potential buyers into the land market,

allowing the value of his own land to appreciate. Therefore whether concentrated land

ownership leads to a more constrained financial sector and less financial access is an

empirical question, which we attempt to answer.

       To preview our results, the answer to the above question is indeed that landed

interests appeared to be an important influence in constraining bank competition and thus

limiting access to finance. We provide a variety of tests showing that their impact was most

pronounced in situations where they had the greatest incentive and ability to exert influence.

We also argue that our results cannot be easily explained as resulting from the supply of

banking services responding to the underlying demand. Finally, we show these constraints on

financial development persisted long after the interest groups driving them faded away.

       While our paper is on financial development, it has broader implications. A recent

trend in explaining the underdevelopment of nations has been to attribute it to the historical

weakness in their political institutions such as democracy and constitutional checks-and-




                                                                                                   5
balances (see, for example, the literature emanating from North (1990) and North and

Weingast (1989)). While U.S. political institutions in the 1920s were far from perfect, they

were also far from the coercive political structures that are typically held responsible for

persistent underdevelopment. Yet even in the United States, we find large variations in the

development of enabling economic institutions such as banking between areas that had

different constituencies but were under the same political structures. The significant, and

potentially adverse, influence of constituencies even in such environments suggests that

fixing political institutions alone cannot be a panacea for the problem of underdevelopment.

                           I. LANDED INTERESTS AND STATE LAWS

        As motivation, it is useful to start with seemingly inefficient state laws governing

banking, on which there is a large literature. In the United States, historical political battles,

such as the one between Andrew Jackson and the Second Bank of the United States, led to

more limited federal involvement in banking. As a result, the system was highly

decentralized—effectively 48 different banking systems (Lamoreaux and Rosenthal (2005)).

Economic efficiency would suggest that each system should have been tailored to the needs

of the local economy. Yet some of the observed choices seemed sub-optimal.

A. Branching regulation

        For example, branch banking—that is, allowing a single bank to operate many

branches spread over the state—should have led to a more efficient and stable financial

system, as banks would have been better able to reap scale economies, diversify the risks of

the local economy, and offer wider credit access to the population (Ramirez (2003), Carlson

and Mitchener (2006)). Yet, only 16 states allowed branching in 1920 (Deheja and Lleras-

Muney (2007)).




                                                                                                     6
       Clearly, there was hysteresis in banking structures. For example, once unit banks

were in place, branching was perceived as a threat, for it would have allowed bigger urban

banks to compete in rural areas, threatening the rents of small rural unit banks. As a result,

unit banks formed associations, or joined hands with state regulators, to oppose branching

(White (1982)). Furthermore, Economides, Palia, and Hubbard (1996) show that states with

unit banking pushed for federal branching restrictions on national banks and for federal

deposit insurance (which particularly favored small unit banks), suggesting that unit banks

had political power in those states.

       But this begs the question of why some states chose in the first place to have no

branching, while others allowed it. Sylla et al. (1987) argue that taxes on bank profits and

dividends were an important source of state revenue. By preventing out-of-state entry, states

could extract more taxes from the protected in-state banks. Kroszner and Strahan (1999)

emphasize the added revenue that each in-state bank could obtain if it enjoyed a local

monopoly, and suggest that this accounted for the limits on branching by even in-state banks.

       These arguments, however, apply to all states. Why did some states go in for unit

banking and others not? Moreover, if revenue was the primary objective, could they have not

chosen a less distortionary means than creating monopolies and then taxing them heavily?

Did states that chose unit banking have few other revenue options?

       Our explanation of why some states chose to impose more restrictions on their banks

is a “bottom-up” view, where local (that is, county-level) preferences for restrictions

aggregated up to a state level preference. While this is not inconsistent with state-level

rationales for restrictions, it does add an additional facet to the study of the political economy

of state regulations. Specifically, we hypothesize that the large landowners’ influence over




                                                                                                 7
the local financial system would have been made easier, in part, by legal branching

restrictions, which prevented national banks and large state banks from entering local

markets.

       Our measure for the concentration of land holdings is based on the distribution of

farm sizes (data are available for each of the decennial census years 1890-1930) (see also

Ramcharan (2007)). The data are collected by the U.S. Census Bureau at the county level;

some specifications aggregate up to the state level. The US Census provides information on

the number of farms falling within particular acreage categories or bins, ranging from 20-49

acres up to 1000 acres. Using the midpoint of each bin, we construct the Gini coefficient to

summarize the farm acreage data. The Gini coefficient is a measure of concentration that lies

between 0 and 1, and higher values indicate that larger farms account for a greater proportion

of total agricultural land—that the ownership of agricultural wealth is unequally distributed,

and skewed towards large farms.

       In the 1920s, the average Gini coefficient of a county is 0.426, the maximum is 0.836

the minimum is 0.017, and the standard deviation 0.101 (see Table 1 for definitions and

Tables 2 and 3 for summary statistics). In Figure 1, we plot the regional variation in the data .

Even in the South, which generally had higher levels of land concentration, there was

significant heterogeneity among counties.

       The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 is a binary variable equaling

one if a state permitted branching in a particular year. We collect the data for the years 1900-

1930 (see Dehejia and Lleras Muney (2007)). Using a simple linear probability model, we

measure the effect of land concentration (aggregated up to the state level ---described in

Table 1) on the probability that a state permitted state wide bank branching. We include state




                                                                                                 8
fixed effects, year indicators, and cluster standard errors at the state level. The simple linear

probability model in Table 4 column 1 suggests that a one standard deviation increase in land

concentration at the state level is associated with a 0.16 decrease in the probability of

observing laws permitting branching. Conditioning on demographic, economic and political

variables does not significantly change this estimate (Table 4 column 2).

B. Usury Laws

        A less well-studied method of constraining credit is through usury laws. Low ceilings

on interest rates make it difficult to charge rates that allow a lender to break even on high-

risk credits. As a result, only the rich with unimpeachable creditworthiness will be able to

borrow when usury ceilings are low. Benmelech and Moskowitz (2007) collect data on usury

ceilings across the United States ending in the late nineteenth century and indeed find that

usury limits do adversely affect lending activity. They also find that the strictness of usury

laws increases with the extent that other groups are excluded from political activity,

suggesting that usury laws are a form of economic exclusion.

        We have data on land concentration in 1890 while Benmelech and Moskowitz have

data on state usury laws in 1890. Marrying the data they collected, and were kind enough to

share, with our data on land concentration, we find in Table 4 column 3 that land

concentration in 1890 is negatively and significantly correlated with the interest rate ceiling

imposed by usury laws in 1890, and the estimate increases in magnitude with the addition of

obvious controls.6




6
 To deal with situations where a state has no ceiling, Benmelech and Moskowitz impose a rate that is the
average for all states in 1890 plus 5 percentage points. We follow their convention.



                                                                                                           9
       In sum then, it does appear that concentrated land holdings at the state level are

correlated with laws restricting the development and availability of finance. This suggestive

evidence motivates our deeper look at county level evidence.

    II. LANDED INTERESTS AND COUNTY-LEVEL BANK STRUCTURE: THE BASIC TEST


       We turn now to county level data on land inequality from 1890-1930 to help measure

the impact of the concentration of agricultural wealth on the various indicators of banking

structure. The state-level results suggest that state-level banking legislation was framed to

restrict financial sector development and limit access to finance in states where land holdings

were more concentrated. Clearly, landowners may also have had the ability to frame

welcoming or restrictive local legislation, as well as the local economic clout that allowed

them to direct, or withhold business. For example, to finance production until harvest, small

tenant farmers often used their crops as collateral. To the extent that local sheriffs treated the

lien of landowners as superior to other claimants in the case of default, it would restrict the

ability of tenant farmers to access outside sources of finance [Vann Woodward (1951),

Weiner (1975)].

       Moreover, to the extent the sheriff enforced some bank claims more willingly than

others, and to the extent that landowners used their power to direct business to some banks

and not others, local powers could also alter the structure of banking. Thus we hypothesize

that, correcting for state effects, the greater the power of local landed interests, as proxied for

by the degree of land concentration in a county, the greater their ability to pass local

regulation or direct local business, and thus the greater their ability to shape the structure of

banking in the county.




                                                                                                  10
A. Banking density and concentration


         One measure of bank structure is to simply count the number of banks in a county,

normalized by the number of people in, or area of, the county. The Federal Deposit Insurance

Corporation (FDIC) provides county level data on the number of state and nationally

chartered active banks in the county, beginning in 1920. The box plot in Figure 2 indicates

high levels of banking density in the upper Mid West, but reveals substantial variation even

among Southern counties.

         We begin by examining the relationship between the density of banks in a county and

the concentration of land holdings. Bank density is an informative measure of access to

finance at the county level during this period (Evanoff (1988)). Distance was an important

factor in economic activity at this time, as Federal involvement in road construction had not

yet begun, road transport networks were relatively primitive, and automobile use was still

limited (Baum-Snow(2006), Ramcharan (2008)). And during this period, policy debates on

the availability of credit often revolved around the geographic proximity of banks, as access

to financial services were more restricted in counties with limited banking density

(Cartinhour and Westferfield(1980)) 7.

         The dependent variable in Column 1 in Table 5a is the number of banks per capita in

a county in 1920. The explanatory variables are the land concentration index for the county

and state dummy variables. To this parsimonious specification, we also include a number of

geographic controls including the county area, and its distance from various waterways.

Waterways were centers of economic activity, with some of particular relevance to

7
 Like the US during the sample period, bank density remains an important measure of access to financial
services in many developing countries today because of their limited transport networks. In these countries,
density significantly predicts credit usage by firms and households (Beck et. al (2007)).



                                                                                                               11
agriculture. Including these variables help control for plausibly exogenous determinants of a

county’s prosperity and the kind of economic activity it might undertake. For instance,

waterways such as the Great Lakes in the upper mid west, and the Atlantic Ocean along the

East coast helped spur industrialization and demand for financial services in those regions

(Pred (1966)). In the estimates that follow, we correct standard errors for possible correlation

between proximate counties.8

        The coefficient estimate of concentration in the OLS regression is negative and

strongly statistically significant (at the 1 percent level). A one standard deviation increase in

land inequality is associated with a 0.27 standard deviation decline in the per capita number

of banks circa 1920. In Column 2, we repeat the same exercise for 1930 and again find a

negative and statistically significant coefficient estimate for land concentration that is similar

in magnitude to the 1920 result. Most interesting, the coefficient is also negative and

significant at the one percent level in a fixed effects regression where we pool both

crossections, and control for unobserved county specific time invariant characteristics

(column 3). The estimated impact of concentration in the fixed effect estimate is about 70

percent larger than the 1920 OLS results, suggesting that increases in land concentration

seem negatively correlated with increases in bank density.

8
  Nearby counties may share similar unobserved features—histories or cultural characteristics for example—
that shape banking density. As a result, the correlation in the error term between county i and county j may
be proportional to the distance between the two counties. We thus follow Conley [1998] and Rappaport [1999]
and assume a spatial structure to the error covariance matrix. Specifically, for county pairs further than 150
kilometers apart—measured as the distance between the counties’ geographic center-- we assume
independence. Meanwhile, for county pairs less than 150 km apart, we use quadratic weighting:

                                                    ⎡ ⎛ dis tan ceij ⎞ 2 ⎤
                                    E ( ε i ε j ) = ⎢1 − ⎜           ⎟ ⎥ ρij
                                                    ⎢⎣ ⎝ 150         ⎠ ⎥⎦
                                    ρm = e e
                                     ij    i   j




                                                                                                            12
       Before making too much of this, we should recognize that there are potential biases in

the estimated coefficient. Well known theoretical arguments predict that economic inequality

can itself be shaped by credit availability and other forms of asset market incompleteness

(Aghion and Bolton (1997), Bannerjee and Newman (1991), Galor and Zeira (1993)),

making reverse causality a likely feature of the data. More banks for example might mean

more credit availability, allowing more people to buy farms, and reducing concentration.

However, the biases could go in either direction. More competition amongst banks may mean

weaker relationships between banks and farmers, and could lead to greater foreclosures of

marginal farmers in times of distress, leading to greater land concentration (see Calomiris

and Ramirez (2004) or Petersen and Rajan (1995)). The larger county fixed effects results

suggests that this direction is plausible, and to better correct for such reverse causality, we

turn to instrumental variables.

B. Instrumental Variables Estimates


       A large literature in agricultural economics suggests that land concentration in the

United States is related to rainfall patterns (Ackerman and Harris (1946), Gardner (2002),

Heady (1952), Tomich et. al (1995)). The underlying logic rests on the idea that given the

technologies of the period, crops suited for plantation agriculture such as sugar cane, tobacco

and rice thrived in warmer counties with regular and heavy rainfall. By contrast, grain—

wheat and barley—which are better suited to more temperate climates, also exhibited fewer

economies of scale. Virginia tobacco for example requires rainfall between 23 to 31 inches

per annum, while Nebraska wheat usually thrives in regions that receive between 14 to 21

inches of rain per annum (Seitz (1948), Myers (1940)).




                                                                                                  13
       Thus, even within states, more arid counties—the Piedmont region of central Virginia

for example—may have had a more equitable distribution of farm sizes because of their

suitability for grain production. Engerman and Sokoloff (2002) also employ a similar

argument to explain the role of geographic endowments in shaping historic cross country

differences in land inequality across North and South America. And using US census data as

early as 1860, Vollrath (2006) provides evidence consistent with the role of geographic

endowments in shaping land inequality across a sample of US counties.

       In the first column of Table 5b, therefore, we present estimates for a first stage where

the dependent variable is land concentration in 1920 and the explanatory variables are the

mean rainfall in the county computed over the last century, state dummies, and the

geographical variables. The coefficient estimate on mean rainfall is positive and statistically

significant at the one percent level, consistent with the literature. The second stage IV

estimates are reported in Table 5a, column 4. The coefficient on instrumented concentration

is negative and again statistically significant at the one percent level. As with the fixed

effects results, the IV coefficient is larger in magnitude than in the OLS regression,

suggesting the OLS estimate is biased towards zero. In this case, a standard deviation

increase in land concentration reduces the number of banks per capita by about one standard

deviation.

C. Basic Concern with Specification

        There is the concern, of course, that land concentration might proxy for some omitted

variable that is also correlated with the number of banks per capita. In particular, a poor, low

skilled population, as well as the very young, might not have the ability to farm land

independently and might also be an unattractive target market for banks. We should also




                                                                                              14
account for the possibility of discrimination, both in terms of blacks not having access to

education, and in terms of their being denied access to financial services (see Ransom and

Sutch 1972). Therefore, we include as additional controls the fraction of the county

population that is illiterate, the fraction that is black, and the fraction that is young.

Moreover, because banking density might be directly affected by the size and spatial

distribution of the population, we include – the log population, as well as the fraction of the

population that is urban (reflecting the degree to which population is unevenly distributed

across the county). For instance, the more urban the population, the more the population is

crowded in a few areas, and the fewer the bank offices needed to service them.

        Of course, these demographic controls are arguably less exogenous than the

geographic controls we included earlier. Nevertheless, it is heartening that in column 5 in

Table 5a the coefficient estimate of concentration in the IV regression is negative, strongly

statistically significant, and indeed a little larger in magnitude with these additional controls

than the coefficient estimated in column 4. This suggests that concentration does not proxy

for these controls. This will be our baseline regression. In what follows, we conduct some

additional robustness checks.

        In Table 6 column 1, the dependent variable is banks per capita in 1930, and we

estimate the IV regression with the full panoply of geographic and demographic controls.

The coefficient estimate for land concentration is again negative and strongly statistically

significant. In Table 6 column 2, the dependent variable is a different measure of bank

density, banks per square kilometer in 1920. Geographic and demographic controls are likely

to be important here. Again, however, we find the coefficient of instrumented land

concentration is negative and strongly statistically significant.




                                                                                                15
        One concern may be that a county with uniformly large farms will have a low Gini.

While this is not inconsistent with some elements of our thesis (there is no need to repress

finance if there are no small farmers/tenants to exploit), it is important to check that this does

not drive our results. Therefore, we recalculate the Gini coefficient using only those counties

with farm sizes in all bin categories—we are left with about 55 percent of the sample of

counties. The coefficient estimates for the Gini are, however, qualitatively similar, and are

available upon request.

        Moving on to other concerns, perhaps land concentration is higher where agricultural

output and the demand for finance is lower, either because of the nature of the workforce or

the poor quality of the land. We already have some controls for the nature of the workforce in

the county, but including the value of crops divided by the farm population in the county as

an explanatory variable helps to directly capture the variation in agricultural income across

counties.

        We lose some observations, and the estimated standard errors are higher, but the

coefficient estimate for land concentration is still negative and statistically significant in

Table 6 column 3, and similar in magnitude to the baseline. Instead of income, we control in

column 4 for the value of agricultural wealth by including the average value of farm land in

county. The estimated impact of land concentration remains negative and significant.

        We can also estimate the “reduced form” specification, including mean rainfall

instead of land concentration. The estimated coefficient is consistent with the pattern of

correlations in first and second stages, and is also robust to variables that control for the

demand for finance. After including both per capita income and wealth, as well as the

panoply of demographic and geophysical variables, we find counties with higher rainfall--




                                                                                                 16
associated with greater concentration in the first stage—also have fewer banks per capita

(column 5).

         Finally, we should note that much of the increase in the number of banks occurred

after 1890, as federal and state authorities competed to weaken chartering requirements,

capital requirements, reserve requirements, and portfolio restrictions in order to attract more

banks into their system (White (1982)). The number of state banks grew from 2534 in 1890

to 14512 in 1914 while the number of national banks grew from 3484 to 7518. Therefore a

significant part of bank structure evolved post 1890. Land inequality in 1890 thus predates

much of the structural change, and could also be a plausible instrument for land

concentration in 1920.9 We find that replacing the rainfall instrument in the basic

specification in Table 5 column 5 with land inequality in 1890, the coefficient estimate of

instrumented land inequality in 1920 (see Table 6 column 6) is negative and highly

significant. Predetermination does not, however, imply the instrument satisfies the exclusion

restriction. As a result, we will use the rainfall instrument as our baseline because we are

more confident that it is plausibly exogenous.

D. Land concentration as a proxy for demand side factors.

         Clearly, an immediate concern is that land concentration proxies for factors that

reflect the demand for finance. We have attempted to correct for those factors with right-

hand side explanatory variables such as literacy and the value of agricultural land that reflect

demand. But they may not fully correct for demand effects. In what follows, we attempt to

tackle the demand issue more directly.

9
 Inequality in 1890 may reflect more than weather patterns -- geographic factors (e.g., mountainous versus
plains) as well as historic Federal policies may have also helped determine land distribution. For example, the
Homestead Act of 1862, which gave 160 acres of farm land for a nominal $18 fee to help settle the Mid West,
created a relatively equal distribution of land in that region that persisted until the 1930s (Everett (1970)).



                                                                                                              17
Human Capital

        In addition to finance, the landed elite may have sought control over other local

policies, including the suppresion of public goods such as education (Galor et. al (2008), and

Ramcharan (2007)). And rather than reflecting the direct influence of land concentration on

local banking structures, these results might indirectly reflect the success of these groups in

limiting human capital investment, and thus, the demand for finance. The baseline

specification already controls for illiteracy, but in column 1 of Table 7, we also include the

per capita education expenditures in the county--available only for 1930. The coefficient on

land concentration remains qualitatively similar to the baseline (Table 6A, column (i)).

Crops

        The potential connection between farm sizes, cash crops and the demand for finance

could also bias our results. But in this case, the bias could well be against our finding the

results we observe. Unlike subsistence farming, cash crops such as wheat and other grains, as

well as tobacco, and cotton often required external sources of credit to finance seeds, and

other inputs until harvest (Gardener (2003). They were also grown within a monoculture

system, with prices that were more variable than other types of crops during this period

(Bean (1931)). As a result, the demand for external sources of finance might be higher in

counties that predominantly produced cash crops. And to the extent that cash crop production

occurred where land was concentrated, the Gini coefficient is likely to be positively related to

bank density.

        Of course, because the scale of agriculture differed significantly across the different

types of cash crops such as grains—primarily produced on smaller farm—versus plantation

cash crops such as cotton and tobacco, any systematic relationship between cash crop




                                                                                                 18
production and land concentration is unlikely. But to assuage concerns about this potential

demand channel, we include the value of plantation crops as a share of all crop values within

the county in Table 7 column 2, as well as its square. We also include an interaction term to

test whether the impact of land inequality on bank density might have depended on the share

of plantation crops. There is no significant evidence of this potential demand side channel:

both the linear and interaction terms are insignificant.

Spatial Distribution and Bankability

       Even though we control for population, county area, and degree of urbanization, the

spatial structure of farming might affect our results. One large farm might require one large

bank, while many small farms might require many smaller banks, resulting in a negative

correlation between bank density and land concentration that is unrelated to political

economy motives. Thus, as a further check, we include the number of farms per capita in the

county (column 3). In column 4, we go further and include the share of land area under

operation by farms in each size bin. These land shares have the potential to mechanically

absorb much of the explanatory power of the Gini for land concentration, and this coefficient

declines by about 45 percent, but remains significant at the 1 percent level. There is also

evidence of a significant relationship between some specific acreage sizes and bank density.

       A somewhat different concern is bankability. Suppose only farmers above a certain

size generate surpluses making them attractive to banks. Again, this should go against our

finding the results we observe, but perhaps one could postulate some version of spatial

distribution and bankability that could account for our results. This is again where the

inclusion of the shares of different bin sizes should reassure the reader. Likewise, the




                                                                                               19
absence of any monotonic relationship between farm sizes and banking also makes it

unlikely that the spatial structure might be a source of bias.

         The next section turns to more direct evidence to test the hypothesis that landed

interests attempted to curtail the supply of financial services in order to extract rents. Were

landed interests more favorable to the financiers they could control than to those they could

not control? Were landed interests more inclined to assert their influence when the ostensible

incentive to do so was higher? What if the channel through which they could control finance

was suppressed? And were landed interests more assertive when their overall ability to exert

influence was higher? This is what we turn to next.



                            III.   THE INFLUENCE OF        LANDED INTERESTS

A. National vs State Banks


        The early years of the 20th century were years of fierce competition between federal

and state regulatory authorities in a seeming race to the bottom (White (1982)). National

banks were chartered by the Office of the Comptroller of Currency in Washington DC, while

state banks were chartered by state authorities. As some of the banking scandals of the 1920s

suggest, state chartered banks were easier for powerful landed interests to control than

nationally chartered banks (see, for example, Vickers (1994))10. One would expect, therefore,

that landed interests would discourage the spread of banks, but be particularly averse to the

spread of national banks.




10
  Politics and corruption in state bank chartering decisions well pre date the sample period. Bodenhorn (2002)
for example documents the fight against corruption in bank chartering in New York State during the 1830s.



                                                                                                            20
       In Table 8 column 1, we report our baseline specification (that is, the specification in

Table 5a, column 5), but with the dependent variable being the number of national banks per

capita in 1920 . The coefficient on land concentration is negative and statistically significant,

as is the coefficient in Table 8 column 2 where the dependent variable is the number of state

banks per capita in 1920. Thus landed interests discouraged both types of banks, a reassuring

finding. In Table 8 column 3, the dependent variable is the share of national banks to total

banks in the county. The coefficient on land concentration is negative and significant – there

are not just fewer banks of any kind but relatively fewer national banks in counties with

concentrated landed interests. Note that by including state indicators, we control for any

direct legislative impediments to the setting up of national banks in the state.

       Finally, a caveat is in order in weighing this finding. Until the relaxation of the 1864

National Bank Act in 1913, national banks were barred from mortgage loans – that is, loans

against land (Sylla (1969)). There is disagreement about the effectiveness of this restriction

(Keehan and Smiley (1977)). Nevertheless, and despite the tremendous change in bank

activity over this period, we cannot rule out the possibility that the past legal restrictions may

have had some effect on national bank presence in 1920. One would certainly presume that

counties with more urban populations would have a higher ratio of national banks and that is

indeed the case, with the coefficient on share of urban population being positive and

significant. It is much harder, though, after correcting for the share of urban population in the

county, to attribute the finding that counties with relatively more concentrated land holdings

have relatively fewer national banks in 1920 to historical legal restrictions.




                                                                                               21
B. Tenancy


       Many of the arguments about the incentives of large land owners to limit access to

finance revolve around tenancy. Land owners could negotiate lucrative share cropping

contracts with heavily indebted tenants, especially where access to credit was limited. Also,

because large farmers were usually owners while small farmers were tenants, in counties

with high levels of tenancy a higher concentration in land holdings would likely reflect a

more skewed distribution of economic and political power than in counties with low levels of

tenancy. Thus landed interests would have both a greater interest and ability to limit finance

in counties with greater tenancy.

       To test this, in column 1 of Table 9, we interact the fraction of farms in the county

operated by tenants with land concentration in the baseline regression, controlling directly for

the impact of tenancy using both linear and quadratic terms. The interaction between land

inequality and the share of tenant farms in the county is negative and significant at the one

percent level. For a county at the 25th percentile level of tenancy in the sample, a one

standard deviation increase in inequality is associated with about a 1.37 standard deviation

decline in banking density. But for a county at the 50th percentile of tenancy, the impact is

about 31 percent larger. Interestingly, the direct correlation of tenancy is positive. Evaluated

around the median levels of concentration and tenancy, a standard deviation increase in

tenancy is associated with a 0.05 standard deviation increase in the number of banks per

capita. This is consistent with the view that tenants had a greater demand for finance and,

absent the influence of landed interests, would have attracted more banks per capita.




                                                                                                22
Sharecropping and cash tenants

         It is useful to distinguish between sharecroppers and cash tenants. Sharecroppers had

so little ready cash that they contracted to pay a share of their output as rent. The implicit

interest rates in these contracts were often as high as 150 percent, with nearly half of share

tenants borrowing about 100 percent of their expected income from their share of the crop11.

Thus, because the profitability of share cropping depended on the underdevelopment of the

financial system, landed interests would have been more likely to oppose wider credit access

in counties where share cropping was more common. Unlike sharecroppers, cash tenants

owned their harvest, paying landlords a fixed cash rent up front. These tenants were typically

better off since they were either able to self finance the rent and cost of farming or had pre-

arranged sources of financing.

         In column 2, we include an interaction between the fraction of farms operated by

sharecroppers and land concentration, as well as the fraction of sharecroppers and the

fraction of sharecroppers squared directly. In column 3, we do the same for the fraction of

cash tenants. In column 2, for a county at the 25th percentile level of sharecropping in the

sample, a one standard deviation increase in inequality is associated with about a 0.89

standard deviation decline in banking density. But for a county at the 50th percentile of

sharecropping, the impact is about 18 percent larger. Interestingly, the direct effect of

sharecropping measured at its mean is positive, suggesting that counties with greater

sharecropping had, ceteris paribus, more demand for finance, and more banks per capita.




11
  Also, poor tenant farmers were often forced to buy seeds and tools from the land owner’s store at inflated
prices. And their persistent indebtedness to the land lord kept tenant farmers tethered to the land to help pay off
old debts and taxes (Brogan (1994)).



                                                                                                                 23
        In contrast to share croppers, the interaction term between concentration and the

fraction of farms operated by cash tenants is positive. For a county at the 25th percentile level

of cash tenancy in the sample, a one standard deviation increase in inequality is associated

with about a 1.20 standard deviation decline in banking density. But for a county at the 50th

percentile of cash tenancy, the impact is about 3 percent smaller.

        In sum, the negative relationship between land concentration and banks per capital

seems most pronounced in areas where there was likely to be the greatest demand for credit,

and hence the greatest incentive for landed interests to control it.

C. Crop Lien Legislation

        We have seen that crop lien laws were one of the principal tools that the landed elite

used to restrict credit from banks and limit their business (Ransom and Sutch (1977, 2001),

Van Woodward (1951)). These laws made the landlords’ claims on tenants superior to other

creditors, effectively preventing banks and merchants from lending to tenant farmers.

Although such laws were deeply unpopular among small farmers, the landed elite used their

political influence with legislatures throughout the South to enact them.

        Texas, for a period, was an important exception. In part, because of different electoral

rules that briefly allowed small farmers to elect a Populist governor, Texas was the only

Southern state that actually passed legislation restricting the maximum liens that landlords

could claim12. The legislation, passed in 1915, also limited the shares that landlords could

negotiate in a share cropping contract--1/3 of the cotton crop and ¼ th of the grain (US


12
  The Progressive Movement was especially strong in the early 1900s in Texas, and the state passed the Terrell
Act in 1905 which created a direct primary system, allowing voters rather than party elites to select the
gubernatorial nominee in a direct election. This of course created a wave of populism and reforms, of which the
1915 law is an example. However, the legislature was still dominated by the landed elite, and they eventually
impeached the Governor three years after the passage of the 1915 legislation (Newton and Gambrell (1935)).



                                                                                                            24
Census (1940)). The Texas Supreme Court—appointed mainly by the landlord dominated

legislature--eventually declared the law unconstitutional in 1929. Nevertheless, for a time,

Texas’ crop lien legislation would have imposed a less onerous barrier to bank entry in rural

areas, implying the impact of land concentration on banking density in Texan counties would

have been weaker compared to counties in other Southern states during our sample period.

       In column 4 of Table 9, we restrict the baseline specification in 1920 to Southern

counties, but allow the impact of land concentration on banking density to differ for Texan

counties. The estimates are generally imprecise, and in 1920, five years after the law, the

impact of land concentration on per capita banks does not appear to be significantly different

in Texan counties. However, 15 years after the initial passage of the Texan legislation, the

impact of concentration on per capita banks is significantly more muted in Texan counties

compared to other Southern counties in the 1930 cross-section (column 5).

D. Relative Power of Landed Interests

       Landed interests are likely to have had more influence on the structure of banking if

they were a dominant economic power in the county. But this was a period when the

manufacturing sector, an important consumer of financial services, was growing. It is

reasonable to think that in counties where the economic power of the agricultural sector was

offset by the power of the manufacturing sector, the effect of land concentration on bank

structure would be weaker.

       One measure of relative economic power is the ratio of the value of manufacturing

output to the value of manufacturing and agriculture output. In Table 9 column 6, we include

the interaction between manufacturing share and land concentration in our baseline

regression, taking care to include manufacturing share and its square directly.




                                                                                               25
        The estimates suggest that as the strength of manufacturing interests in a county

increase, the adverse impact of land concentration on the per capita number of banks falls.

The point estimates in column 6 suggest that for a county at the 25th percentile level of

manufacturing share in the sample, a one standard deviation increase in inequality is

associated with about a 1.40 standard deviation decline in banking density. But for a county

at the 50th percentile of manufacturing share, the impact is about 14 percent smaller. Note

that it is hard to argue that this reflects a greater demand for banking services in counties

with more manufacturing share, because we control for the direct effects of manufacturing

(through both linear and squared terms). Indeed, the direct effect is negative, consistent with

the fact that agriculture was undergoing a boom till the early 1920s, and may have been a

greater source of demand for banking services than manufacturing.

        One way to check that we are picking up relative economic and political power is to

replace the share of value added in manufacturing by the value added per capita by

manufacturing in the county, which we do in column 7. This measure captures the strength of

manufacturing in the county instead of its relative strength. While the interaction coefficient

has the expected sign, it is no longer significant, and neither are the linear and squared terms.

This suggests that it is not the strength of manufacturing per se, but the strength of

manufacturing relative to agriculture that affects the power of landed interests.

E. Distance from State Capital

         As we argued earlier, landed interests could influence state regulation to favor their

private objectives. In most cases, state governors appointed the state bank commissioners,

and politics often shaped chartering and regulatory decisions (Mitchener (2005))13. To the


13
  Using previously secret government documents, Vickers (1994) note for example that land developers often
overcame chartering obstacles by bringing powerful politicians into banking deals. Land developers then used


                                                                                                           26
extent that state power was important, one might expect at this time –when physical distance

mattered greatly --that landed interests in counties that were physically closer to the political

apparatus located in the state capital might have had greater influence on bank structure than

landed interests that were further away. We thus allow the impact of land concentration to

depend on the distance between the county seat and the state capital (calculated with US

Census geographic data). The county’s distance from the state capital also enters as a linear

and quadratic term to absorb any direct impact on bank structure.

        In column 1 of Table 10, there is some evidence in the overall sample of banks that

concentration may have had a larger negative impact on banking in counties closer to the

state capital. But consistent with the fact that state bank chartering and regulations were

determined in state capitals, these results appear to be driven by state banks (column 2). At

the state capital, a one standard deviation increase in land concentration is associated with a

1.8 standard deviation decline in bank density. This impact is about 20 percent smaller in

counties located one standard deviation away from the capital.

        By contrast, the Comptroller of Currency in Washington DC chartered and regulated

national banks using a system of national bank examiners. One should not expect distance

from the state capital to matter for national banks. Indeed, the distance interaction term in

column 3, where the dependent variable is national banks per capita, is small and not

different from zero.

                             IV. LAND CONCENTRATION AND GROWTH

        Our main attempt in this paper has been to provide evidence suggesting that landed

interests retarded the local development of banks. Of course, if this was detrimental and not

bank deposits for unsecured personal loans for themselves, politicians, and bank regulators. These loans were
rarely repaid.



                                                                                                                27
consistent with the needs of the economy, it should have had adverse real effects. One could

look at the effects of banking sector development on the agricultural sector, but this might be

conflated with the direct effect of agricultural concentration on agricultural growth.

         An alternative is to examine manufacturing growth. Clearly, this depends on financial

sector development (see Rajan and Zingales (1998), for example). Equally clearly, it is

unlikely to be directly affected by land concentration in the county. For reasons of space, we

will only present suggestive facts, referring the reader to a more detailed investigation in

Ramcharan and Rajan (2008b).

         In Table 11 column 1, the dependent variable is real per capita manufacturing value

added growth in the county between 1920 and 1930. The explanatory variables are land

concentration in 1920, the initial share of real per capita value added in manufacturing in

1920 (to capture convergence effects), demographic and geographic controls, as well as state

indicators (which capture between-state differences in manufacturing growth).

         In addition to the hypothesized finance channel, land concentration might also affect

manufacturing growth through the initial mix or scale of manufacturing industries. For

instance, small scale manufacturing that relies on local agricultural inputs, such as

agricultural processing plants, might have proliferated in more concentrated counties, and

performed differently than larger enterprises over the 1920s. Thus, to control for this

potential mechanism, we also proxy for the initial type or scale of manufacturing within the

county by including the average horsepower employed in a manufacturing firm in 1920.14

         The coefficient on land concentration is negative and strongly statistically significant.

A one standard deviation increase in the land Gini in 1920 is associated with a 6.4 percentage

14
  Our results are qualitatively similar when we use only the baseline controls, excluding the average
horsepower measure.



                                                                                                        28
point decrease in growth (over the decade), which is 9.7 percent of the standard deviation in

growth rates across counties. Of course, we are interested in the effect of land concentration

working through the development of the banking sector. So in Table 11 column 2, we report

IV estimates where we replace land concentration with banks per capita, instrumented with

land concentration. The instrumented number of banks per capita has a positive and

significant coefficient estimate, as expected.

         One concern, of course, is that it may be that areas where land is very concentrated

are also areas that are difficult for manufacturing to be set up. In the extreme, if there are

only a few “accidental” manufacturing units in a county because of the hostility of the

terrain, their growth is likely to be very low. One way to address this concern is to focus only

on counties where there is a sizeable manufacturing presence already. In Table 11 column 3,

we include county observations only if the share of manufacturing in total value added is

above the median for all counties. Within this sub-sample of counties with a sizeable

manufacturing presence, the coefficient estimate for instrumented bank concentration is even

larger.15

         Does the legacy of land concentration have an impact far into the future? If indeed

areas with concentrated land holdings manage to restrain the spread of banking, and thereby

constrain the growth of manufacture, then powerful landowners might have been able to

project their power into the future, even though agriculture became relatively unimportant in

most other areas of the United States.

15
  Finally, perhaps the right way to undertake this analysis is to also instrument land concentration. The problem
with the required 3 SLS estimate is that it demands a lot of the data. Standard errors blow up and the coefficient
on instrumented banks per capita is negative (but not statistically different from zero) when the instrument for
land concentration in 1920 is rainfall. However, using land concentration in 1890 as the instrument, the
coefficient estimate for banks per capita is positive and statistically significant. We do not report these
estimates, but they are available on request.




                                                                                                               29
        In Table 12 columns 1-3, we examine the coefficient estimate of banks per capita

(instrumented by land concentration in 1930) regressed on subsequent average annual

manufacturing value added growth for the years 1930-1947, 1947-1967, and 1967-1982. We

find that the effect is negative even in the post-war 1947-1967 period when agriculture’s

importance declined rapidly. However, it turns insignificant in the period 1967-82, a period

also associated with substantial bank deregulation, driven in large part by technological

advances such as ATMs and distance lending (see Kroszner and Strahan (1999), Petersen and

Rajan (2002)) that rendered protective regulation ineffective.16

         Clearly, the evidence in this last section should only be deemed suggestive because

there are so many factors that could drive manufacturing growth, but it is consistent with the

view that by constraining financial sector development, landed interests had adverse effects.

This is clearly an area for more research.



                                  V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION


        The evidence in this paper suggests that local landed interests had substantial

influence over the course of banking development in the United States, even as recently as

the early twentieth century when the United States was well on its way to becoming the

foremost industrial economy in the world. Some of this influence was malign, as evidenced

in the lower rate of manufacturing growth in counties with powerful landed interests.




16
  In ongoing work, we find that counties that had fewer banks per capita prior to the wave of state banking
deregulation in the 1970s and 1980s grew substantially faster post deregulation than counties that had more
banks per capita.




                                                                                                              30
        We have not presented much direct evidence of the contemporaneous financial

consequences of political influence. That is the subject of ongoing work. Preliminary results

suggest that counties with concentrated land holdings are also characterized by higher

interest rates on land mortgages, and lower debt to value ratios. Furthermore, the ratio of land

mortgage credit to total deposit is also lower in these areas, suggesting the paucity of

available funds is not the source of the difference. More work is clearly needed, but these

preliminary findings are consistent with the thrust of our thesis that landed interests restricted

access to finance.

        Interestingly, throughout the paper, we find large local effects, even though

institutions that are commonly thought of as important for economic growth, such as broad

political and legal institutions, are held relatively constant. This is not to suggest that

institutions are unimportant (we have nothing to say on that), but rather that large variations

in developmental outcomes may stem simply from differences in the distribution of

economic wealth and power in a society (see Banerjee and Iyer (2005), Ramcharan (2007) or

Rajan (2007), for recent studies). Examining the relative importance of constitutions and

constituencies or, equivalently, institutions and interests, is a task for future research.




                                                                                               31
                             Table 1: Variables’ Definitions and Sources

Variable                           Source                        Definition
Land Inequality                    United States Bureau of       The number of farms are distributed across
(Gini Coefficient)                 Census; Inter-University      the following size (acres) bins: 3-9; 10-19
                                   Consortium for Political      acres; 20-49 acres; 50-99 acres; 100-
                                   and Social Research           174;175-259;260-499;500-999; 1000 and
                                   (ICPSR) NOs: 0003,            above. We use the mid point of each bin to
                                   0007,0008,0009,0014,0017      construct the Gini coefficient; farms above
                                                                 1000 acres are assumed to be 1000 acres. The
                                                                 Gini coefficient is given by
                                                                                               n
                                                                 1 + 1/ n − ⎡⎣ 2 /(m * n 2 ) ⎤⎦ ∑ ( n − i + 1) yi
                                                                                              i =1
                                                                 Where farms are ranked in ascending order
                                                                 of size, yi , and n is the total number of
                                                                 farms, while m is the mean farm size.
                                                                 [Atkinson, A.B. (1970)]. At the state level,
                                                                 we sum the total number of farms in each bin
                                                                 across counties, then compute the Gini
                                                                 coeffcient.
Number of State and National       Federal Deposit Insurance
Banks Active in each county.       Corporation Data on Banks
                                   in the United States, 1920-
                                   1936 (ICPSR 07).
 Urban Population; Fraction of     United States Bureau of
Black Population; Fraction of      Census; Inter-University
Population Between 7 and 20        Consortium for Political
years; County Area; County         and Social Research
Population; Value of Crops/        (ICPSR) NOs: 0003,
Farm Land Divided by Farm          0007,0008,0009,0014,0017
Population
Distance From Mississippi          Computed Using ArcView
River; Atlantic; Pacific and the   from each county’s
Great Lakes.                       centroid.
Annual Mean Rainfall               Weather Source                The COOP Network consists of more than
                                   10 Woodsom Drive              20,000 sites across the U.S., and has monthly
                                   Amesbury MA, 01913            precipitation observations for the past 100
                                   (Data Compiled from the       years. However, for a station’s data to be
                                   National Weather Service      included in the county level data, the station
                                   Cooperative (COOP)            needs to have a minimum of 10 years history
                                   Network                       and a minimum data density of 90 percent:
                                                                 ratio of number of actual observations to
                                                                 potential observations. If one or more
                                                                 candidate stations meet the above criteria the
                                                                 stations’ data are averaged to produce the
                                                                 county level observations. If no candidate
                                                                 station exists within the county, the nearest
                                                                 candidate up to 40 miles away in the next
                                                                 county is substituted. The arithmetic mean
                                                                 and standard deviation level of rainfall are
                                                                 computed from the monthly data for all years
                                                                 with available data.




                                                                                                                    32
   Table 2. County Level Variables, Summary Statistics
                                                         Circa 1920                         Circa 1930
                                                        Mean            Standard         Mean           Standard
                                                                       Deviation                       Deviation
Inequality                                               0.43               0.10          0.43              0.10
All Banks, Number Per 100 Square                         0.08               0.51
Kilometers                                                                                0.07             0.40
All Banks, Per 1000 Inhabitants                          0.48               0.04          0.37             0.26
State banks, as fraction of all banks                    0.71               0.25          0.69             0.27
County Area (Logs)                                       7.38               0.98          7.38             0.98
National banks, Per 1000 Inhabitants                     0.11              0.130          0.09             0.10
Total Population (Logs)                                  9.76               1.03          9.81             1.05
Urban Population                                        19.01              24.83         21.30            25.73
Population Density                                      61.13             902.56         67.75           836.09
Black Population, as a fraction of total                 0.12               0.19
population                                                                                0.11             0.18
5-17 year olds, as a fraction of total                   0.30               0.04
population                                                                                0.30             0.04
Per capita growth in the value of farm lands             -0.33              0.35            ---              ---
and buildings, 1920-1930
Per capita value added in manufacturing,                 0.01               0.66            ---                ---
1920 (logs)
Per capita value of crops, in 1920 (logs)                -0.63              0.51            ---                ---
Per capita growth in manufacturing value                  3.61              1.46            ---                ---
added, 1920-1930
Per capita growth in the value of crops, 1920-           6.57               1.18            ---                ---
1930
Value of fruits, as a share of total agriculture         4.35               9.74
value added                                                                               5.40            11.97
Value of cereals, as a share of total                   42.23              25.06
agriculture value added                                                                  35.80            26.34
Value of vegetables, as a share of total                11.53              13.60
agriculture value added                                                                  10.09           14.12
Per capita value added in agriculture, 1930                ---                ---      3981.91         4751.81
Distance from Mississippi                          1032163.00          808239.30    1032163.00       808239.30
Distance from Atlantic                             1884416.00         1418925.00    1884416.00      1418925.00
Distance from Great Lakes                          1347100.00          926554.80    1347100.00       926554.80
Distance from Pacific                              3686264.00         1415177.00    3686264.00      1415177.00
Annual average rainfall (inches)                        36.41              13.68         36.41           13.68
   Sources and definitions in Table 1.




                                                                                                          33
Figure 1: Land Concentration (Gini Coefficient), 1920.


             .8    .6
     Land Gini, 1920
         .4  .2
             0


                        New England




                                                                                               South
                                      Mid Atlantic




                                                                                                                           Pacific
                                                                                                       Border




                                                                                                                Mountain
                                                     East North Central




                                                                          West North Central




The shaded rectangle represents the interquartile range, which contains the median—the solid line. The ends of the vertical lines extend to a
maximum of 1.5 times the interquartile range. Dots beyond this range are possible outliers.




                                                                                                                                         34
                              Table 3:
                              State
                              Level
                              Summary
                              Statistics

                                             Mean     Standard Deviation
Land Concentration                           0.426    0.101

County Area (log)                            7.376    0.977

Mississippi (log)                            13.423   1.121

Atlantic (log)                               14.011   1.198

Great Lakes (log)                            13.761   1.031

Pacific (log)                                14.952   0.817

Illiteracy (Fraction)                        0.071    0.078

Urban (Percent)                              19.011   24.833

Population Density                           61.126   902.564

Population (Log)                             9.761    1.0324

Black Population (Fraction)                  0.117    0.194

Young Population (Fraction)                  0.296    0.041

Value of Crops (Per Farm Population) (log)   6.65     0.682

Manufacturing Value Added (Per Capita)       92.901   148.94

Manufacturing Shares                         0.392    0.307

Mean Rainfall                                36.405   13.677




                                                                           35
Table 4: State Laws and Landed Interests
                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                       OLS                    OLS                    OLS                    OLS

                       Branching              Branching              Maximum Usury          Maximum Usury
                       Permitted =1,          Permitted =1,          Rate, 1890             Rate, 1890
                       1900-1930              1900-1930
Land Concentration     -2.2563**              -2.3111**              -0.0189**              -0.0244**
                       [1.0397]               [1.0208]               [0.0077]               [0.0117]
Population             ---                    0.0001                 ---                    -0.000005
                       ---                    [0.0001]               ---                    [0.000004]
Population Density     ---                    0.2784**               ---                    -0.0156
                       ---                    [0.1292]               ---                    [0.0124]
Urban Population       ---                    -0.4117                ---                    0.1200**
                       ---                    [0.8400]               ---                    [0.0451]
Black Population       ---                    -0.4633                ---                    0.0626
(Fraction)
                       ---                    [2.4836]               ---                    [0.0380]
Per Capita Wealth      ---                    0.0001**               ---                    0.00001**
(Real Property)
                        ---                      [0.0001]               ---                    [0.000006]
South                   ---                                             ---                    0.0177
                        ---                                             ---                    [0.0213]
Observations            189                      189                    42                     42
R-squared               0.67                     0.71                   0.07                   0.52
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Columns 1 and 2 include state and year fixed
effects, with standard errors clustered at the state level. Columns 3 and 4 report robust standard errors. Land
concentration is logged in columns 3 and 4.




                                                                                                              36
Figure 2, Banking Density, 1920.


                  .004   .003
      Banks Per Capita, 1920
     .001     .0020


                                New England




                                                                                                                        Mountain
                                              Mid Atlantic




                                                                                                                                   Pacific
                                                                                                               Border
                                                                                                       South
                                                             East North Central




                                                                                  West North Central




The shaded rectangle represents the interquartile range, which contains the median—the solid line. The ends of the vertical lines extend to a
maximum of 1.5 times the interquartile range. Dots beyond this range are possible outliers.




                                                                                                                                             37
    Table 5a: Banks Per Capita and Landed Interests
                               (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)
Estimation                      OLS                 OLS              County Fixed        IV               IV
                                                                     Effects
Dependent variable             Banks Per           Banks Per         Banks Per          Banks Per        Banks Per Capita,
                               Capita, 1920        Capita, 1930      Capita, 1920 &     Capita, 1920     1920
                                                                     1930

Explanatory variables
Land Concentration              -0.0011***          -0.0006***      -0.0014***           -0.0045***       -0.0053***
                                [0.0002]            [0.0001]        [0.0010]             [0.0010]         [0.0013]
County Area (log)              -0.1911             -2.0256***       ---                 -1.267           -4.097
                               [1.052]             [0.8749]         ---                 [1.796]          [2.736]
Mississippi (log)              3.736***            1.567***         ---                 -1.681           -0.6345
                               [0.9893]            [0.7208]         ---                 [2.24]           [2.133]
Atlantic (log)                 -0.964              -0.1404          ---                 -11.26***        -12.83**
                               [0.7583]            [0.4747]         ---                 [3.629]          [4.615]
Great Lakes (log)              4.666***            2.965***         ---                 8.268***         9.044**
                               [1.201]             [0.8857]         ---                 [2.165]          [3.14]
Pacific (log)                  1.48                1.647            ---                 -4.342           -5.696
                               [2.067]             [1.194]          ---                 [4.172]          [4.745]
Illiteracy (Fraction)          ---                 ---              ---                                  44.27
                               ---                 ---              ---                                  [56.57]
Urban (Percent)                ---                 ---              ---                                  -0.1913**
                               ---                 ---              ---                                  [0.0788]
Population (Log)               ---                 ---              ---                                  5.85*
                               ---                 ---              ---                                  [4.179]
Black Population               ---                 ---              ---                                  10.43
(Fraction)
                               ---                 ---               ---                                 [13.49]
Young Population               ---                 ---               ---                                 -37.35
(Fraction)
                               ---                   ---               ---                                [76.57]
Observations                   2908                  2935              6038              2908             2908
R-squared                        0.62                0.52              0.57
    Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets; All regressions include state dummy variables; All regressors
    except land concentration are scaled by 10e-05. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                   38
Table 5b: First Stage Estimates for Table 5a
                                                                (1)                      (2)
Estimation                                                    OLS 1                    OLS 2
Dependent variable                                            Land Concentration       Land Concentration

Explanatory variables

Rainfall                                                       0.0015***                0.0012***
                                                              [0.0004]                 [0.0003]
County Area (log)                                             -0.0004                  -0.0093**
                                                              [0.0041]                 [0.0047]
Mississippi (log)                                             -0.0120***               -0.0047
                                                              [0.0039]                 [0.0036]
Atlantic (log)                                                -0.0304***               -0.0284***
                                                              [0.0050]                 [0.0049]
Great Lakes (log)                                             0.0093***                0.0155***
                                                              [0.0046]                 [0.0041]
Pacific (log)                                                 -0.0070                  -0.0069
                                                              [0.0092]                 [0.0072]
Illiteracy (Fraction)                                                                  0.2584***
                                                                                       [0.0791]
Urban (Percent)                                                                        0.0004***
                                                                                       [0.0001]
Population (Log)                                                                       0.0207***
                                                                                       [0.0049]
Black Population (Fraction)                                                            -0.0079
                                                                                       [0.0253]
Young Population (Fraction)                                                            0.1017
                                                                                       [0.0923]

Observations                                                   2908                    2908
R-squared                                                      0.56                    0.62
Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets. All regressions include state dummy variables.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; ***
significant at 1%
1
  First stage for Table 5a column 4
2
  First stage for Table 5a column 5




                                                                                                            39
Table 6a: Robustness -- Second Stage Estimates
                             (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)               (6)
Dependent variable      Banks Per        Banks Per        Banks Per       Banks Per        Banks Per        Banks Per
                        Capita, 1930    Square KM,        Capita, 1920    Capita, 1920     Capita, 1920     Capita, 1920
                                        1920

                        (IV)            (IV)              (IV)            (IV)             (OLS)            (IV)
Explanatory variables

Land Concentration       -0.0023***      -0.0810**         -0.0044**      -0.0040***       ---              -0.0009***
                         [0.0008]        [0.0372]          [0.0023]       [0.0011]         ---              [0.0004]
Mean Rainfall           ---             ---               ---             ---              -0.2815***       ---
                        ---             ---               ---             ---              [0.0847]         ---
County Area (log)       -2.558**        -836.9***         -.9695          .393             5.345***         1.979
                        [1.319]         [151.3]           [3.022]         [2.571]          [1.407]          [1.196]
Mississippi (log)       0.6873          31.13             -.0914          .0217            2.287***         3.11***
                        [1.055]         [54.36]           [2.25]          [1.765]          [0.6454]         [0.8181]
Atlantic (log)          -3.573**        -190.6            -10.01          -9.008**         2.353***         0.3498
                        [2.028]         [116.7]           [6.73]          [3.899]          [0.5857]         [1.152]
Great Lakes (log)       3.339***        88.13             7.304           7.478            1.275            1.629
                        [1.514]         [171.5]           [3.969]         [2.473]          [0.8028]         [1.101]
Pacific (log)           -2.303          57.64             -5.335          -3.64            -1.634           0.7501
                        [2.747]         [100.5]           [4.417]         [3.897]          [2.041]          [2.429]
Illiteracy (Fraction)   32.42           2760*             26.05           .5415            -87.43***        -63.63**
                        [34.83]         [1227]            [57.77]         [44.10]          [17.43]          [16.85]
Urban (Percent)         -0.2421***      1.121             -0.2197***      -0.2023**        -0.3331***       -0.3632***
                        [0.0385]        [1.844]           [0.0869]        [0.0664]         [0.0502]         [0.0396]
Population (Log)        2.174           737.8***          2.959           .0156            -8.678***        -4.393***
                        [1.889]         [128.1]           [5.627]         [4.207]          [2.202]          [1.363]
Black Population        5.425           -363.0            12.15           11.63            12.80***         16.50***
(Fraction)
                        [6.283]         [242.6]           [9.841]         [10.29]          [4.432]          [5.295]
Young Population        -174.0***       -2315**           -69.80          15.97            -33.49           -194.8***
(Fraction)
                        [36.56]         [1570]            [72.96]         [62.13]          [38.88]          [28.32]
Log Value of Crops      ---             ---               3.872           ---              8.004***         ---
(Per Farm Employee)                                       [6.155]
                        ---             ---               ---             ---              [1.927]          ---
Log Value of Farm       ---             ---               ---                              0.0001***        ---
Land (Per Acre)                                                              0.0001***
                        ---               ---               ---              [0.0000249]    [1.514]          ---
Observations            2935              2908              2804                     2908             2804              2574
Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets; All regressions include state dummy variables; All regressors
except land concentration are scaled by 10e-05. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%. Columns 1-4 instrument land concentration using rainfall. Column 6 uses land concentration in 1890 as the
instrument.




                                                                                                             40
Table 6b. Robustness – First Stage Estimates.
                   (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)                 (5)
                   Land                Land                Land               Land                Land
                   Concentration,      Concentration,      Concentration,     Concentration,      Concentration,
                   1930                1920                1920               1920                1920
                   (OLS)               (OLS)               (OLS)              (OLS)               (OLS)

Mean Rainfall       0.0012***           0.0012***          0.0007***          0.0011***           ---

                   [0.0002]            [0.0002]            [0.0003]           [0.0003]            ---
Land               ---                 ---                 ---                ---                 0.2464***
Concentration,
1890
                    ---                 ---                 ---                ---                 [0.0232]
Observations        2935                2908                2804               2908                2574
R Squared           0.6                 0.62                0.64               0.21                0.68
Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
All regressions include state dummy variables. Columns 1-4 also include the same controls used in columns 1-
4 of Table 6a. Column 5 uses the same controls as column 6 of Table 6a.




                                                                                                                41
Table 7. Banking Structure and Land Concentration, Further Robustness
Checks
                                           (1)                       (2)                 (3)                   (4)
                                     Banks Per Capita,      Banks Per Capita,     Banks Per Capita,     Banks Per Capita,
                                     1930                   1930                  1920                  1920
                                         (IV)                   (IV)                  (IV)                  (IV)
Land Concentration                   -0.0022***             -0.0024***            -0.0059***            -0.0049***
                                     [0.0008]               [0.0010]              [0.0016]              [0.0011]
Cash Crops*Land Concentration        ---                    -0.0022               ---                   ---
                                     ---                    [0.0111]              ---                   ---
Cash Crops                           ---                    0.0008                ---                   ---
                                     ---                    [0.0047]              ---                   ---
Cash Crops, Squared                  ---                    -0.0004               ---                   ---
                                     ---                    [0.0003]              ---                   ---
Number of Farms, Per Capita          ---                    ---                   -0.0030***            ---
                                     ---                    ---                   [0.0009]              ---
Education Expenditures, Per          0.00005***             ---                   ---                   ---
Capita (Log)
                                      [0.0000017]           ---                   ---                   ---
Farms between 3-9 acres, as share     ---                   ---                   ---                   0.0748***
of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0218]
Farms between 10-19 acres, as         ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0085
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0065]
Farms between 20-49 acres, as         ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0196**
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0060]
Farms between 50-99 acres, as         ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0047
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0045]
Farms between 100-174 acres, as       ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0523**
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0125]
Farms between 175-259 acres, as       ---                   ---                   ---                   0.0627**
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0177]
Farms between 260-499 acres, as       ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0136
share of total farm acreage
                                      ---                   ---                   ---                   [0.0148]
Farms between 500-999 acres, as       ---                   ---                   ---                   -0.0432**
share of total farm acreage
                                       ---                                          ---                  [0.0257]
Observations                           2935                   2935                  2908                 2908
First Stage: Mean Rainfall             0.0011***              0.0011***             0.0011***            0.0017***
[Land Concentration is Dependent [0.0002]                     [0.0002]              [0.0001]             [0.0001]
Variable]
Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets; * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
All regressions include state dummy variables, county area, population, distance from major waterways,
illiteracy rate, black population, urbanization, young population. The “First Stage” reports the “Mean Rainfall”
coefficient and standard error from the first stage regression: land concentration is the dependent variable, and
all controls that appear in the second stage are included in the first stage.




                                                                                                               42
                         Table 8: National Banks, State Banks, and Land Concentration
                                  (1)                                       (2)                                  (3)
Dependent Variable           National Banks Per Capita, 1920            State Banks Per Capita, 1920          Share of National Banks, 1920


Explanatory Variable
Land Concentration            -0.0018***                                -0.0036***                            -1.436**
                              [0.0005]                                  [0.0009]                              [0.6736]
Observations                  2908                                      2908                                  2869
Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% .All specifications include a county’s distance
from the Atlantic, and Pacific Oceans; the Great Lakes; the Mississippi River; county area; population; illiteracy; urban population share; young population;
black population; as well as state dummies.




                                                                                                                                                                     43
Table 9: Banks per capita and factors that change incentives and the economic power of the landed
                          (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)                (7)
                          All            Share          Cash           Crop Lien     Crop Lien    Manufacturing      Manufacturing
                          Tenants        Croppers       Tenants        Laws          Laws         Share              Value Added
                          Banks Per      Banks Per      Banks Per      Banks Per     Banks Per    Banks Per          Banks Per
                          Capita,        Capita,        Capita,        Capita,       Capita,      Capita, 1920       Capita, 1920
                          1920           1920           1920           1920          1930
                          (IV)           (IV)           (IV)
Land Concentration        -0.0040***     -0.0033***     -0.0052***     -0.0054       -0.0016**    -0.0060***         -0.0056***
                          [0.0017]       [0.0011]       [0.0012]       [0.0057]      [0.0008]     [0.0018]           [0.0014]
Land Concentration        -0.0088***     -0.0088***     0.0051***      ---           ---          ---                ---
*Tenants Share
                          [0.0038]       [0.0028]       [0.0023]       ---           ---          ---                ---
Tenants Share             0.0047***      0.0042***      -0.0011        ---           ---          ---                ---
                          [0.0017]       [0.0014]       [0.0010]       ---           ---          ---                ---
Tenants Share, Squared    -0.0017***     -0.0014**      -0.0019***     ---           ---          ---                ---
                          [0.0006]       [0.0008]       [0.0007]       ---           ---          ---                ---
Land Concentration        ---            ---            ---            -0.0055       0.0022**     ---                ---
*Texas
                          ---            ---            ---            [0.0086]      [0.0012]     ---                ---
Land Concentration        ---            ---            ---            ---           ---          0.0041***          0.0008
*Manufacturing
                          ---            ---            ---            ---           ---          [0.0014]           [0.0005]
Manufacturing             ---            ---            ---            ---           ---          -0.0016***         -0.00031
                          ---            ---            ---            ---           ---          [0.0006]           [0.0002]
Manufacturing ,           ---            ---            ---            ---           ---          -0.0003***         -0.0002
Squared
                                                                                                   [0.0001]           [0.0003]
Observations                2908          2908           2908           1289          1308         2745               2745
All specifications include a county’s distance from the Atlantic, and Pacific Oceans; the Great Lakes; the Mississippi River; county area; population; illiteracy;
urban population share; young population; black population; as well as state dummies. Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets:* significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Columns 4 and 5 use only counties in Southern and Border states. Manufacturing share (column 6) is the fraction of
manufacturing value added relative to value added in manufacturing and agriculture. Column 7 uses the per capita value added in the manufacturing sector. This
variable is scaled by 10-3.




                                                                                                                                                               44
Table 10. State Banks, National Banks and Distance from State Capitals.
                                (1)                  (2)                   (3)
                                All Banks Per        State Banks           National Banks
                                Capita, 1920         Per Capita,           Per Capita,
                                                     1920                  1920
                                (IV)                 (IV)                  (IV)
Land Concentration              -0.0095**            -0.0066***            -0.0026***
                                (0.0039)             (0.0028)              (0.0013)
Land                            0.0177*              0.0135**              0.0003
Concentration*Distance
from State Capital
                                (0.0101)             (0.0071)              (0.0003)
Observations                    2908                 2908                  2908
R-Squared                       0.47                 0.53                  0.15
Spatially corrected standard errors in parenthesis. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent
respectively. All regressions include distance from major waterways, area, population, urbanization, black
population, age structure (5-17 year olds), state dummies. Distance from the state capital enters as a second
order polynomial.




                                                                                                                45
Table 11: Manufacturing growth and landed interests
                               (1)                       (2)                     (3)

Dependent variable             Per Capita Manufacturing Growth, 1920-1930

Estimation                     OLS                       IV2                    IV2

Explanatory variables

Land concentration             -0.7129***
                               [0.2706]
Banks Per Capita, 1920                                   1,320.240**            3284.729***
                                                         [574.478]              [1155.878]


Observations                     2397                       2379                    1190
R-squared                        0.18
All specifications include state dummies, initial log per capita manufacturing, initial log horsepower per
manufacturing firm, and all previous demographic and geographic variables. In columns 2 and 3, “banks per
capita” is instrumented by “land concentration”, observed in 1920. Column 3 includes only all counties with
above median manufacturing share in 1920. Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets* significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                            46
Table 12: Manufacturing Growth and Instrumented Banks per Capita
Over Time.
                              (1)                     (2)                (3)
Dependent variable            Per Capita Man          Per Capita         Per Capita Man
                              Value Added             Man Value          Value Added
                              Growth, 1930‐47         Added Growth       Growth 1967‐
                                                      1947‐1967          1982
Explanatory variable

Banks Per Capita, 1930          2154.785**             2166.366**         657.918
                                (976.953)              (940.211)          (843.519)
Observations                    1859                   1955               2151
All specifications include state dummies, initial log per capita manufacturing, and all previous demographic and
geographic variables. Spatially corrected standard errors in brackets: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%. In all columns, “banks per capita” is instrumented by “land concentration”, observed in
1930.
.




                                                                                                               47
                                          REFERENCES


Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson (2005). “The Rise of Europe:
Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Growth.” American Economic Review, vol 95,
pp546-579.

Ackerman, Joseph and Marshall Harris, editors. 1946. Family Farm Policy. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1997) “A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and Development”
Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151-72.

Atkinson, A.B. (1970) "On the measurement of inequality", Journal of Economic Theory, 2,
244-63.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Andrew F. Newman (1991) “Risk-Bearing and the Theory of
Income Distribution” Review of Economic Studies, 58 (2), 211-35.

Banerjee, Abhijit, and Lakshmi Iyer. "History, Institutions and Economic Performance: the
Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India." American Economic Review 95, no. 4
(September 2005): 1190-1213.

Bank of North Dakota, Bismarck. 1920.

Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122(2), 2007, pp775-805.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt and Sole Martinez Peria. 2007. “Reaching Out:
Access to and Use of Banking Services Across Countries”, Journal of Financial Economics,
85, 234-66.

Benmelech, Efraim and Toby Moskowitz (2007) “The Political Economy of Financial
Regulation: Evidence from U.S State Usury Laws in the 19th Century” NBER Working Paper
W12851.

Brewer, John, 1989, The Sinews of Power: War, Money and the English State, 1688-1783 ,
Routledge, New York, NY.

Bodenhorn, Howard. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History . Oxford and
NY: Oxford University Press, 2002

Bean, L.H. 1931. “Effects of Production and the 1930 Business Depression on Farm Income”,
Journal of Farm Economics, Vol. 13, No. 4, (Oct., 1931), pp. 535-546.




                                                                                            48
Beck, Thorsten and Levine, Ross, 2005, “Legal Institutions and Financial Development.”
(with T. Beck) in Handbook for New Institutional Economics, Eds: Claude Menard and Mary
M. Shirley, Norwell MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Bordo, Michael and Peter Rousseau (2006), “Legal-Political Factors and the Historical
Evolution of the Finance-Growth Link” NBER Working Paper W12035

Bourguignon, Francis and Thierry Verdier (2000), “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality and
Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62(2), 231-285.

Brogan, Hugh. (1999). The Penguin History of the United States. Penguin Books: New York,
New York.

Calomiris, Charles (1992) “Do Vulnerable Economies Need Deposit Insurance? Lessons
from U.S. Agriculture in the 1920s” In If Texas Were Chile: A Primer on Bank Regulation,
ed. Philip L. Brock, San Francisco: The Sequoia Institute.

Calomiris, Charles (2000) U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective New York:
Cambridge University Press.

_________and Carlos Ramirez (2004). The Political Economy of Bank Entry Restrictions:
Theory and Evidence from the US in the 1920s. Working Paper, Columbia University.
Conley, T.J. (1999). “GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence,” Journal of
Econometrics 92, 1-45.

Claessens, Stijn and Perotti, Enrico C. 2007. "Finance and Inequality: Channels and
Evidence". Mimeo.

Claessens, Stijn, Erik Feijen, and Luc Laeven (2007) , Does Campaign Finance Imply
Political Favors, working paper, Tinbergen Institute.

Carlson, Mark and Kris James Mitchener. 2006. Branch Banking, Bank Competition and
       Financial Stability. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, vol 38, no 5.

Chapman, John. 1934. Concentration of Banking: The Changing Structure and Control of
Banking in the United States. New York: Columbia University Press.

Cartinhour, Gaines Thomson and Ray Bert Westerfield. 1980. Branch, Group, and Chain
Banking. Ayer Publishing.

Dehejia, Rajeev and Adriana Lleras-Muney (2007). "Institutions, Financial Development,
and Pathways of Growth: The United States from 1900 to 1940". Journal of Law and
Economics, Volume 50, Number 2 (May 2007), pp. 239-272.

Dick, Everett (1970) The Lure of the Land: A Social History of the Public Lands from the
Articles of Confederation to the New Deal Lincoln: NE: University of Nebraska Press.



                                                                                           49
Eccles, George. (1982). The Politics of Banking. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.

Economides, Nicholas, R. Glenn Hubbard and Darius Palia. (1996) “The Political Economy
of Branching Restrictions and Deposit Insurance: A Model of Monopolistic Competition
among Small and Large Banks” Journal of Law and Economics 39 (2), 667-704.

Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth Lee Sokoloff “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths
of Development among New World Economies” Economía 3 (1), 41-109

Engerman, S., E. Mariscal, and K. Sokoloff, 2002, “The Evolution of Schooling Institutions in the
Americas, 1800-1925”, UCLA Working Paper.

Evanoff, Douglas. 1988. “Branch Banking and Service Accessibility”, Journal of Money
Credit and Banking, Vol 20, No. 2. (May, 1988), pp. 191-202.

Gardner, Bruce. 2002. American Agriculture in the Twentieth Century: How it Flourished
and What it Costs. Harvard University Press.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Boyan Jovanovic (1994), “Financial Development, growth, and the
Distribution of Income”, Journal of Political Economy, 98(5), 1076-1107.

Haber, Stephen (2005) “Mexico’s Experiments with Bank Privatization and Liberalization,
1991-2003.” Journal of Banking and Finance 29: 8-9, 2325-2353.

___________(2005) “Political Institutions and Financial Development: Evidence from the
Economic Histories of the Mexico and the United States, unpublished manuscript.

Haber, Stephen and Enrico Perotti (2007), “The Political Economy of Finance”, mimeo.

Heady, Early O. (1952). Economics of Agricultural Production and Resource Use. New
York: Prentice Hall.

Keeley, Michael. 1990. “Deposit Insurance, Risk and Market Power in Banking”. American
Economic Review, vol. 80, no. 5, pp1183-1200.

Keehn, Richard and Gene Smiley (1977) “Mortgage Lending by National Banks” Business
History Review 51, in: BusHistRev 51, 474-91.

Klebaner, Benjamin J. (1990) American Commercial Banking: A History Boston: Twayne
Publishers.

Kroszner, Randall and Philip Strahan (1999) “What Drives Deregulation? Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 1437-1467.




                                                                                                    50
Lamoreaux, Naomi Rand Jean-Laurent Rosenthal (2005) “Legal Regime and Contractual
Flexibility: A Comparison of Business’s Organizational Choices in France and the United
States during the Era of Industrialization” American Law and Economics Review 7, 28-61.

Landivar, J.A. and J.H. Benedict (1996) “Monitoring System for the Management of Cotton
Growth and Fruiting”

LaPorta, Rafael, Florenico López-de-Silanes, Andrei. Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998.
"Law and Finance," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 6, December 1998.

Levine, Ross (2005) “Law, Endowments and Property Rights” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 19 (3), 61-88.

Lipset, Seymour. 1951. Agrarian Socialism: The Cooperative Commonwealth Federation in
        Saskatchewan, a Study in Political Sociology. University of California Press.

Malin, J.C. (1944) Winter Wheat in the Golden Belt of Kansas: A Study in the Adaptation to
Sub humid Geographical Environment Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.

Mitchener, Kris James. 2005. “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability During the
Great Depression,” Journal of Economic History, vol. 65, pp 152-185.

Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung (2006), “Corporate Governance,
Economic Entrenchment and Growth”, Journal of Economic Literature, 43: 657-722.

Myers (1940) Soil Moisture and Winter Wheat in Kansas H. E. Myers Transactions of the
Kansas Academy of Science (1903-), Vol. 43, Mar. 28-30, 1940 (Mar. 28-30, 1940), pp. 69-
73.

North, Douglas and Barry Weingast. 1989. “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution
of Institutional Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England” The Journal of
Economic History, Vol. 49, No. 4 (Dec., 1989), pp. 803-832

Peltzman, Sam (1976) "Toward a More General Theory of Regulation” Journal of Law and
Economics 19, 211-40.

Peach, W. Nelson, The Security Affiliates of National Banks, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press, 1941.

Perotti, Enrico and Ernest Ludwig Von-Thadden, “The Political Economy of Corporate
Control and Labor Rents”, Journal of Political Economy, 114(1), 145-174.

Perotti, Enrico and Paolo Volpin (2007). “Politics, Investor Protection and Competition”
ECGI Finance Working Paper No. 162/2007.




                                                                                           51
Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan (1995), "The Effect of Credit Market Competition
on Lending Relationships", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 110, pp 407-443.

Petersen, Mitchell and Raghuram Rajan (2002), "Does Distance Still Matter? The
Information Revolution in Small Business Lending", Journal of Finance, 57 (6): 2533-2570.

Pred, A. (1966) The spatial implication of U.S. industrial growth. Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Rajan, Raghuram (2007), “Competitive Rent Preservation, Reform Paralysis, and the
Persistence of Underdevelopment”, working paper, University of Chicago.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (2003) “The great reversals: the politics of financial
development in the twentieth century” Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5–50.

Ramcharan, Rodney. 2007. “Inequality and Redistribution: Evidence from US counties and
states, 1890-1930” mimeo, International Monetary Fund.
__________.2008. “Why and Economic Core: Domestic Transport Costs”, Forthcoming,
Journal of Economic Geography

Ramirez, Carlos. 2003. "Did branch banking restrictions increase bank failures? Evidence
from Virginia and West Virginia in the late 1920s," Journal of Economics and Business,
Elsevier, vol. 55(4), pages 331-352.

Rappaport, J. and J.D. Sachs. (2003). “The United States as a Coastal Nation,” Journal of
Economic Growth 8, 5-46.

Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch.1972. “Debt Peonage in the Cotton South After the Civil
War.” Journal of Economic History, vol 32, no. 3, pp.641-669.

_____________2001. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic Consequences of Emancipation.
Cambridge University Press.

K. M. Seitz. 1948. Wheat in the Southeastern States. Economic Geography, Vol. 24, No. 3
pp. 170-173

Sanders, Elizabeth. 1999. Roots of Reform: Farmers, Workers, and the American State,
1877-1917. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Stock, James. 1994. “Real Estate Mortages, Foreclosures, and Midwestern Agrarian Unrest,
1865-1920,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 44, No.1, pp. 89-105.

Syalla, Richard. 1969. “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure and Capital Mobilization
in the United States, 1863-1913.” Journal of Economic History 29, pp675-86.
Sylla, Richard, John B. Legler and John J. Wallis. 1987. “Banks and State Public Finance in
the New Republic: the United States 1790-1860.” Journal of Economic History 47, pp 391-
404.



                                                                                            52
Sylla, Richard 2005, “The Political Economy of Early US Financial Development”, mimeo.

Tomich, T.P. , Kilby, P. and Johnston, B.F. (1995). Transforming Agrarian Economies.
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

Trescott, Paul B. Financing American Enterprise: The Story of Commercial Banking. New
York: Harper & Row, 1963.

Weiner, Jonathan. “Planter Merchant Conflict in Reconstruction Alabama” Past and Present,
No 68, pp 73-94.

White, Eugene. 1982. “The Political Economy of Banking Regulation, 1864-1933.” Journal
of Economic History, 42 (March).

__________. 1983. “The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-
1929. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Van Woodward, Comer. 1951. Origins of the New South, 1877-1913. Louisiana State
University Press, 1951.

Vickers, Raymond. 1994. Panic in Paradise: Florida's Banking Crash of 1926 . University of
Alabama.

Vollrath, Dietrich. (2006). Geography and the Determinants of Land Distribution: Evidence
from the U.S., mimeo.




                                                                                        53
