                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKET INTERMEDIATION:
                          AN ANALYTIC FRAMEWORK

                                            David H. Autor

                                         Working Paper 14348
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14348


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




The twelve papers in this volume were prepared for and presented at the NBER Conference on Labor
Market Intermediation in May of 2007, and are forthcoming as Studies of Labor Market Intermediation
from the University of Chicago Press. The Labor Market Intermediation conference and resulting volume
were generously supported by the National Bureau of Economic Research and the National Science
Foundation (CAREER award SES-0239538). I am particularly grateful to James Poterba, Marty Feldstein
and Richard Freeman for their intellectual guidance and moral support in the development of this endeavor.
In addition, David J. Pervin of the University of Chicago Press, Helena Fitz-Patrick of NBER, and
two anonymous referees provided invaluable input on the manuscript. I finally thank Carl Beck of
NBER for his superb coordination of all aspects of the conference. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David H. Autor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Economics of Labor Market Intermediation: An Analytic Framework
David H. Autor
NBER Working Paper No. 14348
September 2008
JEL No. J4,J5,J6

                                              ABSTRACT

Labor Market Intermediaries (LMIs) are entities or institutions that interpose themselves between
workers and firms to facilitate, inform, or regulate how workers are matched to firms, how work is
accomplished, and how conflicts are resolved. This paper offers a conceptual foundation for analyzing
the market role played by these understudied institutions, and to develop a qualitative and, in some
cases, quantitative sense of their significance to market operation and welfare. Though heterogeneous,
I argue that LMIs share a common function, which is to redress -- and in some cases exploit -- a set
of endemic departures of labor market operation from the efficient neoclassical benchmark. At a rudimentary
level, LMIs such as online job boards reduce search frictions by aggregating and reselling disparate
information at a cost below which workers and firms could obtain themselves. Beyond passively supplying
information, a set of LMIs forcibly redress adverse selection problems in labor markets by compelling
workers and firms to reveal normally hidden credentials, such as criminal background, academic standing,
or financial integrity. At their most forceful, LMIs such as labor unions and centralized job matching
clearinghouses, resolve coordination and collective action failures in markets by tightly controlling
-- even monopolizing -- the process by which workers and firms meet, match and negotiate. A unifying
observation of the analytic framework is that participation in the activities of a given LMI are typically
voluntary for one side of the market and compulsory for the other; workers cannot, for example, elect
to suppress their criminal records and firms cannot opt out of collective bargaining. I argue that the
nature of participation in an LMI's activities -- voluntary or compulsory, and for which parties -- is
dictated by the market imperfection that it addresses and thus tells us much about its economic function.


David H. Autor
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
    Labor Market Intermediaries (LMIs) are entities or institutions that interpose
themselves between workers and firms to facilitate, inform, or regulate how workers are
matched to firms, how work is accomplished, and how conflicts are resolved. In the
textbook competitive model of the labor market, LMIs do not exist—nor is there any
need for them. If information is complete and markets are competitive, theory suggests
that decentralized, atomistic labor markets are hard to improve upon.
    Economists have long recognized that labor markets deviate substantially from this
neoclassical benchmark. Sumner Slichter (1950) observed more than fifty years ago that
the ‘law of one price’ did not appear to hold in labor markets; seemingly identical
workers earned markedly different wages depending upon what industry they labored in.1
H. Greg Lewis demonstrated in the 1970s that membership in a labor union conferred
substantial wage benefits, underscoring that atomistic wage-setting is far from universal.
Akerlof (1970) showed that a small amount of private information in markets may be
sufficient to thwart trade entirely. Shortly thereafter, Spence (1973) identified a set of
conditions under which employers might reward workers for acquiring costly credentials
that have no productive value. During the 1980s, Diamond, Mortensen and Pissarides
formalized the observation that decentralized labor market search typically leads to a
market equilibrium with both unfilled jobs and unemployed workers.2 This body of
theory and evidence suggests that labor market information is not usually complete or
symmetric, workers are not typically commodities, firms are not always price takers, and
in general, there may be scope for third parties—Labor Market Intermediaries, in
particular—to intercede both to improve the operation of the labor market and to profit
from its imperfections.
    The goal of this volume is to offer a conceptual foundation for analyzing the roles
that these understudied economic actors play in the labor market, and to develop a
qualitative and, in some cases, quantitative sense of their significance to market operation
and worker welfare. The twelve papers in this volume, prepared for and presented at the
NBER Conference on Labor Market Intermediation in May of 2007, offer novel


1
  This finding was corroborated by, among others, Krueger and Summers (1988) and Katz and Summers
(1989).
2
  Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982), Pissarides (1986).
                                                                                                    1
empirical analyses of a diverse array of LMIs, including online job search engines,
criminal records providers, public employment offices, state regulatory bodies, labor
unions, centralized job matching markets, and temporary help agencies. Although
heterogeneous, a central theme of this volume is that these intermediaries serve a
common role, which is to address a set of endemic departures of labor market operation
from the neoclassical benchmark. The intellectual challenge taken up by the volume is to
identify and systematically classify these departures, and to consider how market and
non-market actors—workers, firms, public officials, non-governmental organizations—
adapt to them to improve or to exploit the decentralized outcomes that result.
   The parsimonious and (I hope) encompassing taxonomy offered by this introductory
chapter highlights three major deviations of labor market operation from the neoclassical
benchmark and considers how LMIs potentially address—and in some cases exploit –
them. These deviations are costly information, adverse selection, and (failures of)
collective action. This chapter develops this three-part taxonomy and uses it to illustrate
the underlying economic forces that connect the twelve papers in the volume. A unifying
observation that emerges is that participation in the activities or services of a given LMI
are typically voluntary for one side of the market—workers or employers—and
compulsory for the other. I argue that this pattern of voluntary and compulsory
participation is largely dictated by the nature of the market imperfections that LMIs
address, and thus can tell us much about the roles that intermediaries play in the market.
Figure 1, which categorizes LMIs by market function and the nature of worker and firm
participation (voluntary/compulsory) in their activities, provides a roadmap to the main
arguments of the chapter.

I. Costly information

   In the benchmark neoclassical model of the labor market, it is costless for workers
and firms to search for each other. In reality, search is costly. Workers pay directly for
search, through the monetary and psychic costs of applying and interviewing for jobs,
and indirectly, through foregone work or leisure. Employers likewise incur search costs
directly, through help-wanted advertising, job fairs, and applicant screening and
interviewing, and indirectly through foregone output while vacancies await workers.
                                                                                              2
Since information about job vacancies and job-seekers is in large part a public good—in
particular, each firm would like to be aware of all job-seekers, and each job-seeker would
like to be aware of all vacancies—this information is likely to be under-supplied by the
market.
    The first chapters of this volume portray a set of LMIs that serve as ‘information-
only’ intermediaries—entities whose near-exclusive function is to aggregate, package and
sell information about job-seekers and job vacancies. The leading example of an
information-only intermediary is the online job board, which serves as a clearinghouse
for workers seeking jobs and jobs seeking workers. The chapter by Nakamura, Shaw,
Freeman, Nakamura and Pyman provides an analytic perspective on how the business of
online job search functions—how firms use it, how workers use it, and how online search
firms profit from the process.
    While at their most basic level, job boards merely post lists of job-seekers and job
vacancies, Nakamura et al. outline how the business of online job boards has evolved
greatly from this rudimentary help-wanted function. Large job boards, like Monster.com,
CareerBuilder.com, and Hotjobs.yahoo.com, increasingly provide an outsourced
personnel recruitment function for large employers, hosting the employment sections of
their corporate web sites, contacting potential candidates en masse, accepting and pre-
screening resumes, tracking applications, and providing access to an exclusive set of
candidates—for example, students of elite universities given privileged access to these
sites as they near the completion of their studies.3 A key point made by Nakamura et al. is
that, by making it easier for employers to identify potential candidates among those
currently employed (‘passive seekers’) and simultaneously lowering workers’ costs of
engaging in on-the-job search, job boards may particularly advantage employed relative
to non-employed job-seekers.4
    The chapter by Stevenson complements this analytic overview by providing an initial
empirical analysis of how the Internet may be changing job search behavior in the United
States. Stevenson documents that the variety of job search methods used by unemployed

3
  A related paper by Kroft and Pope (2007) provides evidence on the degree to which online job engines,
Craigslist in particular, have displaced the traditional newspaper help-wanted business.
4
  A 2004 paper by Kugler and Saint Paul considers how the imposition of firing costs in the presence of
worker adverse selection differentially disadvantages non-employed relative to employed job-seekers.
                                                                                                          3
U.S. workers has increased significantly over the last decade, coincident with the rapid
rise in Internet penetration. Moreover, in U.S. states where Internet penetration has risen
the most, the unemployed appear increasingly likely to use job advertisements for
seeking and contacting employers directly—suggesting that online and offline search
may be complements. Consonant with the observations by Nakamura et al., Stevenson
shows that the vast majority of workers using the Internet to gather information about
employment are those who are already employed. Logically, workers who use the
Internet for job search are more likely to leave their current employer. It is plausible—
though far from certain—that online job search may increase the rate at which workers
change jobs.5

II. Mitigating adverse selection

    While pure ‘information-only’ intermediaries address an important public goods
problem, this category of LMI is relatively narrow and, I would argue, less consequential
than the bulk of the LMIs discussed below. The reason is that where information is
costly, the central economic problem is typically not exclusively costly information but
also asymmetric information. Specifically, if information about the quality of workers or
jobs is incomplete, better-informed market actors have an incentive to exploit their
informational advantage to the detriment of less-informed market actors. As first outlined
by Akerlof (1970), these information asymmetries readily generate a market equilibrium
where lower quality market actors (workers or firms) exert negative externalities on their
higher quality counterparts, depressing both the quantity and quality of trade.
    While job boards might appear to offer a powerful mechanism to bolster aggregate
labor market efficiency, qualitative and quantitative evidence suggests that job boards do
not reach this potential. An analysis of U.S. job search data by Kuhn and Skuterud (2004)
finds that workers who use the Internet to search for jobs fare no better—and perhaps
worse—than observably similar workers who do not search for jobs using the Internet.
Their analysis suggests that either Internet job search is ineffective at reducing

5
  If the Internet provides incumbent workers with better information about their outside opportunities, these
workers do not need to change jobs to benefit. Web sites like greedyassociates.com, for example, which
publicize the salary offers made to newly minted attorneys, may serve to homogenize the distribution of
law firm associate wages.
                                                                                                            4
unemployment durations or Internet job searchers are negatively selected on
unobservables. One recruiting executive, quoted in Autor (2001b), lends informal support
to the latter hypothesis, asserting that job boards are populated by four adversely selected
pools: “The unhappy (and thus probably not a desirable employee); the curious (and
therefore likely to be a ‘job-hopper’); the unpromotable (probably for a reason); and the
unemployed (probably for a worse reason).”
   The core problem facing job boards—reflected in the above quotation—is that
workers posting their resumes and credentials online face a strong incentive to conceal or
slant information to make themselves more attractive to potential employers.
Recognizing this, employers are likely to treat information posted to job boards with
skepticism. If in equilibrium, employers view the information on job boards as
untrustworthy, these boards can do little more than provide employers with names and
numbers, leaving them to discover essential information about worker skills and
qualifications through other mechanisms such as interviews, background checks, and job
references.
   A natural solution to this asymmetric information problem is compulsory disclosure;
if job-seekers can be compelled to reveal information that they would not necessarily
disclose voluntarily, this could substantially improve the efficiency of job search and
matching—though clearly not all workers would benefit. Though compulsory disclosure
sounds difficult to achieve in real world labor markets, Chapters 3 and 4 study two Labor
Market Intermediaries that perform exactly this function: reducing worker-side adverse
selection by, implicitly or explicitly, compelling job applicants to reveal information that
they might otherwise conceal.
   A key piece of information that employers may seek to ascertain is criminal history.
As Chapter 3 by Keith Finlay reveals, almost 20 percent of black males and more than 10
percent of white males in recent U.S. youth cohorts have been incarcerated by age 24.
Historically, criminal background checks have been comparatively expensive to perform,
and not particularly reliable. Between 1998 and the present, however more than a dozen
US states placed their criminal history records databases online for use by employers and
other interested parties. Implicitly, job-seekers applying for jobs in ‘open records’ states
are now compelled to submit to a criminal background check at the employer’s
                                                                                               5
discretion. The opening of criminal records therefore functions as a publicly operated
LMI that may in theory reduce worker-side adverse selection.
   How does this opening affect labor market operation in practice? Working from a
simple statistical discrimination framework, Finlay hypothesizes that if employers do not
initially observe applicants’ criminal histories and instead attempt to infer them based on
other observable characteristics (such as education, age, gender and race), the opening of
criminal records should diminish the labor market prospects of ex-offenders while
potentially benefiting non-offenders who might otherwise be viewed as potential
criminals. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of Youth 1997 Cohort,
Finlay finds support for the first proposition. Young adults with criminal histories face
reduced employment odds and lower wages after states make criminal histories available
online. There is less evidence, however, that young adults without criminal records who
appear demographically similar to potential criminals fare better once criminal records
are opened. This result may indicate that employers underestimate the prevalence of
criminality in the absence of open criminal records—and hence, opening of criminal
records impedes applicants who are revealed to be offenders without benefiting those
who are revealed to be non-offenders. As Finlay cautions, however, the relatively small
NLSY 97 sample provide insufficient power to detect the diffuse benefits hypothesized to
accrue to the non-offender population. What appears unambiguous is that opening of
criminal records does diminish the labor market prospects of ex-offenders.
   Although both online job postings and online criminal records potentially serve to
reduce search costs in labor markets, the crucial distinction between these LMIs from the
perspective of this chapter lies in the nature of information disclosure. Users of job
boards may reveal, disclose or simply fabricate information at will. Job applicants in
‘open records’ states have no say in whether their criminal backgrounds are made
publicly available. It appears plausible that this distinction explains why open records
have real bite: they credibly supply information about worker credentials that applicants
might otherwise conceal
   The chapter by Bagues and Labini studies an unusual job search engine, AlmaLaurea,
which also has this compulsory revelation feature. Founded in 1994 by an inter-university
consortium of Italian universities, AlmaLaurea was set up to increase the frequency of
                                                                                              6
successful school-to-work transitions among Italian university graduates, which have
been astonishingly low in recent decades. What distinguishes AlmaLaurea from most
electronic job boards it that it provides detailed administrative records on participants’
courses of study, grades obtained and rank in class. Moreover, it provides this
information for almost the entire set of students currently graduating from the universities
in the consortium. In effect, AlmaLaurea offers the university equivalent of ‘open
records’ for job applicants: a college transcript, a class ranking, and, implicitly, a
comparison of each applicant to his immediate peers.
   A thoroughgoing empirical analysis by Bagues and Labini offers compelling evidence
that AlmaLaurea reduced the non-employment rate of graduates of AlmaLaurea member
universities. Specifically, comparing changes in the non-employment rate of graduates of
universities joining AlmaLaurea over 1998 to 2001 relative to graduates of universities
that had not yet joined during this period suggests that AlmaLaurea reduced the non-
employment rate of AlmaLaurea graduates by several percentage points—which is
considerable. Because Italian labor market conditions were rapidly improving during the
time period studied, there is room for concern that the difference-in-difference approach
employed might be unreliable. Bagues and Labini do much to allay this concern,
including conducting placebo tests of the AlmaLaurea ‘treatment’ in the pre-treatment
period, and exploiting a second wave of AlmaLaurea roll-outs to confirm the main
finding.
   The AlmaLaurea study leaves open two questions that subsequent research will want
to address. First, did the reduction in unemployment of AlmaLaurea graduates come in
part at the expense of other potential workers? Intuition might suggest yes, but initial
analysis by Bagues and Labini suggests otherwise. Alternatively, if AlmaLaurea
primarily expanded the total employment roster, what does this imply about the
magnitude of search costs or adverse selection in the Italian labor market absent
AlmaLaurea? A second question ripe for study is whether AlmaLaurea resulted in a
redistribution of opportunities among job candidates within member institutions. Since
AlmaLaurea was built to facilitate direct comparisons among candidates from member
universities, it is plausible that it produced both winners and losers—improving

                                                                                             7
opportunities for the most distinguished students and reducing them for the least
distinguished.6
      Adverse selection is not of course limited to the worker side of the labor market.
Firms may equally face incentives to exploit asymmetric information to the detriment of
workers and customers. The chapter by Woong Lee confronts the problem of adverse
selection of firms, in particular, firms that are themselves LMIs. Lee’s chapter provides
an original empirical analysis of the rise of US Public Employment Offices (PEOs) at the
turn of the 20th century. At that time, the services of private, for-profit employment
agencies were widely sought by job-seekers, particularly by unskilled workers and
migrants. The lack of sophistication of these job-seekers, however, left them vulnerable
to exploitation. Some of the abuses perpetrated by for-profit employment agencies
included sending job-seekers to distant locations where no work existed, colluding with
employers to provide applicants with only temporary work stints followed by summary
discharge, and (occasionally) sending unwitting female job-seekers to brothels. Thus, for-
profit employment agencies appear to have heavily exploited precisely the information
asymmetries they were hired to resolve.
      For U.S. state governments facing this predicament, several remedies were
conceivable, including regulating and licensing for-profit employment agencies or
banning them outright. The approach pursued by the states, however, was ingenious.
Rather than attempting to directly curtail the behavior of abusers, states chose to
effectively compete them out of business by offering high quality employment assistance
services at Public Employment Offices at no cost to job-seekers. This response seems to
reflect a pinpoint diagnosis of the market failure and its remedy. By introducing
competition between for-profit LMIs and reputable public sector LMIs, states likely
drove many of the lowest-quality PEOs out of business. What was left behind,
presumably, were PEOs thatoffered sufficient value-added to justify a positive price
despite the presence of a reputable, zero-cost competitor.
      The chapter by Dick Todd and Morris Kleiner considers another example of a public
response to a perceived failure of intermediation, in this case by mortgage brokers.


6
    This outcome would also be consonant with the reasoning of the Finlay study.
                                                                                            8
Mortgage brokers are for-profit agents (individuals of firms) that match potential
mortgage borrowers with lenders and assist borrowers in completing the loan origination
process. These brokers were insignificant in the mortgage market in 1980, but by 2004
were involved in approximately 68 percent of all mortgages originated. Coinciding with
their rapid growth was a rise in public concern that market failures prevented competition
from effectively disciplining brokers’ quality of service.7 As mortgage brokering grew,
numerous states passed laws requiring brokers to post surety bonds or maintain a
minimum net worth in order to operate. These requirements potentially work to ensure
that borrowers have financial recourse if brokers are malfeasant. In addition, because
sellers of surety bonds would be expected to charge risky brokers a higher price, bonding
requirements create an entry barrier that is potentially more onerous for low than high
quality mortgage brokers.
    Consistent with this reasoning, Kleiner and Todd show that bonding requirements
reduced mortgage broker employment, curtailed subprime loan originations and increased
the observed qualification levels (measured by education and experience) of brokers
operating in the mortgage broker occupation. Interestingly, however, Kleiner and Todd
also find that bonding requirements increased mortgage foreclosure rates and raised the
probability that newly originated loans were high-priced relative to other loans with
similar characteristics. While Kleiner and Todd advise appropriate caution in interpreting
these adverse impacts, they note that they are consistent with the influential arguments of
Friedman (1962) that occupational licensing requirements dampen market discipline and
produce artificial scarcity, leading to higher fees for providers and lower quality for
consumers.8
    While mortgage brokers are arguably product market rather than labor market
intermediaries, they have much in common with the for-profit employment offices
studied by Woong Lee. Both employment offices and mortgage brokers serve to match
individuals on one side of the market (workers or borrowers) to sellers on the other side
(employers or mortgage lenders). The role played by these intermediaries is a natural

7
  This concern was exacerbated by the fact that mortgage brokers dominated the origination of so-called
subprime mortgages—that is, loans to borrowers who would not be considered creditworthy by traditional
lending standards.
8
  For an extensive treatment of this topic, see Kleiner’s (2006) monograph on occupational licensing.
                                                                                                          9
market response to the problem posed by costly search. There is, however, an adverse
selection problem that intrinsically arises in this setting: intermediaries that are in the
business of selling information are, by nature, better informed about information they sell
than are the customers they serve. A wealth of theory and evidence suggests that markets
are unlikely to operate optimally when sellers and buyers are not equally informed. As
the chapters by Lee and Kleiner and Todd suggest, some subset of intermediaries will use
their informational advantage to exploit rather than to assist customers.
    These parallels suggest some general lessons on the mixed role that intermediaries
play in reducing information costs in labor markets. Since the public good of labor
market information is likely to be underprovided by the free market, a set of LMIS will
find it profitable to collect and sell information at a cost below that which job-seekers
could obtain by their own efforts. These intermediaries mitigate the under-provision
problem. But their informational advantage also potentially gives rise to another market
failure, which is information asymmetry and the attendant risk of adverse selection.
Whether this asymmetric information problem is moderate or severe depends in part on
the market structure in which intermediaries operate. In the case of private employment
agencies at the turn of the 20th century, these abuses were apparently profound. But a
change in market structure, fostered by competition between public and private-sector
providers substantially mitigated the problem. In the case of mortgage brokers, it is less
certain that the regulatory remedy—creating barriers to entry—provided the structural
change needed.
    In both cases, it is significant that the policy response to adverse selection included
forcible public intervention in the market: an injection of competition in the case of
Public Employment Offices; the imposition of bonding requirements in the case of
mortgage brokers. These examples reinforce the general observation that, to address
significant market imperfections, LMIs must be capable of changing the incentives faced
by at least one set of market agents, typically workers or firms.

III. Solving collective action problems

    Providing information—even compelling it—is not necessarily sufficient to resolve
market failures. Notifying a bank’s deposit holders that the institution faces a small risk
                                                                                              10
of insolvency does not make a run on the bank less likely—rather, it spurs each depositor
to withdraw his funds, thus ensuring collapse. In such cases, rational agents acting with
full information and accurate expectations about one-another’s actions make decisions
that are privately optimal yet collectively suboptimal. There is potential in such settings
for market intermediaries to improve upon competitive outcomes. But this is only
feasible if these intermediaries have teeth—or, more specifically, the power to change
payoffs so that the maximizing choices of actors on one or both sides of the market also
serve the common good.
   The chapters by Muriel Niederle and Alvin Roth and by Richard Freeman and Marit
Rehavi consider two such intermediaries. Niederle and Roth analyze the labor market for
medical fellowships (post-residency training) in the specialty of gastroenterology.
Unraveling is widespread in entry-level labor markets for highly specialized positions,
including legal clerkships and medical specialties. Candidates in these fields often sign
binding employment contracts one or more years prior to the start of work—well before
the quality of job matches can be reliably assessed. And job offers are frequently made
with short (‘exploding’) decision deadlines and substantial professional penalties for
reneging. The allocative efficiency of such a matching process is likely to be poor.
   The Niederle and Roth chapter offers a diagnosis of the market failures in entry-level
specialty markets and a quantitative analysis of how these problems were manifest and
subsequently resolved (at least for some time) by the LMI of a centralized fellowship
match. Niederle and Roth argue that the underlying cause of market unraveling is
congestion. In occupations where most entry-level candidates enter the labor market
simultaneously (i.e., as a cohort completes its studies), there is typically insufficient time
for employers to evaluate and make offers to all relevant candidates before competing
offers have already been made and accepted. This congestion spurs employers to make
time-limited (exploding) offers to candidates to reduce the risk that, should their initial
offers be declined, they are left to hire from the residual candidate pool. When exploding
offers become commonplace, employers quickly recognize that they can employ them
strategically to make job markets artificially ‘thin’ for their preferred candidates.
Specifically, by forcing a candidate to make a binding decision before her alternative
offers are known, an exploding offer turns the candidate’s simultaneous decision problem
                                                                                              11
into a sequential decision problem. Such strategies naturally lead to unraveling:
anticipating that their competitors will make exploding job offers, each employer has an
incentive to accelerate its own offers.
    A primary implication of Niederle and Roth’s diagnosis is that market unraveling
could potenetially be checked if job offers were effectively delayed (or made non-
binding) until candidates and employers had sufficient time to search over their relevant
choice sets. The National Resident Matching Program (NRMP), studied by Niederle and
Roth, performs this function. The NRMP provides a centralized clearinghouse where
applicants and employers submit rank ordered lists representing their preferences.
Applying a set of deferred acceptance algorithms, the NRMP allocates candidates to
fellowships.9 Candidates participating in the match are, in theory, not bound by job offers
initiated prior to the resolution of the match—thus nullifying the power of exploding
offers to constrain their choices. Employer participation in the match is voluntary,
however, and the value of participation will depend positively on the fraction of
competitors who are also participating.
    A compelling feature of Niederle and Roth’s quantitative case study of the
gastroenterology (GI) market is that the profession adopted a centralized match in 1989
in response to widespread signs of market malfunction, but participation in the match
began to decline after six years, and the match was formally abandoned in 2000. This set
of events yields two pre-post contrasts for quantitative study, one prior to the match’s
adoption and the other subsequent to its demise. The available evidence suggests that the
centralized match mitigated some clear market maladies, dramatically compressing the
highly dispersed timing of job offers (which led to artificial thinness) and increasing the
mobility of GI residents out of the hospitals where they performed their residences
(suggesting that the match reduced monopsony power among incumbent employers). The
chapter also examines the contentious question of whether the centralized match
depressed fellowship salaries below competitive levels. Niederle and Roth find
essentially no difference in salary levels between specialties that use a match and those

9
  As the chapter discusses, the results of such a match are stable—that is, there exists no applicant-
employer pair, not matched to one another, who would prefer each other to their current match. Moreover,
it is generally (though not always) incentive-compatible for applicants to submit their true preferences to
the clearinghouse.
                                                                                                            12
that do not, suggesting that centralized matching does not dampen salaries per se. Equally
remarkable, however, is that the data reveal almost no economically significant variation
in fellowship salary levels or dispersion across the 14 specialties considered. This
absence of variation raises the question of whether, in addition to congestion, the
maladies of the fellowship market are in part explained by other non-competitive factors.
    The GI matching market example underscores the potential of a Labor Market
Intermediary to resolve collective action problems, in this case, restraining employers
from making early offers. The demise of the GI match in 2000, however, suggests that
something was amiss. Niederle and Roth trace the breakdown of the match to a sudden
and substantial falloff in the supply of GI fellows spurred by a policy change by the
Gastroenterology Leadership Council. When in 1996, the number of fellows fell below
the number of available fellowship slots, the temptation for employers to circumvent the
match to guarantee their supply of labor may simply have become overwhelming. And
because employer participation in the match was voluntary, the matching intermediary
had no teeth with which to discipline defectors. The match therefore unraveled as initial
defections spurred further defections, rendering the match irrelevant by 2000. The GI
case again underscores that the ability to compel participation by at least one side of the
market—and perhaps by both—is a necessary requirement for an LMI to redress a market
failure, in this case, a collective action failure. The GI fellowship match appears to have
had this power when the labor market was slack, but not when it was tight.
   The Freeman and Rehavi chapter, which offers an innovative study of the changing
shape of labor unions, provides a compelling point of comparison to the GI case. While
the National Resident Matching Program is an LMI with the power to change market
payoffs (at least some of the time), labor unions are an LMI adapting to the loss of this
power. Unions have historically solved collective action problems among atomistic
workers by organizing collective bargaining, sanctioning employers for misconduct, and
regulating employers’ hiring and dismissal policies. A key to their ability to perform this
function in the United States is the National Labor Relations Act of 1935, which compels
employers to bargain collectively with a labor union if a majority of the firm’s employees
votes for union representation. Thus, once a union is established, it holds an effective
monopoly on bargaining.
                                                                                              13
   While survey evidence suggests that worker demand for union representation has
increased with time, union density in the US has fallen to almost negligible levels (7.4
percent in 2006). Labor unions have also lost their efficacy in the UK, where the range of
issues subject to collective bargaining has narrowed. If unions can no longer generate
sizable member benefits, their ability to build membership and levy dues diminishes,
reducing their power further. This threatens their viability as an LMI.
   Against this backdrop, Freeman and Rehavi study an alternative organizing model for
unions, which they refer to as ‘open source.’ In the open source model, unions are
decoupled from workplaces and do not collectively bargain. They attract members by
offering a package of services such as legal advice, group employment benefits (e.g.,
health insurance), and political lobbying on labor issues. Two features of this open source
model represent a radical departure from the traditional labor union mode. First, open
source unions lack what is certainly the most effective tool that traditional unions
possessed for generating member benefits: collective bargaining. Second, many of the
services that open source unions will purportedly provide, such as lobbying, are non-
excludable public goods. This leaves them highly vulnerable to free-riding, which was
essentially impossible when union membership and compulsory dues-paying were
preconditions for participation in collective bargaining. This ‘open source’ model will
sharply limit the membership fees that such unions can charge.
   Despite these threats, Freeman and Rehavi see reasons for tempered optimism about
unions’ prospects in the current era. A first is that the Internet has greatly augmented the
capability of unions to communicate with potential members outside of the workplace,
and at much lower cost than door-to-door canvassing. Moreover, the set of union services
that can be provided over the Internet has proven to extend beyond mere online
replication of traditional direct-mail and fundraising operations. Freeman and Rehavi’s
innovative analysis of question-and-answer postings (‘threads’) on the website of
unionreps.org provides a compelling example of a union successfully using the Internet
to provide a set of tangible, individual-level member services, most importantly, legal
advice on workplace matters.
   As another example, Freeman and Rehavi consider the success of a non-workplace-
based union, Working America (a “community-affiliate” of the AFL-CIO union), which
                                                                                           14
enrolled two million workers between 2004 and 2007 by canvassing at homes and over
the Internet. Working America’s success in drawing membership suggests, consistent
with survey evidence, that there is considerable latent demand for organized labor as a
political movement. Working America’s direct membership benefits are, however, quite
limited relative to a traditional labor union, and its fee structure is accordingly modest.
    If unions are successful in reconstituting under the ‘open source’ model, my
expectation is that this will reflect a profound change in their core function as Labor
Market Intermediaries. Whereas traditional labor unions primarily served, in the
taxonomy of this chapter, as enforcers of collective action, ‘open source’ unions appear
poised to serve primarily as information-provision intermediaries—more akin to job
boards than to the medical match studied by Niederle and Roth. Thus, if the power to
compel participation is the sine qua non of LMIs that move the market equilibrium, the
potential of open source unions to generate worker benefits that approach that of unions
of an earlier era is likely to be limited.

IV. Temporary help agencies: What do they do for workers? What do they do to the
    labor market?

    More than any other Labor Market Intermediary, the temporary help industry has
been the subject of intensive recent debate. This is in part due to its spectacular growth.
In the U.S., the temporary help industry accounted for 10 percent of net job creation
during the decade of the 1990s (Autor 2003). In continental Europe and the United
Kingdom, temporary help agency employment increased its share of average daily
employment from 1.0 to 1.8 percent between 1986 and 1996. In the same interval, the
number of workers employed by temporary help agencies more than tripled in Germany,
Denmark and Ireland. In Japan, temporary help employment grew four-fold following
significant deregulation (CIETT 2007).
    Accompanying the growth of temporary help employment has been a qualitative
change in the type of jobs filled by temporary help agencies. Historically, temporary help
agency jobs were synonymous with clerical and office work. By 2005, a larger share of
temporary help jobs in the U.S. was found in production, transportation, and material


                                                                                              15
moving jobs than in clerical or sales occupations.10 As temporary help jobs have moved
into blue-collar occupations, the industry has become an increasingly important employer
of less-skilled workers. Although it accounts for less than 3 percent of average US daily
employment, U.S. state administrative data show that 15 to 40 percent of former welfare
recipients who obtained employment in the years following the 1996 US welfare reform
took jobs in the temporary help sector (Autor and Houseman 2005). Alongside their
traditional role of filling short-term staffing needs, temporary help jobs are increasingly
used by employers to screen workers for direct-hire positions at arm’s length (‘temp-to-
hire’) without the attendant risk of litigation should the match end badly.
     The rapid growth of temporary help employment among low-skilled workers and the
increasing prevalence of temp-to-perm arrangements has spurred an academic and policy
debate as to whether temporary help jobs facilitate or hinder labor market advancement
of job-seekers. Numerous researchers have hypothesized that stints in temporary help
employment enable workers to develop skills and contacts that eventually lead to stable,
long-term employment. Moreover, because temporary help firms face uniquely low
marginal costs of hiring and firing, these firms may be willing to ‘audition’ candidates
who would otherwise have difficulty finding direct-hire jobs (Abraham 1988; Katz and
Krueger 1999; Autor 2001a and 2003; Houseman 2001; Autor and Houseman 2002;
Houseman, Kalleberg, and Erickcek 2003; Kalleberg, Reynolds, and Marsden 2003). But
these hypothesized benefits are uncertain. Scholars and practitioners have also argued
that the unstable and primarily low-skilled positions available through temporary help
agencies provide little opportunity for workers to develop human capital or engage in
productive job search (Parker 1994; Pawasarat 1997; Jorgenson and Riemer 2000;
Benner, Leete and Pastor 2007). If spells with temporary help agencies also inhibit
workers from engaging in productive job search—after all, job search takes time—
temporary help employment might hinder workers from obtaining stable jobs.
     Distinguishing among these competing hypotheses is a significant empirical
challenge. It is inherently difficult to differentiate the effects of holding given job types
from the skills and motivations that cause workers to hold these jobs initially. Four

10
  Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/news.release/conemp.toc.htm, accessed 1/20/2008 (based
upon Current Population Survey February 2005 Contingent Worker Supplement).
                                                                                                      16
chapters in this volume take steps in this direction, however, by studying the role that
temporary help jobs play in the labor market advancement of job-seekers in Portugal,
Germany, and the United States.
     Before discussing the findings of these chapters, it is useful to consider the temporary
help industry through the conceptual lens applied to other LMIs—that is, as institutions
that potentially redress market imperfections arising from decentralized job matching
between workers and firms. The market imperfection to which temporary help firms
primarily address themselves is the fixed cost of job search. Identifying, screening and
hiring workers is a fixed cost that must be sunk before actual paid work gets done. This
cost may not be worth sinking if the job to be filled is brief or has a short shelf life, e.g.,
substituting for an employee who falls ill for a week. Temporary help firms sink these
fixed costs up front by pre-screening workers and clients. They defray these sunk costs
by introducing a wedge between the hourly wage billed to the client firm and the hourly
wage (and other payroll costs) paid to the temporary worker.
     Unlike most of the LMIs considered above, temporary help agencies function on a
two-sided voluntary participation model; neither workers nor firms are obliged to use
their services unless they see gains from doing so. From the firm’s perspective, the gain
to temporary help arrangements is that they convert their fixed job search costs into
marginal costs by providing a supply of pre-screened workers who are waiting at the
gate. From the job-seeker’s perspective, temporary help agencies potentially offer
immediate short-term, hourly employment with almost no initial, fixed investment in job
search.11 In addition, temporary help arrangements facilitate arms length screening by
allowing firms to audition workers without the attendant fixed costs of hiring and the
legal risks of firing. The possibility of a ‘temp-to-perm’ transition also makes temporary




11
  Why, given these efficiencies, are the majority of jobs not found through temporary help firms? A likely
answer is that, due to their informational advantage on both the supply and demand side of the labor
market, temporary help firms find it optimal to charge a relatively high markup on their services. This
markup, estimated at 40 to 60 percentage points above the hourly wage paid to the worker (Autor, Levy
and Murnane 1999), provides workers and firms with an incentive to circumvent temporary-help
arrangements for longer-term matches. Similarly to mortgage brokers and for-profit employment agencies,
temporary-help agencies hold an informational advantage relative to their clients, and, as seen in other
examples, this gives rise to its own difficulties—here, monopsonistic pricing.
                                                                                                         17
help positions more attractive to workers, many of whom report using temporary help as
a means of job search (Autor 2001a).
     These observations—in particular, the fact that temporary help agencies rely on
voluntary two-sided participation—immediately suggests that their potential to
substantially change labor market outcomes for individual workers or firms is likely to be
limited; if this were not so, these arrangements would either be much less common or
much more prevalent. This does not imply that temporary help firms neither help nor
harm workers (or firms) at the margin. Indeed, Autor and Houseman (2005) provide
quasi-experimental evidence that low-skilled former welfare recipients in the U.S. placed
in temporary help agency jobs receive no lasting earnings or employment benefits from
these placements, whereas ex ante identical individuals placed in direct-hire positions
accrue substantial earnings gains over the course of two to three years following
placement. Nevertheless, if temporary help agency employment exists in equilibrium
alongside other employment forms, it is unlikely that temporary help jobs are either
strictly dominant or strictly dominated by either employment arrangements.
     The evidence presented in the final four chapters of the volume appears to
corroborate this reasoning, though with many important nuances. The study by René
Böheim and Ana Rute Cardoso uses uniquely detailed, linked worker-firm data from
Portugal to analyze whether workers suffer a wage penalty either while working for
temporary help firms or in the two years following entry into temporary help
employment. As a descriptive matter, their analysis confirms that workers in temporary
help jobs earn about 10 percent less than observationally similar workers in non-
temporary help (‘direct-hire’) jobs. But once person fixed-effects are included to account
for unobserved worker heterogeneity, this wage penalty disappears or becomes positive.
These results imply that there is negative self-selection of workers into temporary help
jobs in Portugal, a pattern also documented for the United States (Segal and Sullivan,
1997).12


12
  Böheim and Cardoso also estimate that workers who have previously held a temporary-help job suffer no
measurable wage penalty when entering direct-hire employment. Interpretation of this result deserves
particular caution, however, since the analysis is conditioned on remaining in employment (wages are not
otherwise observed).
                                                                                                        18
   While Böheim and Cardoso focus primarily on earnings in temporary help jobs, the
chapters by Carolyn Heinrich, Peter Muesuer and Kenneth Troske, Frederick Andersson,
Harry Holzer and Julia Lane, and Michael Kvasnika study the question of whether
temporary help jobs augment or inhibit labor market advancement over the longer-term.
Using employment register data from Germany, Kvasnicka analyzes whether
unemployed job-seekers who take temporary help jobs are more likely to later obtain
direct-hire employment than observationally similar workers who do not take temporary
help jobs. The analytical tool used in this study is a matching estimator, which identifies
pairs of workers who are observationally similar up to the point where one member of the
pair obtains a temporary help job. From this point of divergence forward, the estimator
compares the trajectory of the two workers to estimate of the impact of temporary help
employment on the ‘treated’ relative to the ‘non-treated’ worker over the subsequent four
years.
   Contrary to many studies of temporary help employment in European countries,
Kvasnicka’s analysis finds no evidence that temporary help employment increases job-
takers’ subsequent rate of direct-hire employment over four years. However, the data
clearly show that workers who enter temporary help employment from unemployment
are substantially more likely to remain in temporary help jobs over the subsequent four
years. Kvasnicka concludes that temporary help jobs increase workers’ employment and
earnings in the temporary help sector without causing any crowd-out of their
advancement into direct-hire employment. As with all studies based on observational
(i.e., non-experimental) data, one must also consider the possibility that the results are in
part driven by unobserved differences in skills and motivations among different groups of
workers. Ultimately, the validity of this approach hinges on the assumption that the
treatment variable (temporary help job employment) can be treated as randomly assigned
conditional on the observable variables used for the matching estimator.
   Similar in spirit to the Böheim and Cardoso study, the chapter by Andersson, Holzer
and Lane estimates a model of worker earnings that includes both worker and firm fixed
effects. Distinct from Böheim and Cardoso, the fixed effects model in this chapter draws
on earnings data from an earlier time period, thus making the fixed-effect more akin to a
measure of workers’ permanent earnings and firms’ average salaries than a conventional
                                                                                            19
fixed-effects estimator. A particular strength of the Andersson et al. chapter is its rigorous
analysis of the trajectory of employment by sector. The chapter explores not only whether
workers in temporary help jobs later obtain direct-hire employment, but also whether
these jobs are found in high wage industries and with high wage employers. The key
result of this analysis is that, although workers earn comparatively low wages while in
temporary help jobs, their subsequent earnings are often relatively high—but only if they
succeed in gaining stable work with direct-hire employers. Consistent with the view that
selective firms use temporary help arrangements to screen workers for desirable direct-
hire jobs, the chapter documents that temporary help workers who successfully transition
to stable, direct-hire employment often end up employed by relatively high wage firms.
     A question left open in part by the Andersson et al. chapter is the role played by
worker heterogeneity. In particular, for workers who successfully transition from
temporary help employment to stable, direct-hire jobs, it is difficult to know whether
their spells in temporary help employment were the cause of these successful transitions
or primarily a waypoint on the route that these workers were navigating. The chapter by
Heinrich, Mueser and Troske makes an ambitious effort to assess the importance of self-
selection in this context, drawing on recent econometric techniques developed by Altonji,
Elder and Taber (2005). Altonji et al. argue that it is feasible to assess the likely extent of
bias stemming from self-selection on unobserved variables by measuring the extent of
self-selection on observed variables. The key to their approach is the maintained
hypothesis that self-selection on observables and unobservables is positively correlated.
Concretely, imagine that in estimating the effect of temporary help employment on
subsequent employment outcomes, a researcher finds that including a worker’s
educational attainment in the statistical model leads to a substantial increase in the
estimated benefits from temporary help employment. This pattern would indicate that
there is significant negative self-selection into temporary help employment based on
education (an observable variable).13 Under the assumptions of the Altonji et al.
framework, this would further imply that selection on unobserved variables, such as

13
  Specifically, we take as given that education is strongly positively correlated with earnings and other
positive labor market outcomes. If adding education to a wage regression raises the coefficient on
temporary-help employment, this implies that temporary-help employment and education are negatively
correlated, i.e., there is negative self-selection into temporary-help employment based on education.
                                                                                                            20
latent human capital or taste for effort, is also likely to be important. By contrast, if the
estimates were found to be largely invariant to the exclusion of all subsets of observable
variables, this would serve as evidence that self-selection on unobservables is unlikely to
be important.
    Heinrich et al. put these ideas into practice by studying the employment and earnings
trajectories of individuals in the state of Missouri who sought employment assistance or
cash support through one of several federal assistance programs. Consistent with prior
research by the authors (Heinrich et al., 2005), they document that the temporary help
industry plays a uniquely important role as a transitional source of employment for low-
skilled job-seekers. A key finding of their chapter is that stints in temporary help
employment have little measurable effect on subsequent earnings or employment. Yet,
consistent with Andersson et al., Heinrich et al. observe that successful transitions from
the temporary help sector are critical to workers’ labor market advancement; workers
who remain in temporary help employment experience long-run earnings that are
substantially below those of workers in other sectors.
    A major contribution of the Heinrich et al. chapter is their application of the Altonji et
al. method to assess the likelihood that the causal effects estimated from the observational
data are spurious. This analysis presents a nuanced picture. For earnings, the Altonji et al.
test is frequently consistent with the null hypothesis that the causal effects estimates are
not spurious. For employment, this is less often the case. Though these results present a
somewhat ambiguous picture, one cannot fail to be impressed by the rigor, clarity and
intellectual candor of the Heinrich et al. analysis. Economic knowledge and credibility
would be well served if more researchers subjected their findings to equally rigorous
sensitivity testing.
    In net, these four chapters, using disparate data sources from three different
industrialized economies, have a clear commonality of conclusions. None suggests that
temporary help jobs have any lasting negative effect on the workers who obtain them.
Whether holding these jobs has positive effects on worker outcomes relative to what they
would have obtained in the absence of temporary help employment is less certain. As a
descriptive matter, many temporary help workers transition from temporary help to
direct-hire jobs at higher wages. Simultaneously, those who stay behind fare relatively
                                                                                                21
poorly. It is a certainty that those who stay behind over the longer term are on average
adversely selected—that is, their unobserved skills or motivation put them at a
disadvantage relative to other workers. By the same token, those who leave temporary
help employment for higher-paying and more durable direct-hire positions are likely
positively selected. These countervailing forces of selection make it difficult to conclude
with certainty if the causal effect of temporary help employment is positive, or merely
neutral, for the subset of workers making successful transitions from temporary help to
direct-hire employment.
     This set of findings suggest a relatively benign labor market role for temporary help
agencies. Yet, there exists substantial suspicion among policymakers and social scientists
(particularly outside of economics) that temporary help jobs are exploitative, offering
below-market pay and limited opportunities for advancement. From whence does this
suspicion arise? One possibility is that because temporary help agencies are for-profit
LMIs—unlike, for example, labor unions, public employment agencies, or university job
placement consortia—they face a pecuniary incentive to minimize wages and benefits,
and to inhibit workers from obtaining other, potentially superior, positions. In this
respect, however, temporary help agencies appear no different from other employers, and
so it is hard to credit this viewpoint.
     Perhaps a more compelling argument is that widespread use of temporary help
agencies, even if beneficial to individual workers and firms, may exert a negative
externality on the aggregate labor market—that is, it is a ‘public bad.’ One case in point
for this argument is that temporary-agency workers cannot vote in union certification
elections at client firms since, for legal purposes, the temporary help agency is their
employer of record. Moreover, temporary help workers are nearly impossible to organize
at their temporary help agency offices since they do not perform work at these sites.
Temporary help arrangements may therefore inhibit collective action that would
otherwise benefit workers. Indeed, anecdotal evidence suggests that some firms use
temporary help agencies to illegally screen out potential union organizers.14


14
  Reflecting the natural tensions between temporary help agencies and labor unions, Houseman, Kalleberg
and Erickcek (2003) document specific union prohibitions on the use of temporary help agency workers at
the auto parts manufacturers and hospitals that they study.
                                                                                                      22
     More broadly, some scholars have argued that the availability of temporary help
agencies encourages employers to pursue a high turnover, low skill-investment human
resources strategy (see, in particular, Benner, Leete and Pastor 2007, chapters 1 and 6).
Were the LMI of temporary help unavailable, this argument suggests that employers
would offer better job opportunities with greater opportunities for skill acquisition and
labor market advancement.15
     Because they operate exclusively at the general equilibrium, macroeconomic level,
these hypotheses are extremely difficult to test—even more so than person-level effects
of temporary help employment studied by the four chapters in the volume. Moreover,
alongside these arguments, one must alternatively consider that temporary help agencies
may increase aggregate labor market efficiency and reduce unemployment by
diminishing the time workers and firms spend in unproductive search (Katz and Krueger
1999).16 At this point, one can only confidently state that the question of how temporary
help employment affects aggregate labor market efficiency and the quality of jobs
available in general equilibrium is of first-order importance. A compelling answer to this
question, however, awaits a suitably ingenious research design.

V. Conclusions

     The labor market depicted by undergraduate textbooks is a pure spot market,
characterized by complete information and atomistic price-taking. Labor economists have
long understood that this model is highly incomplete. Search is costly, information is
typically imperfect and often asymmetric, firms are not always price takers, and atomistic
actors are typically unable to resolve coordination and collective action failures. In this
‘second-best of all worlds,’ there is scope for third parties to intercede, both to improve
the operation of the labor market and to profit from its imperfections.
     One might have speculated, however, that in an era of rapid information flows and
substantial job mobility, the importance of labor market intermediaries would wane.

15
   Kaushik Basu (2003) provides a rigorous discussion of how laissez-faire bargaining among competitive
workers and firms over the terms of employment can result in a market equilibrium that is not necessarily
socially desirable.
16
   This positive aggregate benefit, if present, does not preclude the possibility that individual workers who
use temporary-help agencies fare worse on average than those who do not; that is, the public good and the
private good may have countervailing effects on individuals, even if the public good dominates on average.
                                                                                                             23
Indeed, the most prominent LMI, the traditional labor union, has been in secular declines
for decades. Yet, the decline of labor unions as an LMI is the exception rather than the
rule. Three of the LMIs studied in this volume—online search engines, criminal records
providers and open-source unions—have only recently emerged. And a fourth, temporary
help agencies, has risen from relative obscurity to international prominence over the last
two decades.
     Though recent technological advances have made market information more abundant
and less expensive, cheap information alone is rarely sufficient to solve the fundamental
problems posed by costly and asymmetric information, adverse selection, and failures of
collective action.17 Ultimately, the imperfections endemic to decentralized labor markets
generate demand for institutions that can variously compel disclosure of hidden
information, coordinate the actions of members of a congested market, or solve collective
action failures among parties with complementary interests. The Labor Market
Intermediaries studied in this volume perform these functions, though always
imperfectly, and not without attendant costs and abuses. Despite widely heralded
advances in the technology of job matching, it is my strong contention that Labor Market
Intermediaries will continue to arise to address, ameliorate, and exploit the imperfect
environment in which workers and employers interact.




17
  Indeed, cheap information can in some cases exacerbate adverse selection by eliminating the signaling
value of formerly costly actions such as submitting job applications (Autor 2001b).
                                                                                                          24
                                      References
Abraham, Katharine G. 1988. “Flexible Staffing Arrangements and Employers' Short-
   term Adjustment Strategies.” In Employment, Unemployment, and Labor Utilization,
   Robert A. Hart, ed. Boston: Unwin Hyman.
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for ‘Lemons:’ Quality, Uncertainty and the
   Market Mechanism.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), August, 488-500.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on
   Observed and Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic
   Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-184.
Autor, David. 2001a. “Why do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills
   Training?” 2001. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116 (4), November, 1409-1448.
Autor, David. 2001b. “Wiring the Labor Market.” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
   15(1), Winter, 25 – 40.
Autor, David. 2003. “Outsourcing at Will: The Contribution of Unjust Dismissal
   Doctrine to the Growth of Employment Outsourcing.” 2003. Journal of Labor
   Economics, 21(1), January, 1 – 42.
Autor, David, Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane. 1999. “Skills Training in the
   Temporary Help Sector: Employer Motivations and Worker Impacts.” MIT
   Mimeograph, September.
Autor, David and Susan N. Houseman. 2002. “The Role of Temporary Employment
   Agencies in Welfare to Work: Part of the Problem or Part of the Solution?” Focus
   22(1): 63–70.
Autor, David and Susan N. Houseman. 2005. “Do Temporary Help Jobs Improve Labor
   Market Outcomes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from Random Assignments.”
   NBER Working Paper No. 11743, November.
Basu, Kaushik. 2003. “The Economics and Law of Sexual Harassment in the
   Workplace.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17(3), Summer, 141-157.
Benner, Chris, Laura Leete and Manuel Pastor. 2007. Staircases or Treadmills? Labor
   Market Intermediaries and Economic Opportunity in a Changing Economy. New
   York: Russell Sage Foundation.
CIETT (International Confederation of Private Employment Agencies). 2007. “The
   Agency Work Industry around the World”.
   http://www.ciett.org/fileadmin/templates/ciett/docs/Ciett_Economic_Report_2007.pd
   f, accessed 9/2/2008.
Diamond, Peter A. 1982. “Wage Determination and Efficiency in Search Equilibrium.”
   Review of Economic Studies, 49, 217-227.
                                                                                      25
Friedman, Milton. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Heinrich, Carolyn J., Peter R. Mueser, and Kenneth R. Troske. 2005. “Welfare to
   Temporary Work: Implications for Labor Market Outcomes.” Review of Economics
   and Statistics 87(1): 154–173.
Houseman, Susan N. 2001. “Why Employers Use Flexible Staffing Arrangements:
   Evidence from an Establishment Survey.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review
   55(1): 149–170.
Houseman, Susan N., Arne J. Kalleberg, and George A. Erickcek. 2003. “The Role of
   Temporary Help Employment in Tight Labor Markets.” Industrial and Labor
   Relations Review 57(1): 105--127.
Jorgenson, Helene, and Hans Riemer. 2000. “Permatemps: Young Temp Workers as
    Permanent Second Class Employees.” American Prospect 11(18): 38--40.
Kalleberg, Arne L., Jeremy Reynolds, and Peter V. Marsden. 2003. “Externalizing
   Employment: Flexible Staffing Arrangements in U.S. Organizations.” Social Science
   Research 32: 525–552.
Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger. 1999. “The High-Pressure U.S. Labor Market
   of the 1990s.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 0(1): 1–65.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. “Industry Rents: Evidence and
   Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 209-290.
Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. “Licensing Occupations: Ensuring Quality or Restricting
   Competition?” Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Kroft, Kory and Devin G Pope. 2007. “The Effect of the Internet on Matching Markets:
   Evidence from Craigslist,” Wharton School mimeograph, November.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. “Efficiency Wages and the
   Interindustry Wage Structure.” Econometrica, 56(2), 259-293.
Kuhn, Peter, and Mikal Skuterud. 2004. “Internet Job Search and Unemployment
   Durations.” American Economic Review, 94(1), 218-232.
Kugler, Adriana and Gilles Saint-Paul. 2004. “How do Firing Costs Affect Worker Flows
   in a World with Adverse Selection?” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(3), 553-584.
Lewis, H.G. (1986) Union Relative Wage Effects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mortensen, Dale T. 1982. “The Matching Process as a Non-Cooperative Bargaining
  Game,” in J.J. McCall (ed.), The Economics of Information and Uncertainty,
  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Parker, Robert E. 1994. Flesh Peddlers and Warm Bodies: The Temporary Help Industry
   and Its Workers. New York: Rutgers University Press.
                                                                                       26
Pawasarat, John. 1997. “The Employer Perspective: Jobs Held by the Milwaukee County
   AFDC Single Parent Population (January 1996–March 1997).” Milwaukee:
   Employment and Training Institute, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee.
Pissarides, Chris A. 1986. “Unemployment and Vacancies in Britain.” Economic Policy,
    3, 499-559.
Segal, Lewis M., and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1997. “The Growth of Temporary Services
   Work.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11, 117--136.
Slichter, Sumner. 1950. “Notes on the Structure of Wages,” Review of Economics and
    Statistics 32, 80-91.
Spence, Michael. 1973 “Job Market Signaling,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87(3),
   August, 355-374.




                                                                                     27
                                                                 Table 1.
                          Categorizing Labor Market Intermediaries by Market Function and Nature of Participation

                                      Market Failure                                     Nature of Participation

                                   Worker-                                    Voluntary for   Voluntary for   Voluntary for
                    Information      Side      Firm-Side   Coordination       Workers and      Firms not      Workers not
                     Provision/    Adverse      Adverse    & Collective          Firms          Workers          Firms
                    Search Costs   Selection   Selection     Action

Traditional job          ×                                                         ×
boards

Comprehensive                         ×                                                            ×
job boards (e.g.,
AlmaLaurea)

Criminal records                      ×                                                            ×
providers


Public                                             ×                                                                ×
employment
offices

Labor standards                                    ×                                                                ×
regulations


Centralized                                                     ×                                  ×
medical job match

Labor unions                                                    ×                                                   ×

Temporary help           ×                                                         ×
agencies
                                                                                                                         28
