NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSFER OF PUBLIC PENSION PROMISES
Robert Novy-Marx
Joshua D. Rauh
Working Paper 14343
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14343

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

We are grateful to Adam Friedlan, Jerry Chao, and Wai Keong Ng for research assistance. We thank
the Global Association of Risk Professionals (GARP) Risk Management Research Program, Netspar,
and the Chicago GSB Initiative on Global Markets (IGM) for support. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Robert Novy-Marx and Joshua D. Rauh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Intergenerational Transfer of Public Pension Promises
Robert Novy-Marx and Joshua D. Rauh
NBER Working Paper No. 14343
September 2008
JEL No. G11,G23,G28,H55,H60,H68,H72,H74
ABSTRACT
The value of pension promises already made by US state governments will grow to approximately
$7.9 trillion in 15 years. We study investment strategies of state pension plans and estimate the distribution
of future funding outcomes. We conservatively predict a 50% chance of aggregate underfunding greater
than $750 billion and a 25% chance of at least $1.75 trillion (in 2005 dollars). Adjusting for risk, the
true intergenerational transfer is substantially larger. Insuring both taxpayers against funding deficits
and plan participants against benefit reductions would cost almost $2 trillion today, even though governments
portray state pensions as almost fully funded.

Robert Novy-Marx
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rnm@chicagogsb.edu
Joshua D. Rauh
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jrauh@ChicagoGSB.edu

The true extent of public pension underfunding has been obscured by governmental
accounting rules, which allow pension liabilities to be discounted at expected rates of return on
pension assets. This paper takes stock of the distribution and magnitude of prospective
underfunding in state pension plans given current state pension funding, asset allocation and
liability estimates. This analysis demonstrates the large burden that current public pension policy
places on future generations. In particular, we show that while the plans appear almost fully
funded under government-chosen discount rates, there is a large probability of significant
shortfalls in the future. The shortfalls are likely to occur if the economy performs poorly, and so
are particularly costly to future generations. The cost of fully insuring future taxpayers and plan
participants against these potential shortfalls would approach $2 trillion.
Using a dataset assembled from state government reports, we examine the actual asset
allocation of the universe of state-sponsored defined benefit (DB) plans. Given the estimated
variance-covariance matrix of state pension investments, we calculate the distribution of
intergenerational transfers that will occur under current funding and investment policy. If
households form their own financial portfolios taking government pension investment policy into
account, then how the government invests pension assets does not matter for intergenerational
risk transfers. The extent to which the government taxes current generations to fund pensions, as
opposed to waiting to tax future generations, would completely determine the extent of
intergenerational risk transfer. However, if households do not undo the government’s investment
strategy, then investing in risky assets subjects future generations to substantially more risk in the
value of their after tax wealth.
If current investment strategies are maintained for 15 years, we estimate (conservatively)
that there is a 50% chance of an aggregate underfunding in excess of $750 billion, a 25% chance
of an underfunding of at least $1.74 trillion, and a 10% chance of an underfunding in excess of
$2.48 trillion (all in 2005 dollars, and under lognormal assumptions regarding the evolution of
assets and liabilities). Given that poor returns tend to occur in high marginal utility states,
however, these figures understate the pain that would be associated with underfunding. On a
risk-adjusted basis, there is a 50% chance of an aggregate underfunding in excess of $2.66
trillion, a 25% chance of an underfunding of at least $3.25 trillion, and a 10% chance of an
underfunding in excess of $3.74 trillion (all in 2005 dollars). Furthermore, in the event that
public pension funds are in surplus, excess assets are unlikely to be entirely returned to taxpayers,
increasing the net expected burden. In addition, we find that the states with more general
obligation (GO) debt as a share of revenue also have more underfunding as a share of revenue,
although their total pension liabilities are not any larger.

2

States back pension liabilities with a mix of assets that include stock, bonds, cash, private
equity, real estate, and hedge fund exposure. The typical investment strategies in conjunction
with accounting rules make the pension funding situation look much better than it actually is. To
illustrate this irony, we set forth a “Modest Proposal” in the spirit of Jonathan Swift, whereby
state pension funds could be shown to be in substantial surplus if only the state government
entities would invest pension assets in a ten-beta levered S&P500 Exchange Traded Fund (ETF).
In that case, the “surplus” that would appear to emerge would justify withdrawals from public
pension funds sufficient to pay down all outstanding state bonds and pay a $5,000 dividend to
every American citizen.
Under any plausible discounting assumptions that reflect the true present value of state
pension promises, the underfund in state pension plans is larger than the total magnitude of
outstanding state bonds, which was $798 billion as of the end of fiscal year 2005. Under the
assumption that state pension promises are riskless, so that accrued benefits cannot be abrogated,
the underfunding would amount to $1.9 trillion. If the risk of state pension liabilities is roughly
captured by municipal borrowing rates excluding the tax benefit, we find that total state
underfunding amounted to $862 billion as of late 2005. This number is smaller because the
calculation ascribes a significant probability to a default on pension promises by US states.
Given the protections afforded public pension liabilities by state constitutions, this latter measure
is almost certainly too conservative.
Furthermore, all of these figures assume that all pension benefits that will be accrued in
the future will be fully funded using appropriate discount rates, which we demonstrate has not
been the case in the recent past. They also ignore other postretirement employee benefits
(OPEBs) which total $380 billion in present value under GASB 45 disclosures. Therefore, our
calculations certainly understate the extent of the funding crisis.
The crisis in public pension funds dwarves taxpayers’ exposure to underfunded corporate
pension plans. As of September 2007, the net financial position of the Pension Benefit Guarantee
Corporation (PBGC) was an underfund of $14 billion, with additional “reasonably possible
exposure” of $66 billion. The roughly $2 trillion in project benefit obligation (PBO) pension
liabilities of US publicly traded corporations were almost fully funded at the point in time we
study, though funding may have deteriorated in late 2007 and early 2008. Furthermore, the
PBGC is only liable for underfunding on an accumulated benefit obligation basis (ABO), on
which basis corporate plans are actually overfunded. The magnitude of the crisis in state pension
plans is much larger.

3

This paper proceeds as follows. Section I calculates the distribution of underfunding of
US state pension plans, both relative to state pension liabilities and relative to total state nonpension debt under current reporting standards. Section II analyzes the merits of several possible
alternative discount rates and calculates the true distribution of the funding position under these
alternatives. Section III describes state DB investment policy. Section IV describes a “Modest
Proposal” by which these state pension funds could be shown to have a substantial surplus simply
by reallocating pension assets. Section V presents evidence on the distribution of
intergenerational transfers inherent in this system. Section VI concludes.

I. The Extent of Underfunding Under Current Reporting
We collected data on the largest DB pension funds sponsored by US state governments.
In a typical DB pension plan, an employer pledges an annual pension payment of an amount that
is a function of the employee’s final salary and years of employment. To assemble the list of
plans, we began with data from the US Census of Governments, published by the US Census
Department. We listed all plans with more than $1 billion of assets, including only those plans
sponsored by state governments. There were 112 such plans at the end of 2005.1
While the US corporate sector has moved away from DB plans and towards defined
contribution (DC) arrangements such as 401(k) plans, this movement has been very limited in the
public sector. A March 2008 Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) survey indicates that 80% of state
and local government workers are enrolled in a DB plan and under 20% are enrolled in a DC plan
(BLS (2008)). The GAO in late 2007 reported that only Alaska and Michigan offered employees
a DC plan but not a DB plan, and Indiana and Oregon offered a hybrid plan; all other states
offered only DB plans (GAO (2007))2.
The Census of Governments does not contain any data on DB pension liabilities. We
therefore examined the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) for each pension plan
and collected total actuarial liabilities for each pension plan, along with the discount rate used by
state actuaries to calculate these liabilities. We also collected the total plan assets for these plans
as stated in the CAFR. This measure of total plan assets is on an actuarial basis, which allows for
smoothing of investment returns over a certain number of years according to actuarial discretion.
The US Census Department data are intended to measure assets at their market value.

1

As of the time of the study, 2006 data were not yet fully available for the universe of state plans. However,
preliminary indications suggest that the 2006 analysis will be very similar to the 2005 analysis.
2
Nebraska offered a cash balance plan, a type of DB plan in which the value of the plan is presented to employees as a
cash balance and the trajectory of benefit accrual with respect to tenure is more concave than in a traditional DB plan.

4

The statement of liabilities in the CAFRs is an accrued actuarial liability (AAL). In
calculating an AAL, state actuaries start with a calculation of the total present value of benefits
they expect employees to receive under the plan. To complete this first step, they need to choose
a discount rate with which to discount future payments. Furthermore, some of those benefits,
have not yet been accrued. Actuaries therefore have to determine the allocation of the present
value of future liabilities to past, current, and future years. The flow measure of accruing benefits
is called the normal cost, which is the share of the present value of future benefits assigned to a
given year. Another way of explaining the AAL is that it is the “portion of the present value of
benefits which is not covered by future normal costs” (Civic Federation (2007)).
We begin by taking the AAL calculations at face value, and then consider how different
discount rates and normal cost calculations might affect them. We were able to collect liability
data on 108 of the 112 plans in the initial list. These plans had an actuarial asset value as of the
end of 2005 of $2.164 trillion, compared to $2.175 trillion in the asset measure provided by the
Census of Governments. The similarity of the asset measures suggests that the smoothing in
actuarial assets is not critical for our cross-sectional analysis. Appendix Table I lists this data.
Adding pension liabilities in the same fashion, we find total liabilities from US state
sponsored pension plans of $2.476 trillion as of the end of 2005. The discount rates used by the
state plans to calculate these liabilities averaged 7.97% with a standard deviation of 0.39%, and
had a median of 8%. The modal discount rate was 8%, with 55 entities using this rate. The
minimum rate was 6.5% and the maximum was 8.75%.3
Taking the pension liability calculations from the state plans at face value, the state
public sector faces an aggregate deficit in pension funding of $312 billion. Similar calculations
have also been performed by the Pew Charitable Trust (2007), National Association of
Retirement Administrators (2003-2007), and Merrill Lynch Research (2007). Our numbers are
similar to those provided in their reports.
The $312 billion pension gap represents an underfunding of 12.6% of state government
assets. The top graph of Figure 1 shows the distribution of underfunding relative to pension
liabilities across US state-sponsored plans on an unweighted basis and weighted by pension
liabilities. The vast majority of plans are underfunded, as is the vast share of total liabilities.
It is instructive to compare this number to total state debt outstanding excluding pensions,
which we collected from the US Census Bureau (2005 Survey of State Government Finances).
Total state nonpension debt is $798 billion, so that even taking the pension liability calculations
from the state plans at face value reveals an underfunding equivalent to 39% of state debt. In
3

Giertz and Papke (2007) find some evidence that these assumptions are manipulated to reduce funding pressure.

5

other words, if one treats unfunded pension liabilities as state debt, total state debt was 39%
higher at the end of 2005 than if one ignores unfunded pension liabilities as is typically done.
The bottom graph of Figure 1 shows the distribution of underfunding relative to total nonpension
state debt across US state-sponsored pension plans. For 21 states, adding the pension funding gap
at stated levels increases total state debt by at least 60%. For 7 states, adding the pension funding
gap at stated levels increases total state debt by more than 100%.

II. Understanding the True Funding Position
A. Possible Discount Rates
As several studies have pointed out previously (see for example Barclays Global
Investors (2004)), the 8% average discount rate used by state-sponsored pension plans is almost
certainly too high. The discount rate assumptions come from the Government Accounting
Standards Board (GASB) ruling 25, and Actuarial Standards of Practice (ASOP) item 27, which
together stipulate that the actuarial value of pension liabilities should depend on the assumed
return on pension plan assets. Most finance academics and practitioners view this rule as
misguided (see Gold (2002) and Bader and Gold (2004)). Financial liabilities should be
discounted using discount rates that are specific to the factor (or market) risk inherent in the
liabilities.4 The way the liabilities are funded is irrelevant to their value.
Note that the government treatment differs substantially from the treatment of corporate
pension plan liabilities, which under FASB must be discounted using a blended corporate bond
yield and for funding purposes must be discounted using Treasury yields (see Rauh (2006) and
Bergstresser, Desai, and Rauh (2006) for more information).
States present AAL calculations and disclose the discount rates used to discount the
pension payments promised to beneficiaries. They do not disclose the duration of the liabilities.
Some practitioner studies (see for example Barclays Global Investors (2004)) assume 14-year
durations for pension liabilities based on Waring (2004a, 2004b). Others argue that the true
duration is higher because of cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) in the public plans. For lack of
better information, we consider the liabilities of state pension plans to have a 15 year duration and
consider what their state will be in 15 years. In effect, we therefore are assuming that states will
have to make up shortfalls in pension funding after 15 years. We also examine the robustness of
our calculations to 20-year durations. In both cases we assume the convexity of the liabilities to
the discount rate is as low as possible given the duration, so we underestimate the true sensitivity

4

This point has been made in the context of corporate pension plans by Petersen (1996) and Ippolito (2002).

6

of the liabilities to falling discount rates.5 That is, we ignore the fact that the duration of the
liabilities increases as the discount rate decreases, which makes our estimates conservative.
If we presume that the states accurately forecast liabilities, then we know their expected
value in the future. We need only scale up the actuarial liabilities at the stated discount rate. As
shown above, total liabilities from US state sponsored pension plans were $2.476 trillion as of the
end of 2005. If the duration is 15 years, the future liability is ($2.5 trillion)*(1.08)15 = $7.9
trillion in 15 years time. Again, this understates the true future liability, both because the
duration we employ is too short, and because we have made the most conservative possible
assumption regarding the liabilities’ convexity given the duration.
Recall that $2.5 trillion is the total of state level liabilities in the AAL as of the end of
2005. This liability includes projections for salary growth, but does not consider the projected
benefit accruals from additional years of service or new workers. We currently consider only the
right discount rate for these liabilities that have been accrued up to the present, i.e. liabilities
represented in the AAL calculation that states are required to provide. In other words, we
assume that all future accrued liabilities will be fully funded, an assumption that is contradicted
by the fact that many states are funding less than 100% of newly accrued liabilities.
The right discount rate for the AAL pension promise depends on the risk structure of the
liabilities and its covariance with pricing factors. If state pension promises were truly riskless,
meaning that pensioners would get the expected benefit in all states of the world, then one would
want to use a risk-free rate.
Our first main candidate for a discount rate is the 15-year strip Treasury rate as of the end
of 2005. This serves as a useful if imperfect benchmark for a risk-free rate. The imperfection
comes from the fact that long-term Treasury bond yields may contain a risk premium, either
because of default risk or in order to entice investors with shorter investment horizons to hold
them instead of shorter-maturity government debt, so in fact the actual yield on long-term
Treasury bonds is an upper bound on the risk-free rate.
To the extent that there is a risk that retirees will not get the expected benefit, or that the
assumptions inherent in projecting the pension payments may be incorrect, then one might want
to use a discount rate that is higher than the risk-free rate. However, the risk-free rate would still
be the right rate to use if these risks are uncorrelated with pricing factors, which in the context of
the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) means uncorrelated with the market portfolio. In other
words, the Treasury rate is approximately the appropriate discount rate if the liabilities are risk5

Essentially, we are assuming the entire liability comes due with a maturity equal to the duration. The single payment
“bullet” is less sensitive to falling discount rates than any other distribution of liabilities with the same duration.

7

free or if their risk is uncorrelated with the market portfolio. We proceed to consider discount
rates in the context of the CAPM single-factor pricing model.
If government pension payments are likely to be higher in a bull market and lower in a
bear market, then a higher discount rate than the risk-free rate is warranted. If government
pension payments are likely to be higher in the event of a market downturn, then a lower discount
rate than the risk-free rate is warranted.
There are two primary risk factors that affect the evolution of the liabilities that have
been accrued until now and that may be correlated with market pricing factors: i.) default risk;
and ii.) the risk that salary increases will be higher or lower than expected. There are other risk
factors in the liabilities, e.g. mortality and retirement assumptions, but these are unlikely to be
correlated with the market. There is also the issue of the magnitude of future benefit accruals
(due to additional years of service), but again, we begin under the assumption that states will fully
fund all future accrued benefits and consider just the liabilities accrued until now.
We start by considering discount rates that assume possible positive covariance of default
risk with the market, but zero covariance of salary increases with the market.6 We then consider
the likely extent of salary increase covariance and how it would affect our results. One hint as to
the appropriate discount rate that reflects default risk comes from state-specific general obligation
credit ratings, to which yields on states’ municipal general-obligation bonds are closely related.
If government pension liabilities have the same priority as other government debt, then the
discount rate should be related to municipal bond yields.
This leads us to consider another discount rate candidate: the yield on state general
obligation municipal bonds with a similar duration to the pension liabilities, grossed up to
eliminate the tax preference given to borrowing. In other words, for state i at time t, the taxcorrected yield would be roughly rit / (1-τb), where τb is a personal investor’s marginal tax rate on
interest income (35%). We will refer to this rate as the grossed-up muni rate.
The grossed-up muni rate rate is appropriate if the state is equally likely to default on its
pension obligations as it is to default on its other debt, but investors cannot receive tax preference
for bond issues in which the proceeds are used to fund pensions. State constitutions often build in
protections for government-sponsored pensions (National Conference on Public Employee
Retirement Systems (2007)), suggesting that their priority may even be higher than that of general
government debt and that the default probabilities of state pension obligations are at least as low

6

Inkmann and Blake (2007) derive optimal asset allocation as a function of initial funding ratios when the
probability of default covaries with the asset allocation. Maurer, Mitchell, and Rogalla (2008) consider
optimal asset allocation in the context of the German public sector pension reform.

8

as those of state general obligation debt. Furthermore, attempts by states to issue Pension
Obligation Bonds (POBs), which raise financing at the tax-preferred municipal bond rate in order
to fund state pension funds has lead to IRS rulings deeming these instruments “arbitrage bonds”
and disallowing tax deductibility (Ellement (2003)).
Despite these rulings, states may still be able to exploit the arbitrage to some extent by
increasing their issuance of general obligation debt that they classify as being used to fund
operations but which in fact allows them more financial slack. With this financial slack they
could increase their pension contributions, perhaps not with an obvious lump sum, but gradually
over time. To the extent that states can perform this arbitrage, the grossed-up muni rate is an
upper bound on the true risk of the pension liabilities.
To value the liabilities in today’s terms, a higher discount rate is required due to the fact
that the plans might default. The muni rate grossed up by the tax rate represents the risk that
states will default on their general obligation bonds. Assuming the CAPM is the correct model,
that rate is higher than the risk-free rate because there is a correlation of default risk on general
obligation bonds with the equity market. In the absence of correlation between the magnitude of
the pension promise and the stock market, the rate for pensions should be similar.
Now we relax the assumption of zero covariance in salary increases. What if the
evolution of pension liabilities is correlated with the market over long horizons? Recall that by
examining accrued liabilities, we are not considering variation in the size of the public sector, just
about the current promises to current workers. However, a correlation between real wages and
the market could generate positive covariance between pension liabilities and the market through
variation in salary growth, a point made by Black (1989) and others. This issue has been
analyzed in a general context with closed form solutions by Sundaresan and Zapatero (1997).
Empirically, Benzoni et al (2006) show that while the correlation between earnings growth and
stock returns are negligible on a short horizon, the correlation is higher on a longer positive
horizon. Lucas and Zeldes (2006) discuss these effects in the context of corporate pension plans
with a model in which the value of human capital and the value of the stock market have positive
covariance. In data simulated from their model of corporate outcomes, the one-year correlation
between earnings growth and stock returns is zero, the three-year correlation is 0.11, and the fiveyear correlation is 0.22.
The extent to which the grossed-up muni rate understates the discount rate as a result of
this correlation depends on the volatility of wage growth and market returns, as well as their
correlation. The loading of liabilities on the market is

9

βL =

σ L , M ρ L , M σ Lσ M
=
σ M2
σ M2

where σL is the volatility (standard deviation) of liabilities, σM is the volatility (standard deviation)
of the market portfolio, σL,M is the covariance between the two, and ρL,M is the correlation
coefficient between the two. The discount rate would have to be adjusted upwards by β*(market
premium), where for market premium we use lower and upper bounds of 6.5% and 8%
respectively. The volatility of liabilities (σL) relevant for this equation is the volatility of
currently accrued pension liabilities as the future unfolds. It includes variation due to possible
default and salary growth, but again not due to future service accruals.
We follow two procedures for investigating the short- and long-horizon covariance
between the market and public pension liabilities. First, we examine the annual standard
deviation of the actual liabilities for some samples of state pension funds for which we have a
balanced panel of data over a medium horizon. We consider one sample of 70 plans for which
we have data for 9 years (1997-2005) and another of 28 plans for which we have data for 13 years
(1993-2005). Table I shows the outcome of this analysis. The volatility of liability growth in
these samples is 1.56% and 1.52% respectively, and the beta with respect to the market portfolio
is 0.008 and -0.011 respectively. At one-year horizons, therefore, there appears to be no
appreciable covariance between the evolution of liabilities and returns on the market portfolio.
There is not enough data on liability growth to measure longer-horizon covariance
between liabilities and the market portfolio. However, it is possible to obtain long series of
salaries of government employees. Our second procedure makes use of salary data and considers
the fact that most DB pension plans make the payout a linear function of the average of the final
several years of average pay. We use the current population survey (CPS) of the US Census for
salary data. Appendix Table II shows the raw data. We use these data to calculate the three-year
moving average of full-time government employee average wages during the period 1962-2006.
Table II shows this analysis. The 3-year moving average of real government employee
salary growth has a mean of 0.7% and a standard deviation of 2.2%. The covariance of this
salary growth series with respect to excess returns on the market portfolio is 0.056, and the beta
with respect to excess returns on the market portfolio is 0.007. Collapsing the data into 3-year
horizons, we find a correlation of -0.098 and a beta of -0.019. Collapsing the data into 5-year
horizons, we find a correlation of -0.234 and a beta of -0.017. While these betas are certainly
measured imprecisely, there is no evidence that government salary growth and the stock market
are co-integrated at either short or long horizons.

10

Figure 2 shows the experience of government salaries versus market returns over three
15-year experiences covered by the sample. While 45 years of data is not sufficient to reject a
statistical hypothesis that these series are co-integrated over 15-year horizons, the overall pattern
appears to be that government wages have kept pace with inflation but little more, while equity
markets have increased dramatically during two of these time periods.
Note that even under the completely unrealistic assumption that the liabilities have a
volatility of 0.05 and a correlation with the market of 0.25, the implied discount rate would be
higher by only 6.5%*0.05*0.25/0.16 = 51 basis points. Even this implausibly high excess
discount rate is only one seventh of the 3.5% in excess of the risk-free rate employed by the
median plan. Furthermore, although the present value of liabilities is lower under this higher rate,
the potential magnitude of the underfunding is much larger, as we show in Section V.
It is perhaps unsurprising that government worker wages covary little with equity
markets, given the possibility of state-level fiscal stimulus and that government employment
terms are less driven by market forces. We note that this finding says nothing about the corporate
sector, where real wage growth might be highly correlated with the stock market (Lucas and
Zeldes (2006)).
Table III shows the distribution of state municipal bond ratings and implied discount
rates as of 2005. 46% of states have AA ratings from S&P, with 32% above that range and
roughly 22% below.
B. The Extent of Underfunding Under Different Discount Rates
Figure 3 repeats the analysis of Figure 1 using tax-corrected municipal yields. Figure 4
repeats the analysis using Treasury yields. Figure 5 summarizes these relations. To calculate the
liability under a different discount rate we assume a 15-year duration and use the simple equation:

Ladjusted

⎛ 1+ r
stated
= Lstated * ⎜
⎜ 1+ radjusted
⎝

15

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

The liabilities calculated in this manner represent lower bounds on the liabilities for each discount
rate. This is because our analysis underestimates the convexity of the liabilities, and consequently
underestimates the extent to which the liabilities rise as discount rates fall.7
7

The stated liability is calculated by discounting each time-t ahead liability at the stated discount rate,

Lstated = ∑ t

L

t
. If each of the liabilities were known, then the “true” adjusted liability could be calculated by
(1+ rstated )t
discounting using the adjusted discount rate,

Ltrue
adjusted = ∑ t

(1+ radjusted )

t

⎛

= Lstated × ∑ t Lt / (1L+ rstated ) × ⎜⎜ 11++rrstated
t

Lt

stated

⎝

11

adjusted

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

t

⎛

= Ladjusted × ∑ t Lt / (1L+ rstated ) × ⎜⎜ 11++rrstated
t

stated

⎝

adjusted

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

t −15

.

In section A above, we showed that if one treats unfunded pension liabilities discounted
at stated discount rates as state debt, total debt was 39% higher at the end of 2005 than if one
ignores unfunded pension liabilities as is typically done. Using the adjusted muni rate, pension
underfunding adds 113% to state GO debt. Total liabilities increase to $3.1 trillion, so that
underfunding increases to $901 billion, compared to $798 billion of state GO debt. Using the
risk-free Treasury rate, pension underfunding adds 234% to state GO debt. Total liabilities
increase to $4.0 trillion, so that underfunding increases to $1.9 trillion.
The total underfunding under the adjusted muni rate ($901 billion) is less than the total
underfunding under the Treasury rate ($1.9 trillion) because the adjusted muni rate gives weight
to the possibility that the states can default on their promises to public employees. That is, if true
pension underfunding is only $901 billion, current public employees are exposed to default risk
on their pensions. Insurance against this default would have a fair market cost of $1 trillion.
This analysis raises the question of whether pension and GO debt are substitutes or
complements in the cross-section. We therefore also consider the relation between state general
obligation (GO) debt and state pension liabilities and funding. We do this in order to understand
the concentration of risk in the system. Are the large pension liabilities and large state general
obligations concentrated in the same states, or are they present in different states?
Figure 6 shows several versions of this analysis. Each graph in the left column shows the
cross-sectional relation between state GO debt scaled by revenues and net state pension funding
scaled by revenues. Each graph in the right column shows the cross-sectional relation between
state GO debt scaled by revenues and state pension liabilities scaled by revenues. The top graphs
measure liabilities at stated discount rates, the middle graphs at the tax-adjusted muni rate, and
the bottom graphs at the Treasury rate.
The left column of graphs shows that states with higher GO debt as a share of state
revenues clearly also have larger pension underfunding as a share of state revenues. Note that
this relation is not simply driven by the size of the state, since both variables are scaled by state
revenues. In particular, the left column of graphs shows that each additional dollar of state GO
debt is associated with $0.28 more pension underfunding at stated discount rates, $0.39 more
pension underfunding at the tax-adjusted muni rate, and $0.44 more pension underfunding at the

If radjusted < rstated, then

⎛
⎜ 1+ rstated
⎜ 1+ radjusted
⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

t −15

is a convex function of t, so the sum on the right hand side of the previous

equation exceeds one, the value of the function evaluated at the weighted-average duration of 15 years. Our “adjusted”
liabilities

Lstated

are consequently less than the “true” adjusted liabilities

12

Ltrue
stated .

Treasury rate. The right column of graphs shows that states with more GO debt as a share of
revenue do not have large pension liabilities as a share of revenue. Indeed, it is pension
underfunding, not simply pension plan size, that correlates with the existence of GO debt.
C. Other Considerations: Actuarial Methods and Benefits to Be Accrued
The earning of pension benefits for workers is typically back-loaded in the workers’
careers. Given the standard DB contract, the tenure-benefits function is convex. One way to
account for this is to use a projected unit credit (PUC) method for calculating normal cost. This
method projects compensation growth to retirement but counts only benefits related to years of
service up to the present time as part of the AAL. This means that if the DB-covered government
workforce gets closer to retirement, the AAL will grow in a convex way. So current AAL and
recent AAL growth might mask large increases in the near future.
The more common method of AAL calculation in our sample is the entry age (EA)
method which smoothes the earning of benefits over time. Under this method, the AAL is likely
to grow over time in a close to linear fashion. Munnell et al (2008) find that 70% of public sector
plans use the EA method, with the remainder using PUC or another method.
In the above calculations, we combine liabilities calculated under the PUC and EA
methods. We note that the PUC method may disguise large looming increases in liabilities as
workers enter the convex portion of their benefit accrual curve. The EA method, on the other
hand, would overstate liabilities if we think that governments have some way to stop future
benefit accruals, as corporations have by converting to cash balance plans. Given the relative
lack of DC plans in the public sector, and the protections of state pension liabilities offered by
state constitutions, we would argue that the EA method gives an accurate picture.
Note that neither method assumes that there will be any growth in state workers.
Furthermore, the AAL implicitly assumes that all future normal costs will be fully funded. Thus
the current extent of pension underfunding must be seen as relative to benefits that have been
accrued until now, with some smoothing of benefit accrual possible under the EA method.
Finally, it is worth repeating that the liabilities in the measures above include projected
salary increases, but not effects of working another year (future normal cost). States are subject
to GASB guidelines that they should at least fund normal cost, although they may report that they
chose to fund less than the normal cost. However, the normal cost understates liability if the true
liability has a lower discount rate than the assumed discount rate. In other words, working
another year is in fact only partly funded under current funding guidelines, because it is assumed

13

that states can just put $1/(1+r)T in the pension fund to cover each $1 of promised benefits, where
r is the state-chosen discount rate.8
In this paper, we make the assumption that all future accrued benefits will be fully
funded. However, according to Munnell et al (2008) a full 43% of state and local governments
are not even paying their ARCs based on normal cost calculations at state-chosen discount rates.
This suggests that future benefit accruals are unlikely to be fully funded and that the expected
funding deficit is even worse than our findings suggest.

III. State DB Pension Investment Policy
Data on asset allocation within the public pension plans in our sample were collected
from three sources: the US Census of Governments, the Pensions and Investments (P&I) survey,
and the annual reports of the entities themselves if necessary. As shown in Table IV, each of
these data sources offers a somewhat different breakdown of asset allocation.
We use the information from these sources to allocate assets into the following
categories: domestic stocks, domestic government bonds, domestic corporate bonds, international
stocks, international government bonds, international corporate bonds, cash and cash equivalents,
private equity, real estate equity, mortgages, and other (primarily hedge funds). We use the
following procedure to aggregate information from the different sources.
Step 1. If no assets are in the “Other” census category that includes trusts, we begin with
the census numbers and then use the P&I survey to decompose stocks into international and
domestic stocks, and bonds into international and domestic bonds. We also use the P&I data to
determine allocations to private equity and real estate. If no P&I survey data exists, or if the P&I
numbers appear to conflict with the census numbers, then we collect data from the annual report
to obtain these decompositions.
Step 2. If the “Other” census category that includes trusts is less than 5% in the census
data, we categorize these assets based on the P&I survey and/or data from the annual reports.
Step 3. If the “Other” census category that includes trusts is greater than 5% in the
census data, we use the P&I survey as the primary source and use the census data and if necessary
the annual reports to distinguish domestic from international securities in the stock and bond
categories.
The summary statistics in Table IV illustrate the outcome of this categorization. We
obtain asset allocation data for 95 of the 108 plans in our sample (covering 99.3% of the assets).
8

Munnell et al (2008) report that 57% of state and local governments paid their full Annual Required Contributions
(ARCs) in 2006, with 16% contributing 80-99%, 13% contributing 60-79%, and 14% even less than 60%. Mitchell and
Smith (1994) find wide variations in this funding behavior.

14

We find the largest allocation is to domestic stock, which has a 45.8% asset-weighted mean.
International stock and domestic corporate bonds are the next largest categories at 16.4% and
14.4%, respectively. Domestic government bonds represent 9.7% of the asset-weighted portfolio.
The other categories combined make up the remaining 13.7%, with private equity and real estate
equity each amounting to about 4%. These figures bear similarity to the tabulations in Rauh
(2008) of corporate pension plans, in which total allocations to equity among major pension
sponsors as of the end of 2003 were approximately 60%.

IV. A Modest Proposal
Current government accounting standards encourage states to fund pension liabilities in
expectation, meaning that the expected future value of pension assets should equal the expected
future value of pension liabilities. This ignores the fact that any asset allocation strategy
generates a distribution of potential outcomes, with first-order welfare implications. For
example, a highly risky asset allocation strategy might allow pension liabilities to be funded in
expectation (on average), even though they might be massively underfunded 99% of the time.
In this section, we present an illustration of the problems inherent in focusing only on
meeting pension liabilities in expectation. If you accept the logic of GASB 25 and ASOP 27,
then you must accept the “modest proposal” we provide. This proposal is in the spirit of Jonathan
Swift’s 1729 essay, “For Preventing The Children of Poor People in Ireland From Being a Burden
to Their Parents or Country, and For Making Them Beneficial to The Public.”9 If you do not
accept this modest proposal, then you cannot accept the logic of GASB 25 and ASOP 27.
Suppose public pension fund managers increased their allocation in the stock market
from 60% to 70%. Assuming a 6.5% equity premium, a 4.5% risk free rate, and a 15 year
duration, plans in aggregate would miraculously be fully funded, as opposed to $300 billion short
under current asset allocation. All that GASB 25 and ASOP 27 require for full funding is that in
expectation, the plans will have $7.9 trillion in assets in 15 years’ time. An investment strategy
with a beta of one generates a 9% expected return, and the existing $2.175 trillion in assets
invested over 15 years generates $7.9 trillion in assets in expectation in 15 years’ time.
Now, by investing in futures contracts on the market or ETFs to continuously maintain a
market beta of 10, investment managers could free far more cash for the benefit of the people. In
fact, we calculate that such an investment strategy would allow for a windfall distribution in the
9

The premise of Swift’s proposal was that the children could be eaten: “I have been assured by a very knowing
American of my acquaintance in London, that a young healthy child well nursed is at a year old a most delicious,
nourishing, and wholesome food, whether stewed, roasted, baked, or boiled; and I make no doubt that it will equally
serve in a fricassee or a ragout” (Swift (1729)).

15

amount of $5,000 to every American man, woman and child, all while providing for a state
pension and OPEB system that appears fully funded. Under a nearly 100% annual expected
return (= 4.5% + Exp[10*Log[1.065]]), one only needs to invest $320 million today to meet (in
expectation) a liability of $7.9 trillion. This “frees up” $2.17 trillion of assets today. After
paying off the entire $800 billion in state debt, there is $1.37 trillion left, or almost $5,000 for
each of 280 million Americans. Of course, while funded in expectation due to a large right tail of
outcomes, the system is underfunded at maturity with 99.9% probability. With greater than 99%
probability the shortfall in 15 years would exceed $7 trillion.
The “modest proposal” presented above is provided in Swiftian language in the
accompanying box.
A Modest Proposal, adapted from Jonathan Swift (1729)
For Preventing the Employees of the States and Municipalities from Being a Burden to their Children or
Country
It is a melancholy object to those who peruse the financial statements of this great country’s public
entities, when they see the pension plans, welfare benefit plans, and other post employment benefits
crowded with massive liabilities. These pension and benefit plans, instead of relying on the high returns
that can be earned by investing in levered equity positions, private equity, and hedge funds, are forced to
employ taxpayer money in simple allocations of balanced stock and bond investing, siphoning off money
from the school budgets of their helpless infants: who as they grow up must either turn thieves to pay their
tax bills or leave their dear native country to Belize or the Cayman Islands.
We think it is agreed by all parties that this prodigious grasp of the state employee pensions onto the
arms and heels and into the pockets of children, and frequently the pockets of their mothers and fathers, is
in the present deplorable state of the union a very great additional grievance; and, therefore, whoever could
find out a fair, cheap, and easy method of making these employees’ pensions sound, useful, and beneficial
component entities of the commonwealth, would deserve so well of the public as to have his statue set up
for a preserver of the nation.
But our intention is very far from being confined to provide only for the professed beggars who are the
employees of the states and municipalities; it is of a much greater extent, and shall in fact provide for all
citizens and workers and their children who are so burdened by taxes as to have to demand our charity in
the streets.
As to our own part, having turned our thoughts for many months upon this important subject, and
maturely weighed the several schemes of other projectors, we have always found them grossly mistaken in
the computation. It is true, an employee just beginning to accrue a pension may be supported by the meager
returns that present managers acting unconscionably are generating by investing in low-yielding debt
instruments. But it is exactly as the financial demands of state and local pensioners grow large that we
propose to provide for them in such a manner as instead of being a charge upon the taxpayers and their
children, or needing our support for the rest of their lives, they shall on the contrary contribute to the
feeding, and partly to the clothing of many households.
There is likewise another great advantage in our scheme, that it will prevent those voluntary
terminations of defined benefit pension plan, and that horrid practice of converting them to defined
contribution plans, alas! Too frequent among us! Sacrificing the poor innocent public employees more to
avoid the funding expense than the simple administrative costs. The fate of the public employee on a cash
balance plan would move tears and pity in the most savage and inhuman breast.
The number of dollars in this land owed to state employee pensions alone is usually reckoned at $2.5
trillion at an 8% discount rate and a 15 year duration; this being granted our society needs $7.9 trillion in 15
years’ time if our state pensions are to be fully funded.
The question therefore is how this number shall be provided for, which, as we have already said under
the present situation of affairs, is utterly impossible by all the methods hitherto proposed. For we can
neither tax current employees to the necessary extent, nor cut spending to the necessary extent, nor expect

16

employees to work over the age of 60. We confess that public employees learn the rudiments of retirement
much earlier, during which time, they can however be properly looked upon only as pensioners. We have
indeed been informed by a principal gentleman in the county of Cook in the state of Illinois, who protested
to us that he never knew above one or two instances of public employees over the age of 60, even in a part
of the land so renowned for public employment.
We shall now therefore humbly propose our own thoughts, which we hope will not be liable to the
least objection. We have been assured by our very knowing acquaintances at our university that a young
healthy investment in an exchange traded fund that continuously maintained a market beta loading of 10
would generate 10 times the expected excess market return (which we take conservatively to be a simple
annual rate of 6.5%). With continuous rebalancing, and accounting for the risk free rate (which we take
conservatively to be 4.5%), this investment strategy would yield an expected annual return of over 90% per
annum.
We have reckoned upon the simplest of desktop spreadsheet applications that an investment of $320
million thus made would reach in expectation $7.9 trillion in 15 years’ time. Seeing that $2.175 trillion of
funds have been set aside in public pension funds being invested in irresponsibly low-yielding assets, in
excess of $2.17 trillion could be removed from pension funds and spent on paying down our eight hundred
billion of state debt. This would then leave $1.37 trillion to be spent on our nation’s schools, highways,
and baseball stadiums or distributed as a windfall gain to taxpayers.
We do therefore humbly offer it to public consideration that of the two hundred eighty million citizens
of the United States, each could receive a share of this $1.37 trillion amounting to a windfall tax dividend
of nearly $5,000.
We have already computed the fee for the managers in such an ETF (in which we include all of the
investment bankers, hedgies, capital markets desk traders, accountants, and desktop spreadsheet laborers)
to be about 1% per annum. While this raises the amount that must be set aside now from $320 million to
$9 billion, we believe that no gentleman would repine to give even $10 billion as such a donation to the
capital markets would only reduce the value of his $5,000 net profit by approximately $50. The squire will
have $4,950 in net profit and be fiscally fit until the next fiscal catastrophe should ensue.
Those who are more thrifty (as we must confess the times require) may donate some of the proceeds to
paying down the federal debt, which ignoring the artificial dressing due to the off-budget position of
Medicare and Social Security will make admirable improvements in our nation’s fiscal position. As to our
financial centers such as New York and Chicago, investment bankers we may be assured will not be
wanting in helping state and local governments to establish their derivatives positions.
A very worthy person, a true lover of his country, and whose virtues I highly esteem, was lately
pleased in discoursing on this matter to offer a refinement upon our scheme. He said that many gentlemen
of this nation, having of late destroyed their retirement savings, he conceived that the want of money in
401(k) plans might be well supplied by the windfall gains from the new investment strategy. But with due
deference to so excellent a friend and so deserving a patriot, we cannot be altogether in his sentiments; for
as to the individual investors, my American acquaintance assured me, from frequent experience, that their
investment performance in their 401(k) plans was so generally poor and the frequency of their trading so
disagreeable, so that to fatten their defined contribution accounts now would not answer the charge.
We profess, in the sincerity of our hearts, that we have not the least personal interest in endeavoring to
promote this necessary work, having no other motive than the public good of our country, by advancing our
trade, providing for elderly and infants alike, relieving the poor, and giving some pleasure to the rich. We
ourselves are not participants in public defined benefit pension plans, as we are not employees of the state,
and are unlikely to be so unless in the future we become employed by state universities.

V. Intergenerational Transfers in the System
Section IV showed that analyzing average funding outcomes provides an insufficient
picture of the welfare implications of current policy. In this section, we examine the distribution
of potential outcomes in terms of the magnitude of the funding shortfall or surplus. Future
funding surpluses represent transfers from the current generation to future generations, while
future funding shortfalls represent transfers from future generations to the current generation.

17

We also consider the fact that the magnitude of the potential transfers does not adequately
characterize the true cost of the uncertainty in the plans’ future funding status. Funding shortfalls
will occur if the assets perform poorly over relatively long horizons, meaning that the economy as
a whole has grown at a rate that has fallen short of expectations. That is, our generation will be
foisting a large financial obligation on our children precisely in those states of the world in which
our children’s standard of living is lower than our own. The worse off the next generation is, the
greater the burden they will carry. In order to account for the fact that funding shortfalls coincide
with high marginal utility states of the world, we consider here the risk-neutral distribution of the
future funding surplus or shortfall.10
Characterizing the distribution of the future funding shortfall/surplus is equivalent to
characterizing the joint distribution of the plans’ future assets and liabilities. The plans’ future
liabilities may be calculated using the current actuarial values of the liabilities, the discount rates
employed by the plans, and the duration of the plans’ liabilities. While the actuarial liabilities of
the plans and the discount rates they employ are stated annually in the CAFRs, the CAFRs do not
provide the duration of the plans’ liabilities. Our estimates of the true magnitude of plans’
liabilities consequently depend critically on our assumptions regarding the duration of the plans’
liabilities.
As noted previously, corporate DB plans have shorter durations than state plans, both
because they have fewer young workers, and because they typically do not provide COLAs. We
assume that the duration of state DB pension liabilities is 15 years. Figure 7 shows the expected
future liabilities of the states’ DB pension liabilities as a function of the duration of the plans’
liabilities, for durations from 15 to 20 years, in trillions of 2005 dollars.11,12
Given the expected magnitude of the plans’ liabilities we can calculate the probability of
each possible funding outcome, i.e., the distribution of the possible future aggregate surplus,
under standard log-normal assumptions regarding the evolution the plans’ assets and liabilities. If
the liabilities are well forecast (i.e., known), and if plans maintain their current investment
strategies, then the probability that the realized value of the assets exceeds the value of the
liabilities by at least s is
10

The risk-neutral probability of an outcome is the fair market price (in cents) of a dollar, plus interest, received in the
event of the outcome.
11
Real discount rates are calculated assuming each plans’ stated discount rate accounts for both the real discount rate
and inflation, (1 + mnominal) = (1 + mreal)(1 + i), where mnominal is the stated discount rate, mreal is the real component, and i
is inflation. The component due to expected inflation comes from a similar relation for bonds, (1 + rnominal) = (1 +
rreal)(1 + i), using US Treasury data on yields. At the end of 2005 the real yield curve was basically flat at two percent
(2.06% for 15 years, and 2.04% for 20 years), while nominal interest rates on long-dated bonds were roughly four and a
half percent (4.50% for 15 years, and 4.61% for 20 years).
12
For each duration the liabilities are conservatively estimated, because we treat them as a single payment due in the
future, and consequently underestimate their convexity.

18

P [ AT − LT > s ] = N ( d 2s )
where N is the cumulative distributions for the standard normal and

d 2s =

ln

( ) + (μ
A0
s + LT

2

A

)

− σ2A T

σA T

.

This expression is familiar from the Black-Scholes option pricing equation. It says that the
probability that the value of the assets exceeds the liability by at least the surplus level depends
on the geometric distance, measured in the standard deviation of the log of the asset’s future

(

)

price, between the most probable future asset value ( A0 exp μ A − σ A2 / 2 T ) and the sum of the
future liability and the surplus.
More generally, if the magnitude of the time-T liabilities are uncertain, with the logliabilities normally distributed around ln LT −

σ L2T
2

with standard deviation σ L T , where LT is

the expected liability at time-T, then the probability that the surplus exceeds s is

(

)

( (

⎡ ln ( e z − s ) − ln L − σ L2T − ρσ L z − ln A − σ A2T
T
T
σA
2
2
⎢
N
∫ ⎢
1 − ρ 2σ L T
z = ln s
⎢⎣
∞

)) ⎤⎥ n ⎡⎢ z − ( ln A − ) ⎤⎥
T

⎥ ⎢
⎥⎦ ⎣⎢

σA T

σ A2 T
2

dz
⎥σ T
A
⎦⎥

where ρ is the correlation between ln LT and ln AT, and n is the density for the standard normal.
Details are provided in the appendix.
Using the previous equation we can characterize the distribution of the funding surplus in
15 years. This requires estimating the expected growth rate and volatility of the plans’ assets, as
well as the uncertainty regarding future liabilities, and the correlation of these liabilities with the
dedicated pension assets.
Table V presents the volatility of each asset class included in Table IV, and the
correlations between the asset classes’ returns. For each asset class, with the exception of private
equity, we estimate the volatilities and correlations using five years of monthly data,
encompassing the calendar years 2001 through 2005. For domestic equity and cash equivalents
we use Fama-French factors (MKT and RF). For the bonds, mortgage backed securities, and
hedge funds we use Lehman indices (U.S. Treasuries, U.S. Corporate Investment Grade, Global
Treasuries ex-U.S., Global Credit Corporate, U.S. Mortgage Backed Securities, and Hedge Fund
Index (Asset Weighted)). For foreign equities and real estate we use the MSCI indices (World
ex-USA Standard Core and U.S. REIT). For private equity, we use annual data beginning in
1983 from Thomson Financial’s Venture Economics database and take a value-weighted average

19

of Venture Capital and Private Equity sector returns (see Kaplan and Rauh (2008) for details).
Due to the lack of high-frequency data, we are forced to estimate the volatility of private equity
and its correlations with the other asset classes at an annual frequency.
Assuming the plans maintain their current asset allocations, and using the estimated
variance-covariance matrix, the volatility of the aggregate asset portfolio is 8.92%. For the
volatility of the plans’ liabilities we use 1.5%, as this is the number observed directly in the timeseries data on plan liabilities. The assets and liabilities also appear uncorrelated in the data, so we
present results assuming the correlation between the two is zero. We discuss robustness to these
assumptions below.
Figure 8 depicts the distribution of possible plan shortfalls or surplus in 15 years, using
the log-normal model for the evolution of the assets and liabilities, and under the conservative
assumption that the duration of the states’ DB pension plans is only 15 years. The figure depicts
the probability density for each surplus, measured in trillions of 2005 dollars, and shows both the
objective probabilities (bold curve) and the risk neutral probabilities (thin curve). The objective
distribution assumes the plans’ assets carry an annual Sharpe ratio of 0.41, which corresponds to
roughly a 6.5% market price of risk and a market volatility of 16%.13 Figure 9 shows the
sensitivity of these results to the plans’ asset holdings. It shows the cumulative distribution
function for the funding surpluses, as a function of the weight on risky assets in the plans’ asset
portfolios, highlighting the distribution under the states’ current allocation.
Table VI, which shows the magnitude of the under or over funding for nine different
levels of the cumulative probability distribution, provides an alternative expression of the results
of Figure 8. If current investment strategies are maintained for 15 years, and assuming a 6.5%
risk-premium, there is a 50% chance of an aggregate underfunding in excess of $750 billion, a
25% chance of an underfunding of at least $1.74 trillion, and a 10% chance of an underfunding in
excess of $2.48 trillion (all in 2005 dollars). The probability that the plans are fully funded is
barely one third. Even assuming an implausibly high 8% risk premium, the plans are more likely
to be underfunded than overfunded in 15 years.
Accounting for state prices, the distribution of funding outcomes looks even worse. The
risk-neutral probability that the value of the liabilities will exceed that of the assets in 15 years is
97.3%. With 50 percent probability, the net liability will exceed $2.66 trillion (2005 dollars).

13

This analysis assumes that public pension plans do not generate negative alpha, i.e. that they do not perform worse
than the market benchmark. Coronado, Engen and Knight (2003) provide evidence that public plans earned a
significantly lower rate of return than private plans during the period they analyze. Yang and Mitchell (2006) find that
certain governance structures can enhance public pension plan investment performance.

20

We can also calculate the fair market price of insurance against bad funding outcomes.
This insurance is essentially an exchange option. It gives the holder the right to trade the assets
for the value of the liabilities in T years, should the value of the liabilities exceed that of the assets
at that time. This exchange option may be priced using Black’s formula for pricing options on
futures contracts.14 Under the states’ assumptions regarding the future magnitude of their
liabilities, the market price of insuring against bad funding outcomes is almost $1.9 trillion,
essentially the entire funding shortfall. The cost of this insurance is almost as large as the funding
shortfall because the value of the potential over funding is trivial relative to the potential
underfunding, only $16 billion.15 The expected overfunding is roughly $500 billion in 2005
dollars (33% chance of overfunding times $1.5 trillion conditional overfunding), roughly half the
magnitude of the expected underfunding, but the surplus comes only in low marginal utility states
of the world. The shortfall, on the contrary, comes in high marginal utility states of the world.16
In Table VII, we examine the robustness of these results to different assumptions
regarding the volatility of liabilities (σL) and their real correlation with the market portfolio (ρ).
Greater uncertainty regarding the future value of the liabilities (higher σL) generates a wider
dispersion of outcomes. Higher correlations with the market portfolio reduce the dispersion of
the outcomes, because increases in the value of pension liabilities coincide with increases in the
value of the assets used to fund them. The overall effect of the uncertainty in the liabilities
dominates, so that with σL = 0.05 and ρ = 0.25, the outcomes are still more dispersed than with σL
= 0.015 and ρ = 0. We emphasize, however, that high correlations and high volatility are not
consistent with what is seen in the data (see Section I).

VI. Conclusion
Current government accounting rules allow public pension liabilities to be discounted at
expected rates of return on pension assets. Under these rules, state pensions appear to be nearly
fully funded. This has led some analysts to the conclusion that the public pension system in its
current form is not placing any burden on future generations. As we have shown, this view is
misguided. Under the government accounting logic, states could always eliminate their
14

The value of the exchange option is the Black price of the “futures contract” on the liabilities, struck at the futures
price of the assets, using the volatility of the liabilities-to-assets ratio,
L0 N ( d 2 + σ L / A ) − A0 N ( d 2 )

where

σ L / A = (σ A2 + σ L2 − 2 ρσ Aσ L )

1/ 2

, and

(

d 2 = ln ( L0 / A0 ) −

15

σ L2 / AT
2

) / (σ

L/ A

)

T .

This means that even if the government is likely to squander overfunding (or promise it to beneficiaries as in Bodie
(1990)), the value of that option is small taking the state pricing into account.
16
These numbers assume a 6.5% market price of risk. For numbers assuming an 8% risk premium, see Table VI.

21

underfunding no matter how large, simply by investing in sufficiently risky assets. In fact,
investing in riskier assets may raise expected returns, but it also increases the probability of a
severe underfunding. Under current investment strategies and a standard equity premium of
6.5%, state pension plans realize a shortfall with two-thirds probability in 15 years. The expected
conditional shortfall is almost $1.5 trillion in 2005 dollars.
Moreover, bad outcomes occur precisely in states for which marginal utility is high, so
that the true welfare implications of the potential shortfalls is much larger. The cost of insuring
both taxpayers and plan participants against potential underfunding on a 15 year horizon would
be almost $2 trillion in 2005 dollars. Investing more in risky assets has no effect on the cost of
this insurance.
These results also are relevant for the debate about whether Social Security could be prefunded with the assets invested in equities to achieve higher expected returns. Even ignoring
concerns about the appropriate role of government in allocating capital, our analysis shows that
an underfunded system cannot magically reduce the burden on future generations simply by
taking more risk.
Perhaps a more stark example on the federal level is the recent decision by the Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) to increase its asset allocation to equities. The alleged
motivation for doing so is to generate higher returns. The logic for taking on risk to get higher
returns is even worse for the PBGC than it is for the states. While the states’ pension liabilities
appear uncorrelated with the market, the PBGC has large unrecognized liabilities, plans it will
have to take over as a result of future corporate bankruptcies, which are strongly negatively
correlated with the market. This suggests an optimal asset allocation policy that is significantly
short, not long, the market.
At a given funding level, increases in public pension investment risk would be irrelevant
for taxpayers if taxpayers actually unwind those changes by decreasing their own risk exposures.
If taxpayers do not recognize the exposures created by government investment policies, then such
policies expose tax-payers to hidden risk.

Appendix: Distribution of the surplus
The probability that the surplus exceeds any given level s is

P [ AT − LT > s ] = P ⎡⎣ln AT > ln ( s + LT ) ⎤⎦ .
Assuming LT is known, and making the standard log-normal assumptions on AT , i.e., that

((

2

)

)

AT ∼ A0 exp μ A − σ2A T + σ A T χ where A0 is the current value of assets, mA and sA are the
22

asset’s expected growth rate and volatility, and χ is a standard normal random variable, then this
probability is equal to

⎡
ln
⎢
P χ>
⎢
⎢⎣

( ( ) + (μ

where d 2s = ln

A0
s + LT

2

( ) − (μ
σA

) )(

)

− σ2A T ⎤
⎥ = N ds
( 2)
⎥
T
⎥⎦

s + LT
A0

2

A

)

− σ2A T / σ A T . That is, the probability of realizing a surplus

A

that exceeds any given level s looks like the Black-Scholes probability of exercising a call option
struck at s + LT, using the expected growth rate of assets under the employed measure.
More generally, assuming LT is unknown,

P [ AT − LT > s ] = ∫

∞

a = ln s

P ⎣⎡ a − s > LT AT = a ⎦⎤ P [ AT = a ]da.

((

If LT is also log-normally distributed then LT ∼ L0 exp μ L −

σ L2
2

)T + σ

L

(

T ρχ + 1 − ρ 2 χ ′

))

where χ’ is a standard normal random variable uncorrelated with χ and ρ is the correlation of the
growth in the assets and liabilities, and we can write the liabilities as

LT = ( AT / α )

((

where α = A0 exp μ A −

σ A2
2

ρσ L /σ A

β exp

(

)T ) and β = L exp (( μ
0

1 − ρ 2σ L T χ ′
2

L

)

) )

− σ2L T . Using this, we can rewrite the

right hand side of the previous equation as

⎡ ⎛
a−s
P
∫a = s ⎢⎢ln ⎜⎜ β ( a / α ) ρσ L /σ A
⎣ ⎝
∞

⎤
⎞
⎟ > 1 − ρ 2 σ L T χ ′ ⎥ P [ AT = a ] da.
⎟
⎥⎦
⎠

this may be rewritten, letting z ≡ ln a and using the fact that χ′ and ln AT are independently
distributed normal random variables, as

(

)

⎡ ln ( e z − s ) / β − ρσ L ( z − ln α ) ⎤ ⎡ z − ln α ⎤ dz
σA
⎥n⎢
N⎢
⎥
∫
2
⎢
⎥ ⎣ σA T ⎦σA T
−
1
ρ
σ
T
z = ln s
L
⎣
⎦
∞

where n and N are the density and cumulative distributions for the standard normal, respectively.
References
Bader, Lawrence N. and Jeremy Gold, 2004, “The Case Against Stock in Public Pension Funds,”
Pension Research Council Working Paper.
Benzoni, L., P. Collin Dufresne, and R. Goldstein (2006), “Portfolio Choice over the Life-cycle
when the Stock and Labor Markets are Cointegrated,” Working Paper, University of Minnesota.

23

Bergstresser, Daniel, Mihir A. Desai, and Joshua Rauh, 2006, “Earnings Manipulation, Pension
Assumptions, and Managerial Investment Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1),
157-195.
Barclays Global Investors, 2004, “The Retirement Benefits Crisis: A Survival Guide,” Barclays
Global Investors Investment Insights 7(5).
Black, Fischer, 1989, “Should You Use Stocks to Hedge Your Pension Liability?” Financial
Analysts Journal 45(1), 10-12.
Blake, David, and Joachim Inkmann, 2007, “Pension Liability Valuation and Asset Allocation in
the Presence of Funding Risk,” Netspar Discussion Paper 2007-008.
Bodie, Zvi, 1990, “The ABO, the PBO, and Pension Investment Policy,” Financial Analysts
Journal 46, 27-34.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2008, “National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in State
and Local Governments in the United States, September 2007,” BLS Summary 08-02,
http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/sp/ebsm0007.pdf
Coronado, Julia L., Eric M. Engen, and Brian Knight, 2003, “The Investment Practices and
Performance of State and Local Pensions,” National Tax Journal 56(3), 579-594.
Ellement, Jason, “A Guide to Pension Obligation Bonds,” 2003, Working Paper, Callan
Associates Charter Investments Institute.
Gierz, J. Fred and Leslie E. Papke, 2007, “Public Pension Plans: Myths and Realities for State
Budgets,” National Tax Journal 60(2), 305-323.
Gold, Jeremy, 2002, “Risk Transfer in Public Pension Plans,” Working Paper 2002-18, Wharton
Pension Research Council.
Government Accounting Office (GAO), 2007, “State and Local Government Retirement Benefits:
Current Status of Benefit Structures, Protections, and Fiscal Outlook for Funding Future Costs,”
GAO-07-1156, www.gao.gov/new.items/d071156.pdf.
Ippolito, Richard A. (2002): “Replicating Default Risk in a Defined Benefit Plan,” Financial
Analysts Journal, 58 (6), 31-40.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Joshua Rauh, 2008, “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the
Rise in the Highest Incomes?,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Lucas, Deborah and Stephen P. Zeldes, 2006, “Valuing and Hedging Defined Benefit Pension
Obligations – the Role of Stocks Revisited,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Maurer, Raimond, Olivia S. Mitchell and Ralph Rogalla, 2008, “The Victory of Hope over
Angst? Funding, Asset Allocation, and Risk-Taking in German Public Sector Pension Reform,”
in Dirk Broeders, Sylvester Eijffinger, and Aerdt Houben (eds), Frontiers in Pensions Finance,
Edward Elgar, 51-81.

24

Merrill Lynch Research, 2007, “Public Plans Take Center Stage,” Research Note.
Mitchell, Olivia S., and Robert S. Smith, 1994, “Pension Funding in the Public Sector,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 76(2), 278-290.
Munnell, Alicia, Kelly Haverstick, Steven Sass, and Jean-Pierre Aubry, 2008, “The Miracle of
Pension Funding by State and Local Pension Plans,” Center for Retirement Research, Issue in
Brief #5.
National Association of State Retirement Administrators, 2003-2006, Public Fund Survey.
National Conference on Public Employee Retirement Systems (NCPERS), 2007, “State
Constitutional Protections for Public Sector Retirement Benefits,”
www.ncpers.org/Files/News/03152007RetireBenefitProtections.pdf
Petersen, Mitchell A., 1996, “Allocating Assets and Discounting Cash Flows: Pension Plan
Finance,“ in P. A. Fernandez, J. A. Turner, and R. P. Hinz (eds.), Pensions, Savings and Capital
Markets, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Labor.
Pew Charitable Trust, 2007, Promise with a Price: Public Sector Retirement Benefits.
Rauh, Joshua, 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of
Corporate Pension Plans,” Journal of Finance 61, 33-71.
Rauh, Joshua, 2008, “Risk Shifting versus Risk Management: Investment Policy in Corporate
Pension Plans,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Sundaresan, Suresh and Fernando Zapatero, 1997, “Valuation, Optimal Asset Allocation and
Retirement Incentives of Pension Plans,” Review of Financial Studies 10(3), 631-660.
Swift, Jonathan, 1729, A Modest Proposal, various editions.
Waring, M. Barton, 2004a, “Liability-relative investing,” Journal of Portfolio Management 30(4).
Waring, M. Barton, 2004b, “Liability-relative investing II,” Journal of Portfolio Management
31(1).
Yang, Tongxuan (Stella) & Olivia S. Mitchell, 2006, “Public Pension Governance, Funding, and
Performance: A Longitudinal Appraisal,” in John Evans and John Piggott (eds), Pension Fund
Governance: A Global Perspective, Edward Elgar (forthcoming).

25

3.0

18
Frequency, Right Axis
16

Kernel Estimate of PDF,
unweighted, Left Axis

2.5

14

Kernel Estimate of PDF, weighted
by Liabilities, Left Axis

12

Density

2.0

10
8
6

1.0

Number of Plans

1.5

4
0.5
2
0

0.0

Pension Funding Status
12

10

Number of States

8

6

4

2

0

Unrecognized Effect of Pension Funding on State Debt

Figure 1: Distribution of Funding Levels in State Pension Plans at Stated Discount Rates
The upper graph shows the distribution of underfunding or overfunding in state pension plans at
discount rates provided by the states themselves. The lower graph shows the distribution of the
increase in state debt that occurs when adding the pension funding gap calculated at the stated
discount rates to state general obligation debt.

26

Nominal Wages and rM

Real Wages and rM-rf

1962-1976

1962-1976

1976

1975

1974

1973

1971

1972

1970

1969

1977-1991
300

900
800

250

700

200

600
500

Index

400

150
100

300
200

50

100

1992-2006

450

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1984

1983

1992-2006

300

400

1982

1981

1980

1979

1977

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

0
1977

0

1978

Index

1986

1977-1991

1985

1962

1976

1975

1974

1973

1972

1971

1970

1969

1968

1967

1966

1965

1964

1963

1962

0

1968

50

1967

100

1966

150

1965

Index

Index

200

1964

250

200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1963

300

250

350
200
Index

Index

300
250
200

150

150

100

100

50

50
2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1992

2006

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

wage index of government workers (1992=100)
rm (1992=100)

1993

0

0

wage index of government workers - CPI (1992=100)
rm-rf (1992=100)

Figure 2: Government Salary Growth and Market Returns
This figure shows the extent of co-movement between returns on a wage index of government
workers and returns on the market portfolio. The wage index comes from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) of the US Census for all government workers between 1962 and 2006. Consumer
Price Inflation (CPI) growth is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) website. The return on
the US stock market and the risk-free rate is extracted from the Ken French data.

27

3.0

20
Frequency, Right Axis
18

2.5

2.0

Kernel Estimate of PDF, unweighted,
Left Axis

16

Kernel Estimate of PDF, weighted by
Liabilities, Left Axis

14

1.5

10
8

1.0

6

Number of Plans

Density

12

4

0.5

2
0

0.0

Pension Funding Status
20
18
16

Number of States

14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

Unrecognized Effect of Pension Funding on State Debt

Figure 3. Distribution of Funding Levels in State Pension Plans at the Municipal Bond Rate
Excluding the Tax Benefit. Pension liabilities have been adjusted to a discount rate that equals
the state’s municipal bond discount rate divided by (1-0.35), assuming a 15-year duration. The
upper graph shows the distribution of underfunding or overfunding in state pension plans using
this rate. The lower graph shows the distribution of the increase in state debt that occurs when
adding the pension funding gap calculated at this discount rate to state general obligation debt.

28

25

4.0
Frequency, Right Axis
3.5
Kernel Estimate of PDF, unweighted,
Left Axis
3.0

Kernel Estimate of PDF, weighted by
Liabilities, Left Axis

2.5

15
Number of Plans

Density

20

2.0

10

1.5

1.0
5
0.5

0.0

0

Pension Funding Status

16

14

Number of States

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

Unrecognized Effect of Pension Funding on State Debt

Figure 4. Distribution of Funding Levels in State Pension Plans at the Treasury Rate
Pension liabilities have been adjusted to a discount rate that equals the state’s municipal bond
discount rate / (1-0.35), assuming a 15-year duration. The upper figure shows the distribution of
underfunding or overfunding in state pension plans using this rate. The lower graph shows the
distribution of the increase in state general obligation debt that occurs when adding the pension
funding gap calculated at this discount rate.

29

4.0
unweighted, Treasury
3.5

weighted by Liabilities, Treasury

3.0

unweighted, Muni Discount Rate
(Excluding Tax Benefit)
weighted by Liabilities, Muni Discount
Rate (Excluding Tax Benefit)

2.5
Density

unweighted, Stated AAL
2.0

weighted by Liabilities, Stated AAL

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Pension Funding Status
40
Stated Discount Rates

35

Muni Rates (Excluding Tax Subsidy)

Number of States

30

Treasury Rate

25

20

15

10

5

0
≤0%

0% to 100%
100% to 200%
Unrecognized Effect of Pension Funding on State Debt

200% to 300%

Figure 5. Distribution of Funding Levels in State Pension Plans at Various Rates
The upper graph shows the cross-sectional distribution of state funding statuses as of 2005 under
different discount rate assumptions. The lower graph shows the cross-sectional distribution of the
impact of pension underfunding on state finances under different discount rate assumptions.

30

2.5
Stated Pension Liabilities / State
Revenues

Stated Pension Funding / State
Revenues

0.2
0.1
0
‐0.1 0

0.5

1

1.5

‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
y = ‐0.2812x ‐ 0.0964
R² = 0.1178

‐0.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

y = 0.0324x + 1.3636
R² = 0.0005

‐0.6
0

‐0.7

0

State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

3
0

0.5

1

1.5

Grossed‐Up Muni Rate Pension Liabilities /
State Revenues

Grossed‐Up Muni Rate Pension Funding /
State Revenues

0.0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐0.8
y = ‐0.3928x ‐ 0.3633
R² = 0.1227

‐1.0
‐1.2
‐1.4

State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

2
1.5
1
y = 0.144x + 1.6304
R² = 0.0058

0.5
0
0

0.5
1
1.5
State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

4.0
0

0.5

1

1.5

3.5

‐0.5

3.0
2.5

‐1.0

2.0

y = ‐0.4427x ‐ 0.8285
R² = 0.0833

1.5
1.0

‐2.0

‐2.5

2.5

Treasury Rate Pension Liabilities / State
Revenues

Treasury Rate Pension Funding / State
Revenues

0.0

‐1.5

0.5
1
1.5
State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

y = 0.1938x + 2.0956
R² = 0.0063

0.5
0.0

State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

0

0.5
1
1.5
State General Obligation Debt / State Revenues

Figure 6: State General Obligation Debt and Pension Funding
The three graphs on the left show the cross-sectional relation between state general obligation
(GO) debt scaled by state revenues and pension funding scaled by state revenues for the year
2005. The graphs on the right show the relation between state GO debt scaled by state revenues
and state pension liabilities scaled by state revenues. The top graphs measure liabilities at stated
discount rates, the middle graphs measure liabilities at the municipal rate grossed up by the
statutory tax rate of 35%, and the bottom graphs measure liabilities at the Treasury rate.

31

Future Liabilities

H1012 2005 dollarsL

7
6.75
6.5
6.25

16

17

18

19

20

Duration of
Liabilities H yearsL

5.75
5.5

Figure 7: Duration and Future Liabilities
This figure shows the magnitude of the future plan liabilities, in 2005 dollars, as a function of the
duration of the plans’ current liabilities.
Probability Density
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

-4

-2

2

4

6

8

FundingSurplus
$1012 H2005dollars L

Figure 8: Density of Funding Outcomes Under Current Investment Strategies
This figure shows the probability density for possible outcomes for the funding surplus in 15
years (in trillions of 2005 dollars), assuming plans maintain their current investment strategies.
The bold line depicts the objective probability distribution, while the thin line depicts the riskneutral distribution.

32

Objective probabilities
0

0.25

Marketweight in
theasset portfolio
0.5
0.75
1
1
0.75
00.5

Cumulative
Probability
0
0.25
5

0

2.5
0
-2.5
-5

Fundingsurplus
$1012 H2005dollars L

Risk-neutral probabilities
0

0.25

Marketweight in
theasset portfolio
0.5
0.75
1
1
0.75
00.5

Cumulative
00.25 Probability
5

0

2.5
0
-2.5
-5

Fundingsurplus
$1012 H2005dollars L

Figure 9: Cumulative Distribution Function of Funding Outcomes
This figure shows the distribution of funding outcomes in 15 years (in trillions of 2005 dollars),
as a function of the market weight in the asset portfolio. The figure assumes the actuarial
liabilities are calculated using plans’ stated discount rates and a 15 year duration. The bold line
shows the portfolio with the same volatility as the aggregate state pension assets.

33

Table I: Growth Rate of Liabilities in Balanced Panels
This table shows the mean and standard deviation of the accrued actuarial liability (AAL) for balanced
panels of state government pension plans. All data are from annual reports of state pension plans. The US
Census of Governments lists 112 state pension plans with more than $1 billion in assets as of the end of
2005. AAL data are available from annual reports for 108 of those plans as of 2005. For 70 plans we are
able to collect a balanced panel back to 1997 and for 28 we are able to collect a balanced panel back to
1993.

Balanced Panel 1993-2005
Accrued Actuarial Liability (AAL)
$ billions
Growth Rate
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

426.4
465.2
500.4
532.5
562.4
602.9
666.3
720.8
780.3
836.2
900.2
948.4
1001.9

9.10%
7.57%
6.41%
5.61%
7.21%
10.52%
8.17%
8.26%
7.16%
7.66%
5.35%
5.65%

Observations Per Year
Mean
Standard Deviation
Beta with respect to (rm-rf)

28
7.39%
1.53%
-0.011

34

Balanced Panel 1997-2005
Accrued Actuarial Liability (AAL)
$ billions
Growth Rate

1042.5
1129.8
1248.9
1348.9
1464.3
1563.9
1674.1
1767.4
1878.7

8.38%
10.54%
8.01%
8.56%
6.80%
7.05%
5.57%
6.30%
70
7.65%
1.56%
0.008

Table II: Covariance Between Government Salary Wage Growth and Stock Market
Government wage growth is calculated from the Current Population Survey (CPS) of the US Census for all
government workers between 1962 and 2006. For 3 year moving averages, the data therefore begin in
1965. CPI growth is from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) website. The return on the US stock
market net of the risk-free rate is extracted from the Ken French data.

Horizon
(Years)

Growth of 3 year
Average
Government
Salaries – CPI
Growth

rm–rf

Correlation

Beta

1

Mean
StDev

0.7%
2.2%

5.9%
17.2%

0.056

0.007

3

Mean
StDev

2.1%
5.0%

16.3%
25.8%

-0.098

-0.019

5

Mean
StDev

3.8%
4.8%

36.5%
66.1%

-0.234

-0.017

Table III: Distribution of State Municipal Bond Ratings (S&P) and Implied Yields as of
December 2005
This table shows the distribution of S&P municipal bond ratings for each of the 50 US states as of
December 31, 2005, as well as the distribution of state pension plans. The yield is the yield on municipal
bonds in each ratings category as of December 31, 2005 from Bloomberg. The tax grossed-up yield is the
yield divided by (1-0.35), the statutory after-tax rate.

AAA
AA+
AA
AAA
NR

States
9
7
23
5
2
4

Plans
17
16
57
6
5
7

Total

50

108

35

Yield
4.08%
4.14%
4.16%
4.17%
4.27%
4.16%

Tax
Grossed-Up
Yield
6.28%
6.37%
6.40%
6.42%
6.57%
6.40%

Table IV: Asset Allocation in State Pension Funds
The table presents mean asset allocation in state pension funds from two different data sources, and our aggregation from these two sources. We use the
following procedure to aggregate information from the different sources. 1.) If no assets are in the “Other” census category that includes trusts, we begin with
the census numbers and then use the P&I survey to decompose stocks into international and domestic stocks, and bonds into international and domestic bonds.
We also use the P&I data to determine allocations to private equity and real estate. If no P&I survey data exists, or if the P&I numbers appear to conflict with the
census numbers, then we collect data from the annual report to obtain these decompositions. 2.) If the “Other” census category that includes trusts is less than
5% in the census data, we categorize these assets based on the P&I survey and/or data from the annual reports. 3.) If the “Other” census category that includes
trusts is >5% in the census data, we use the P&I survey as the primary source and use the census data and if necessary the annual reports to distinguish domestic
from international securities in the stock and bond categories.
US Census of Governments (N=108)
Pensions and Investments (P&I) (N=62)
Our Categories (N=95)
Sample Means
Sample Means
Sample Means
Weighted
Weighted
Our Categories
Weighted
Unweighted by Assets
Unweighted by Assets
(N=95)
Unweighted by Assets
Corporate Stock
37.5%
39.1%
Domestic stock
45.4%
46.5%
Domestic Stock
44.8%
45.8%
International
International
Stock
16.4%
17.4%
Stock
15.4%
16.4%
Domestic
Government
Domestic Fixed
Government
Bonds
7.6%
9.0%
Income
26.1%
23.7%
Bonds
9.8%
9.7%
Corporate
International
Domestic Corp
Bonds
16.1%
14.2%
Fixed Income
0.9%
1.1%
Bonds
16.2%
14.4%
International
International
12.5%
14.6%
Govt Bonds
0.5%
0.4%
Cash and
Cash and
International
Deposits
3.6%
3.1%
Equivalents
1.9%
1.5%
Corp Bonds
0.7%
0.7%
Cash and Cash
Private Equity
4.2%
4.0%
Equivalents
2.7%
2.2%
Real Property
(and Misc NonReal Estate
Securities)
8.4%
8.6%
Equity
3.7%
3.7%
Private Equity
3.6%
4.0%
Real Estate
Mortgages
0.3%
0.5%
Mortgages
0.7%
1.4%
Equity
3.7%
3.9%
Other Securities
(incl Trusts)
13.9%
10.8%
Other
0.7%
0.8%
Mortgages
0.6%
1.4%
Other Including
Hedge Funds
2.0%
1.1%

36

Table V: Variance-Covariance Matrix of Asset Classes
This table presents the volatility of each asset class included in Table 4, and the correlations between the asset classes’ returns.

Asset Class

Dom.
stocks
15.4%

Dom.
gvt.
bonds
5.3%

Dom.
corp.
bonds
5.2%

Asset Class Volatility
Correlation Matrix
Domestic stock
Domestic gvt. Bonds
Domestic corp. Bonds
Internat'l stock
Internat'l gvt. Bonds
Internat'l corp. Bonds
cash
private equity
real estate
MBS
hedge funds

1.00
-0.04
0.01
0.28
0.08
0.14
-0.08
0.51
0.22
-0.06
0.32

1.00
0.60
-0.01
0.32
0.32
0.04
-0.34
0.16
0.53
0.08

1.00
0.04
0.38
0.41
-0.01
-0.33
0.19
0.56
0.17

For.
stock

For.
corp.
bonds
6.6%

cash

private
equity

real
estate

MBS

Hedge
funds

15.3%

For.
gvt.
bonds
8.5%

0.4%

26.2%

14.3%

2.7%

3.5%

1.00
0.18
0.24
-0.07
0.29
0.21
-0.01
0.42

1.00
0.58
-0.11
-0.25
0.28
0.31
0.32

1.00
-0.16
-0.52
0.29
0.31
0.40

1.00
0.05
-0.08
0.04
-0.04

1.00
-0.35
-0.27
0.50

1.00
0.17
0.26

1.00
0.07

1.00

37

Table VI: Cumulative Distribution of Funding Outcomes
Panel A shows the surplus (assets minus liabilities) realized in fifteen or twenty years, in trillions of 2005
dollars, for different levels of the cumulative distribution of outcomes. The table reports the funding
surplus at nine levels of the objective probability distribution, assuming market risk-premia of 6.5% and
8%, and also the risk-neutral probabilities. In all columns, we assume that the volatility of liabilities (σL) is
1.5% and the real correlation between the liabilities and the market portfolio (ρ) is 0. Panel B shows the
probabilities of under and over fundings for each scenario, and the expected magnitude of the realized
under or overfunding (again in trillions of 2005 dollars).

Duration

15 years

20 years

Market price of risk
6.5%
8%
risk-neutral

Market price of risk
6.5%
8%
risk-neutral

Panel A: Magnitude of the under/over funding, at different points in the distribution of outcomes
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%

-3.48
-2.86
-2.48
-1.74
-0.75
0.50
1.88
2.86
5.06

-3.21
-2.52
-2.10
-1.28
-0.17
1.23
2.78
3.88
6.35

-4.42
-3.99
-3.74
-3.25
-2.66
-1.91
-1.08
-0.50
0.80

-4.91
-4.05
-3.52
-2.47
-1.01
0.87
3.05
4.63
8.27

-4.48
-3.51
-2.90
-1.69
0.01
2.20
4.75
6.59
10.84

-6.30
-5.74
-5.42
-4.83
-4.05
-3.08
-1.99
-1.21
0.60

Panel B: Probability of underfunding and overfunding, and conditional magnitudes of the
under/over funding.
P[s < 0]
E[s|s < 0]
P[s > 0]
E[s|s > 0]

66.4%
-1.48
33.6%
1.53

53.6%
-1.30
46.4%
1.81

97.3%
-2.60
2.7%
0.81

38

64.9%
-2.12
35.1%
2.41

49.9%
-1.83
50.1%
2.96

98.3%
-3.92
1.7%
1.15

Table VII: Cumulative Distributions of Funding Outcomes Under Different Volatility and
Correlation Assumptions
This table shows the cumulative distribution functions of funding outcomes under different assumptions for
the volatility of liabilities (σL) and the real correlation between the liabilities and the market portfolio (ρ).
All values are in trillions of 2005 dollars.

Panel A: Market Price of Risk = 6.5%
σL
ρ
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%

0
0
-3.34
-2.79
-2.43
-1.73
-0.76
0.47
1.85
2.83
5.02

0.015
0.00
-3.48
-2.86
-2.48
-1.74
-0.75
0.50
1.88
2.86
5.06

0.015
0.25
-3.29
-2.73
-2.38
-1.69
-0.75
0.44
1.78
2.73
4.87

0.050
0.00
-4.70
-3.51
-2.89
-1.86
-0.65
0.72
2.17
3.17
5.38

0.050
0.25
-4.16
-3.13
-2.59
-1.70
-0.65
0.56
1.87
2.78
4.82

0.050
0.00
-4.34
-3.12
-2.48
-1.38
-0.07
1.43
3.04
4.16
6.65

0.050
0.25
-3.77
-2.72
-2.17
-1.22
-0.07
1.27
2.73
3.76
6.07

0.050
0.00
-6.00
-4.89
-4.34
-3.47
-2.53
-1.58
-0.65
-0.03
1.30

0.050
0.25
-5.58
-4.59
-4.11
-3.34
-2.52
-1.70
-0.90
-0.36
0.81

Panel B: Market Price of Risk = 8%
σL
ρ
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%

0.00
0.00
-3.08
-2.46
-2.06
-1.27
-0.18
1.20
2.76
3.85
6.32

0.015
0.00
-3.21
-2.52
-2.10
-1.28
-0.17
1.23
2.78
3.88
6.35

0.015
0.25
-3.02
-2.39
-2.00
-1.23
-0.17
1.17
2.68
3.75
6.16

Panel C: Risk Neutral
σL
ρ
1%
5%
10%
25%
50%
75%
90%
95%
99%

0.00
0.00
-4.20
-3.87
-3.66
-3.25
-2.68
-1.95
-1.13
-0.56
0.74

0.015
0.00
-4.42
-3.99
-3.74
-3.27
-2.66
-1.91
-1.08
-0.50
0.80

39

0.015
0.25
-4.24
-3.86
-3.64
-3.22
-2.66
-1.96
-1.18
-0.63
0.61

Appendix Table I: State Pension Data for 2005, in $ billions

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
TOTAL($billions)

State
Pension
Assets
28.4
7.3
23.7
14.5
383.3
34.3
20.0
5.7
111.5
60.0
8.9
8.2
77.6
19.5
18.0
11.3
27.1
18.8
8.9
34.5
33.9
49.5
37.7
17.4
32.5
5.7
5.6
17.7
4.0
83.1
17.5
220.5
64.1
2.7
127.3
15.4
51.4
78.0
5.4
24.4
5.4
27.8
134.4
14.7
2.8
40.4
44.8
5.0
68.6
5.3
2,164

Stated
State
Pension
Liabilities
34.0
11.4
25.4
17.7
398.3
46.8
33.5
5.6
103.9
61.3
13.0
8.8
116.5
29.2
20.2
16.5
34.3
29.5
11.7
39.1
45.7
62.1
42.4
24.1
38.6
7.0
6.5
23.4
5.3
101.0
21.5
221.4
59.1
2.9
159.9
25.9
49.3
90.1
9.8
33.4
5.6
28.1
152.4
15.7
2.9
49.6
50.6
10.7
69.0
5.2
2,476

State
General
Obligation
Debt
6.3
5.8
8.0
4.3
107.4
12.4
23.0
4.4
25.9
8.2
5.8
2.4
48.3
13.3
4.9
5.1
8.6
11.5
4.6
13.7
56.0
26.2
7.3
4.3
16.2
3.7
1.7
3.9
6.9
42.3
5.9
102.0
15.8
1.7
23.1
7.5
11.3
27.7
6.8
13.4
2.6
3.6
18.2
5.3
2.8
16.9
17.0
5.0
18.8
0.9
798

40

State
Revenues
22.5
9.1
25.3
14.9
249.1
22.5
20.6
6.2
77.1
36.1
9.1
7.2
60.1
27.3
15.7
12.5
21.2
24.8
8.4
28.9
41.7
55.7
31.7
15.5
26.8
5.7
8.7
11.5
6.2
51.3
13.3
140.2
44.9
3.9
72.2
17.9
22.6
69.8
7.3
23.0
4.1
24.7
96.1
13.1
4.6
37.3
36.8
12.2
34.4
5.9
1,638

State
GDP
151.3
39.4
212.3
87.0
1,616.4
214.3
193.5
56.7
666.6
358.4
54.8
45.9
555.6
236.4
117.6
105.2
138.6
180.3
44.9
244.4
320.1
372.1
231.4
79.8
215.1
29.9
72.2
110.2
54.1
427.7
69.7
961.4
350.7
24.9
442.2
121.6
141.8
486.1
43.6
140.1
30.5
225.0
989.3
88.4
23.1
350.7
271.4
53.1
217.0
27.2
12,290

Number
of Plans
in Sample
(number)
3
2
2
3
3
1
3
1
1
2
1
1
4
3
1
1
3
2
1
1
2
4
3
2
3
2
2
1
1
4
2
2
2
2
5
4
1
2
1
2
1
1
4
3
3
1
4
1
1
3

Average
Discount
Rate (%)
8.00
8.13
8.25
8.00
7.75
8.50
8.50
8.00
7.75
7.50
8.00
7.75
8.25
7.33
7.50
8.00
8.00
8.25
8.00
7.75
8.25
8.00
8.50
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.50
8.38
8.00
7.50
7.25
8.00
8.05
7.63
8.00
8.50
8.25
7.75
8.00
7.50
7.75
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00
8.00

Appendix Table II: Government Employee Wage Data from the Current Population Survey

CPS Year
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Mean
Volatility

Mean
Wage
Income
5000
5033
5327
5471
5791
6023
6598
7148
7734
8446
8814
9357
9977
10556
11499
12248
12924
13829
14879
16236
17813
18333
19926
21048
21657
23038
24311
25143
26749
27400
29008
30067
30719
31699
33301
33627
34860
36204
37003
39358
40366
41402
43600
43281
45182

Standard
Deviation
of Wage
Income
2724
2446
2881
2632
3159
2874
3699
4188
3686
4279
5184
4777
5379
5762
5646
5944
6336
7108
8008
7193
7941
9481
10540
11155
11127
11824
12388
12972
13631
13880
14717
15131
15738
16922
24617
22699
21563
21813
21555
24954
25560
28042
30343
27485
33045

Growth
in Mean
Wage
Income

CPI
Inflation

Government
Wage
Growth
Minus CPI
Inflation

rf

rm

rm-rf

0.7%
5.8%
2.7%
5.9%
4.0%
9.6%
8.3%
8.2%
9.2%
4.4%
6.2%
6.6%
5.8%
8.9%
6.5%
5.5%
7.0%
7.6%
9.1%
9.7%
2.9%
8.7%
5.6%
2.9%
6.4%
5.5%
3.4%
6.4%
2.4%
5.9%
3.7%
2.2%
3.2%
5.1%
1.0%
3.7%
3.9%
2.2%
6.4%
2.6%
2.6%
5.3%
-0.7%
4.4%

1.3%
1.3%
1.6%
2.9%
3.1%
4.2%
5.5%
5.7%
4.4%
3.2%
6.2%
11.0%
9.1%
5.8%
6.5%
7.6%
11.3%
13.5%
10.3%
6.2%
3.2%
4.3%
3.6%
1.9%
3.6%
4.1%
4.8%
5.4%
4.2%
3.0%
3.0%
2.6%
2.8%
3.0%
2.3%
1.6%
2.2%
3.4%
2.8%
1.6%
2.3%
2.7%
3.4%
3.2%

-0.7%
4.5%
1.1%
3.0%
0.9%
5.4%
2.9%
2.5%
4.8%
1.2%
-0.1%
-4.4%
-3.3%
3.2%
0.0%
-2.1%
-4.3%
-5.9%
-1.2%
3.6%
-0.3%
4.4%
2.1%
1.0%
2.7%
1.4%
-1.4%
1.0%
-1.8%
2.9%
0.7%
-0.4%
0.4%
2.1%
-1.3%
2.1%
1.6%
-1.2%
3.5%
1.0%
0.3%
2.6%
-4.1%
1.2%

2.7%
3.1%
3.5%
3.9%
4.8%
4.2%
5.2%
6.6%
6.5%
4.4%
3.8%
6.9%
8.0%
5.8%
5.1%
5.1%
7.2%
10.4%
11.3%
14.7%
10.5%
8.8%
9.8%
7.7%
6.2%
5.5%
6.4%
8.4%
7.8%
5.6%
3.5%
2.9%
3.9%
5.6%
5.2%
5.3%
4.9%
4.7%
5.9%
3.9%
1.6%
1.0%
1.2%
3.0%
4.8%

-10.3%
20.9%
16.3%
14.4%
-8.7%
28.6%
14.2%
-10.8%
0.1%
16.2%
17.3%
-18.8%
-27.9%
37.4%
26.8%
-3.0%
8.6%
24.4%
33.2%
-4.0%
20.4%
22.7%
3.2%
31.4%
15.6%
1.8%
17.6%
28.4%
-6.1%
33.6%
9.1%
11.6%
-0.8%
35.7%
21.2%
30.3%
22.3%
25.3%
-11.1%
-11.3%
-20.8%
33.1%
13.0%
7.3%
16.2%

-13.1%
17.8%
12.8%
10.5%
-13.4%
24.4%
9.0%
-17.4%
-6.4%
11.8%
13.5%
-25.7%
-36.0%
31.6%
21.7%
-8.1%
1.4%
14.0%
22.0%
-18.7%
9.9%
13.9%
-6.7%
23.7%
9.4%
-3.7%
11.2%
20.1%
-13.9%
28.0%
5.6%
8.7%
-4.7%
30.1%
16.0%
25.1%
17.4%
20.6%
-16.9%
-15.1%
-22.5%
32.1%
11.8%
4.4%
11.4%

5.2%
2.6%

4.4%
2.9%

0.7%
2.6%

5.8%
2.7%

12.2%
16.8%

6.4%
17.0%

41

