NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COSTLY FINANCIAL INTERMEDIATION IN NEOCLASSICAL GROWTH THEORY
Rajnish Mehra
Facundo Piguillem
Edward C. Prescott
Working Paper 14351
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14351

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

This paper has circulated as “Intermediated Quantities and Returns.” We thank the editor, the two
referees, Andy Abel, Costas Azariadis, Sudipto Bhattacharya, Bruce Lehmann, John Cochrane, George
Constantinides, Cristina De Nardi, Douglas Diamond, John Donaldson, John Heaton, Jack Favilukis,
Francisco Gomes, Fumio Hayashi, Daniel Lawver, Anil Kashyap, Juhani Linnainmaa, Robert Lucas,
Ellen McGrattan, Krishna Ramaswamy, Jesper Rangvid, Kent Smetters, Michael Woodford, Dimitri
Vayanos, Amir Yaron, Stephen Zeldes, the seminar participants at the Arizona State University, Bank
of Korea, University of Calgary, UCLA, UCSD, Charles University, University of Chicago, Columbia
University, Duke University, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, ITAM, London Business School,
London School of Economics, University of Mannheim, University of Minnesota, University of New
South Wales, Peking University, Reykjavik University, Rice University, University of Tokyo, University
of Virginia, Wharton, Yale University, Yonsei University, the Economic Theory conference in Kos,
the conference on Money, Banking and Asset Markets at the University of Wisconsin and ESSFM
in Gerzensee for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Rajnish Mehra, Facundo Piguillem, and Edward C. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Costly Financial Intermediation in Neoclassical Growth Theory
Rajnish Mehra, Facundo Piguillem, and Edward C. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 14351
September 2008, Revised March 2011
JEL No. E2,E44,E6,G1,G11,G12,G23
ABSTRACT
The neoclassical growth model is extended to include costly intermediated borrowing and lending
between households. This is an important extension as substantial resources are used in intermediating
the large amount of borrowing and lending between households. In 2007, in the United States, the
amount intermediated was 1.7 times GNP, and the resources used in this intermediation amounted
to at least 3.4 percent of GNP. The theory implies that financial intermediation services are an intermediate
good and that the spread between borrowing and lending rates measures the efficiency of the financial
sector.
Rajnish Mehra
Department of Economics
W. P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
PO Box 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801
and NBER
rajnish.mehra@asu.edu
Facundo Piguillem
EIEF
Via Sallustiana, 62 00187
Roma. Italia
facundo.piguillem@eief.it

Edward C. Prescott
Economics Department
ASU / Main Campus
PO BOX 873806
Tempe, AZ 85287-3806
and NBER
edward.prescott@asu.edu

1.

Introduction
There is a rich class of models that study savings for retirement. But these models

abstract from the large costs of financial intermediation, despite the fact that most savings
are intermediated. This paper extends the neoclassical growth model by incorporating an
intermediation sector. It does so in such a way that it matches both the amount of
borrowing and lending between households and the resources used in intermediation.
Furthermore, all the appealing characteristics of the standard neoclassical growth model
remain unaltered. In addition, the model provides a suitable framework to evaluate not
only efficiency gains from innovations in the financial sector but also the impact of
demographic changes on intermediation and saving behavior.
Our paper presents model that is consistent with the economic growth facts,
documented by Kaldor (1961) and used by Solow (1969) and provides a prototype
framework that allows us to address the amount of borrowing and lending between
households and the resources used in intermediation. To the best of our knowledge this is
the first such extension. One interpretation of our model would be a theory of growth
with financial intermediation. Given the large amount of recourses used in intermediation
we consider this to be an important extension of the existing growth models.
In 2007, for the U.S economy, intermediation was large, around 1.7 times the
annual Gross National Product (GNP).1 The resources used in this process were not
inconsequential, amounting to at least 3.4 percent of GNP. These two figures together
imply that the average household borrowing rate is at least 2 percent higher than the

1

About half of this is intermediated lending by commercial banks. The other half is lending by other
financial intermediaries such as mutual organizations.

2
average household lending rate. Relative to the level of the observed average rates of
return on debt and equity securities this spread is far from being insignificant.
Since our model abstracts from aggregate risk, by construction there is no premium
for bearing aggregate risk. As explained later, the household borrowing rate is equal to
the return on equity. The government can borrow at a lower rate than households – as
empirically observed. Consequently there is a difference in the return on equity and the
interest rate on government debt. For our calibrated economy this difference is 2 percent,
and abstracting from it may be inappropriate when computing statistics that report the
spread between different rates of return in the economy. We discuss this in Section 8.
Since in equilibrium the total amount borrowed by households is equal to the total
amount of intermediated lending by households, a natural question that arises is who are
the borrowers and lenders? In our model, where the only reason for households to save is
to finance retirement over an uncertain lifetime, one set of households choose to save by
accumulating capital and a second set by purchasing annuities. Since capital
accumulation is partially financed by owners’ equity and the remainder by borrowing,
capital owners are the borrowers. In addition, since purchasing annuities is isomorphic to
lending, annuity holders are the lenders.
We caution the reader regarding two issues. First, the model counterpart of
annuities is not limited to commercial annuities but includes, more importantly, defined
benefit pension plans and even more importantly annuity-like promises of the
government, such as Social Security and Medicare. We think of these plans as mandatory
purchases of annuities. As pointed out by Abel (1987), Social Security and Medicare are
implicit government liabilities and can be regarded as annuity-like promises of the

3
government. When we examine some implications of our theory, we will include these
annuity-like promises as part of annuity-like assets held by households.
Payments for these “annuities” are made throughout the working life of
households and our model tries to capture this. Empirically, commercially available
annuities, purchased at or near retirement account for a very small fraction of savings for
retirement due to well-known adverse selection issues. Consequently our paper abstracts
from these annuities. The biggest annuities are in the form of Social Security retirement
benefits and Medicare, which are mandatory purchases of annuities during a household’s
working life. In addition, there are defined benefit retirement plans, which are essentially
annuities that people effectively purchase during their working life.
An integral part of our analysis is that households endogenously borrow and lend.
Some households lend to financial intermediaries while others borrow from these
intermediaries to partially finance the capital investment in the businesses they own.
While there is a myriad of reasons why households borrow and lend, in our model, for
simplicity, we motivate this by only one such reason (the intensity for bequests). This
keeps the analysis simple and tractable. The reasons matter little for the inference we
draw.
Later in Section 8, when we examine some implications of our theory, we will
include these annuity-like promises as part of annuity assets held by model households.2
Second, we follow the tradition in macroeconomics assuming that households
own all the capital in the economy and rent it to businesses. Thus, we treat the capital

2

We reemphasize that when we use the annuity construct in this paper, it includes all annuity-like
payments, including Social Security, Medicare, defined benefit pension plans and the small amount of
commercial annuities.

4
owned by businesses as capital owned by the owners of these businesses, and therefore,
all debt of non financial businesses is debt of our household sector.
The output of the intermediary sector is an intermediary good. The value added by
intermediation services is equal to the amount of borrowing times its price minus the
amount of lending times its price. In equilibrium, the amount borrowed is equal to the
amount lent. Hence, the price of this service is equal to the spread between the average
borrowing and lending rates. Improvements in the financial system which reduce this
spread are efficiency gains.
In 2007, about half the U.S. capital stock, the value of which was 3.4 times GNP,
was financed by borrowing and half by owners’ equity. This borrowing is done to finance
owner-occupied housing, by proprietorships and partnerships to finance unincorporated
businesses, and by shared ownership corporations to finance businesses. Households who
own capital finance it partially by borrowing and partially by equity. Further, the
Modigliani-Miller Theorem holds for our economy as for a given firm the debt-equity
financing decision does not matter. In the aggregate, total equity and private debt are
determined.

Reason for household borrowing
We begin our study by examining household saving decision. In practice, most
household savings are for retirement. However, some of it is held in highly liquid kind of
financial instruments as a substitute for costly insurance against idiosyncratic risk such as

5
a job loss.3 Abstracting from these factors has little consequence for aggregate lending. In
our model households choose between two savings strategies. One strategy is to invest in
equity and earn a real return of

percent. The other strategy is to purchase a lifetime

annuity, which is actuarially fair at

percent. Since the lifetime remaining after

retirement is uncertain, households that choose the annuity option are in effect buying
insurance against outliving their savings.
But, why do some households choose to save by lending to financial
intermediaries (with a low return) while others invest in equities (with a high return)? In
this study this is due to household heterogeneity in the form of differences in the strength
of preferences for bequests. That is, we assume that people are identical in all aspects
other than the intensity of their bequest motive. The only source of uncertainty is the
duration of the lifetime after retirement. Hence, an important difference between both
strategies is that buying equities strategy generates bequests upon death equal to net
worth at the time of death, while buying annuities does not.4 For our calibrated economy
people with low, say nil, bequest motive will prefer the annuity strategy while agents
with even a modest bequest motive will prefer equities.5 The strength of the bequest
motive has little consequence for aggregate bequests with bequest being largely
accidental.
To summarize, in equilibrium, those with even a modest preference for bequests
accumulate capital assets and borrow during their working lives, and upon retirement, use
3

In this study we do not make a distinction between these two types of saving. For issues other than the
ones we address in this paper this may be a crucial element of reality that would have to be incorporated
into the abstraction.
4

We permit an annuity payment upon death. It will be positive if the bequest preference parameter is not
zero for anyone choosing the annuity strategy.
5
As explained later, there is an additional requirement about the size of the spread.

6
capital income for consumption and interest payment on debt. Upon their death they
bequeath all their net worth. Households with little or no bequest motive buy annuities
during their working years and use annuity benefits to finance their consumption over
their retirement years.
As mention earlier, we abstract from the small amount of direct borrowing and
lending between households and assume that all borrowing and lending between
households is intermediated through financial institutions. Furthermore, in light of the
finding that the premium for bearing non-diversifiable aggregate risk is small in models
consistent with growth and business cycle facts, our analysis abstracts from aggregate
risk.6
The intermediation technology is constant returns to scale with intermediation
costs being proportional to the amount intermediated. To calibrate the constant of
proportionality, we use Flow of Funds Account statistics and data from National Income
and Product Accounts. The calibrated value of this parameter equals the net interest
income of financial intermediaries, divided by the quantity of intermediated debt, and is
approximately 2 percent.7
In the absence of aggregate uncertainty, the return on equity and the borrowing
rate are identical, since the households who borrow are also marginal in equity markets.
In our framework, government debt is intermediated at zero cost, and thus its return is

6

Using a model with no capital accumulation, Mehra and Prescott (1985) find a small equity premium.
McGrattan and Prescott (2000) find that the equity premium is small in the growth model if it is restricted
to be consistent with growth and business cycle facts. Lettau and Uhlig (2000) introduce habit formation
into the standard growth model and find that the equity premium is small if the model parameters are
restricted to be consistent with the business cycle facts. Many others using the growth model restricted to
be consistent with the macro economic growth and business cycle facts have found the same thing.
7
See Section 7 (calibration) for details.

7
equal to the household lending rate. An important feature is that the government can
borrow at a lower rate than can households, which mirrors reality.
In our model, all households in a cohort have identical labor income at every
point in their working life. As a consequence of this, there is little difference in cross
sectional consumption at a point in time. However, sizable differences in net worth
develop within a cohort over their working years. One implication is that preferences for
bequests cannot be ignored when studying net worth distributions.
The paper is organized as follows. The economy is specified in Section 2. In
Section 3, we discuss the decision problem of the households. Section 4 deals with the
aggregation of individual behavior, Section 5 with the relevant balance sheets, and
Section 6 characterizes the balanced growth equilibrium. We calibrate the economy in
Section 7. In Section 8, we present and discuss our results. Section 9 concludes the paper.

2. The Economy
In order to build a model that captures the large amount of observed borrowing
and lending, as well as the large amount of resources used in this process, we introduce
three key features of reality. The first feature is differences in bequest preferences, the
second is an uncertain length of retirement, and the third is costly intermediation of
borrowing and lending between households. This leads some households to buy costly
annuities that make payments throughout the retirement years. Since buying an annuity is
isomorphic to lending, households choosing the annuity option are the lenders in our
model. Households with high bequest utility save by increasing their net worth, which is
their holding of productive capital less their debt.
We model an overlapping generations economy, and consider its balanced growth

8
path equilibrium. All households born at a given date are identical in all respects except
for their bequest preference parameter . They all have identical preferences with respect
to consumptions over their lifetime, so the only dimension over which they differ is
Those with a not small

(type-B) borrow and own capital; others with

.

or weak

preferences for bequest (type-A) lend by acquiring annuities.
What motivates bequests? While a casual consideration of bequests naturally
assumes that they exist because of parents’ altruistic concern for the economic well-being
of their offspring, results in Menchik and David (1983), Hurd (1989), Wilhelm (1996),
Laitner and Juster (1996), Altonji, Hayashi, and Kotlikoff (1997), Laitner and Ohlsson
(2001), Kopczuk and Lupton (2007), and Fuster, Imrohoroglu and Imrohoroglu (2008)
suggest otherwise: households with children do not, in general, exhibit behavior in
greater accord with a bequest motive than do childless households. This, we think, leads
us to conclude that the existing literature supports our assumption that some people have
preferences for making bequests. These empirical results lead us to eschew the
perspective of Barro (1974) and Becker and Barro (1988), who postulate that each
generation receives utility from the consumption of the generations to follow, and simply
model bequests as being motivated by a well-defined “joy of giving,”8 as in Abel and
Warshawsky (1988) and Constantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra (2007).
Households
Any systematic consideration of bequests mandates that the analysis be
undertaken in the context of an overlapping generations model. Accordingly, we analyze
an overlapping generations economy and determine its balanced growth behavior. Each
8

See also Hurd and Mandcada (1989), De Nardi, Imrohoroglu, and Sargent (1999), De Nardi (2004), and
Hansen and Imrohoroglu (2006).

9
period, a set of individuals of measure one enter the economy. Two types enter at each
date: Type A, who derive no utility from leaving a bequest, and type-B, whose utility is
an increasing function of the amount they bequeath.9 The measure of type
. The total measure of people born at each date is 1, so

is

.

Individuals have finite expected lives. They enter the labor force at age 22, work
for

years, and then retire.10 Model age j is 0 when a person begins his or her working

life. The first year of retirement is model age

.

All workers receive an identical wage income. Wage income grows at the
economy’s balanced growth rate

. At retirement, individuals face idiosyncratic

uncertainty about the length of their remaining lifetime. Their retirement lifetimes are
exponentially distributed. Once individuals retire, the probability of surviving to the next
period is

, where

is the probability of death. Expected life is

. We

emphasize that there is no aggregate uncertainty.11
Individuals of type

, born at time t, order their preferences over age-contingent

consumption and bequests by12
(2.1)

9

.

The “no utility from a bequest” assumption is a simplifying one and is not necessary for the analysis. All
that is needed is the utility from bequest be sufficiently small that the type-A choose to acquire annuities.
10
We implicitly assume that parents finance the consumption of their children under the age of 22; in other
words, children’s consumption is a part of their parents’ consumption.
11
The Blanchard (1985) model has individuals with exponential life. The Díaz-Giménez et al. (1992)
model has individuals with both an exponential working life and an exponential retirement life.
12
Our model has no factor giving rise to life cycle consumption patterns over the working life as in
Fernández-Villaverde and Krueger (2002).

10
Here

is the discount factor and

is the strength of bequest parameter. Variable

is the period consumption of a j-year-old born at time t,13 conditional on being alive
at time t + j. An individual who is born at time t and dies at age
at time t + j and bequeaths

consumes nothing

units of the period t + j consumption good and

consumes nothing subsequently. Each generation supplies one unit of labor inelastically
for

. Thus, aggregate labor supply is

given that the measure of each

generation is 1.
We only need to analyze the decision problems of an individual of a type
individual born at time t = 0. The solution to the problem for a type

born at any other

time t can be found using the fact that along a balanced growth path
(2.2)
Further, to simplify the notation, we use
time j rather than

to denote the consumption of a j-year-old at

. An analogous change of notation applies to the other variables.

Production Technology
The aggregate production function is
(2.3)
(2.4)
is capital,

.
is labor, and

is the labor-augmenting technological change

parameter, which grows at a rate . The parameter
13

is chosen so that

.

In this paper, the first subscript represents calendar time and the second subscript represents the age at
that time.

11
Output is produced competitively, so
(2.5)
(2.6)
where

,
is the depreciation rate,

on equity, and

is both the household borrowing rate and the return

is the wage rate.

Income is received as either wage income
(2.7)

. Thus,

,
and

where
consumption
(2.8)

or gross capital income

, investment

. Components of output are

, and intermediation services ; thus,
.

Along a balanced growth path, investment

and

.

Financial Intermediation Technology
The intermediation technology displays constant returns to scale, with the
intermediation cost in units of the composite output good being proportional to the
amount of borrowing and lending intermediated. The cost is
borrowing and lending between households.14

times the amount of

The intermediary also intermediates

between households lending to the government. There are no costs associated with this
intermediation. The intermediary receives interest rate
and effectively pays interest rate

on its lending to households

on its borrowing from households. Given the

technology, equilibrium interest rates satisfy
14

Miller and Upton (1974) pioneered in having a financial sector in their dynamic general equilibrium
model. They had no intermediation costs.

12
.
The lending contract between households and intermediaries is not the standard
one, but rather an annuity contract. A household can enter into an annuity contract at age
0.

An annuity contract specifies an age-contingent premium payment path during

working life, a benefit path contingent on being alive subsequent to retirement, and a
payment upon death. The amount being lent by an individual who has chosen the annuity
contract is the value of pension fund reserves for that contract at that point in time. These
reserves are equal to the expected present value of future payments less the expected
present value of future premium payments, if any. The present value is calculated using r
the lending rate at which households can lend to intermediaries. Competitive
intermediaries will offer any annuity contract with the property that the expected present
value of benefits is equal to the present value of the premiums using

in the present

value calculations.
The alternative to entering into an annuity contract to save for retirement is to
accumulate capital and to borrow to partially finance that capital. Our model has three
sectors: a household sector, a government sector, and a financial sector. The nonfinancial business sector is consolidated with household sector.
Government Policy
Government policy is characterized by a tax rate
rate

on labor income, an interest

on government debt, and the path of government debt

. The

feasible government policy parameters are constrained to a one dimensional manifold.
Theoretically it does not matter which of the three policy parameters is picked. We chose
because it simplified finding the equilibrium and there is a wealth of observations as to

13
a reasonable value for its choice. The government finances interest payments on its debt
by issuing new debt and by taxing labor income. The government’s period t budget
constraint is
(2.9)

.
Since

in balanced growth,
.

(2.10)

The government pursues a tax rate policy that pegs15

, which equals the interest

rate on government debt. This being a balanced growth analysis, government debt grows
at rate

, which means that the government deficits are positive and grow at rate

as well.
The intermediary holds all the government debt, and there are no intermediation
costs associated with holding this asset on the part of the intermediary.
Bequests
Aggregate bequests at date t are
(2.11)
We let

.
. The inheritance of a type-B born at

is

(2.12)
and is received at date
(2.13)

. The inheritance of a type-A born at

is

.

The reason that a type-A’s inheritance is slightly smaller than that of a type-B is that their
inheritances are intermediated and intermediation is costly.

15

In this paper, we fix this at 3 percent. This is discussed further in Section 7 on calibration.

14
3. Optimal Individual Decisions
We consider the optimal individual decision problem, taking as given (i) the size
of the inheritance the individual will receive at model age 30 (chronological age 52), (ii)
wages at each date of the individual’s working life, (iii) the labor income tax rate
(iv) the borrowing and lending rates

and

, and

. The first problem facing an individual is

whether to choose the annuity strategy A or the no annuity strategy B. The parameters of
the calibrated economy are such that a type-A will choose the annuity strategy, while a
type-B will choose the no annuity strategy. The second problem is to determine the
optimal lifetime consumption and savings decisions conditional on the strategy chosen.
We determine, given

, the optimal consumption/saving behavior for each strategy and

the resulting lifetime utility, and then determine which of the two strategies is best for
that individual type.
A convention followed is that a bar over a variable denotes a constant. In the case
where the constant depends upon a person’s type, that is, on

, this functional

dependence is indicated. This is necessary because the best strategy will differ across
household types.
The Best No Annuity Strategy
This problem can be split into two sub-problems. The first problem is the one
after retirement, which is stationary and is solved using recursive techniques. The state
variable is net worth, which is in units of the current period consumption good. The value
of a unit of k is

to a household choosing the no annuity strategy. The second

problem is to determine consumptions and savings over the working life.

15
The problem becomes stationary and recursive at retirement age T, with net worth
w being the state variable. The value function

is the maximal obtainable expected

current and future utility flows if a retiree is alive and has net worth w. The optimality
equation is

(3.1)

The solution to this optimality equation has the form
(3.2)

,

where
(3.3)

.
The optimal consumption/saving policy for retirees is

(3.4)
The bequests, conditional on j − 1 being the person’s last year of life, is
(3.5)

.
The problem facing an individual at birth who follows the no annuity strategy

(which we call strategy B because it is the one chosen by those with a sufficiently strong
preference for making a bequest) is

16

(3.6)

Here

is the present value of wages and inheritance of an individual born at

. The

solution (see Appendix 2 for more details) is

(3.7)

where

.
The preretirement age j net worth of an individual following this strategy satisfies

(3.8)

The Best Annuity Strategy
The best annuity strategy for a type

is the solution to the following:

(3.9)

where
(3.10)

is the lending rate and
.

17
The constant

is the present value of future wage income and inheritances using the

lending rate r of a person born at

. The superscript A denotes the annuity strategy

and not an individual type. In equilibrium, type-A will choose strategy A.
There are other constraints, specifically, that the worker choosing this strategy
does not borrow. For the economies considered in this study, these constraints are not
binding and can therefore be ignored. If, however, the economy were such that the noborrowing constraint were binding for some j, then the solution below would not be the
solution to the problem formulated above.
The nature of the annuity contract is that the payment to a retiree who is alive at
age

is

. If the individual dies at age j, payment

is made to that person’s estate.

The solution to this program is
(3.11)
(3.12)
The net worth of an individual choosing this strategy is the pension fund reserves
associated with that individual’s annuity contract. Pension fund reserves (from the point
of view of the intermediary) for a given annuity contract for an individual born at
age j in equilibrium equals the expected present value at time
be made less the value (at time

at

of payments that will

as well) of premiums that will be received.

For workers, they can be determined as the present value of past premiums. Thus,
pension fund reserves for individuals’ annuity holders born at

(3.13)

at age j satisfy

18
For retirees, conditional on being alive, pension fund reserves for individuals born at
at age j are equal to the expected present value of the future payments:
(3.14)

The Best Strategy
In general there will be a
exceeds

such that a household chooses strategy B if its

and the annuity strategy otherwise. Propositions 1 is used to establish this

result under a restriction that is satisfied for the calibrated model economy.
Proposition 1: If

then

.

Proof: In Appendix 1.□

The value of

affects the relative attractiveness of the two strategies.

Proposition 2 establishes that an -household will choose the annuity strategy if
sufficiently small and the no annuity strategy if
Proposition 2: For sufficiently small

,

is

is sufficiently large.
. For sufficiently large ,

.
Proof outline: For small non-negative

, the value of insurance associated with strategy

A exceeds the value of the higher return associated with strategy B. This is why strategy
A dominates for small

. For large

, the cost of the annuity is large and the higher

return associated with the no annuity strategy dominates.
dominates for large

.□

This is why strategy B

19
Figure 1 plots the difference in utilities for the two strategies, as a function of

,

for the prices, tax rate, and bequest for our calibrated economy. We see that individuals
with bequest preference parameter

choose to annuitize.

20
Figure 1
Utility Difference between the Best No Annuity and Best Annuity Strategy:

4. Aggregate Behavior of the Household Sector
Aggregate Consumption
Aggregate consumption depends upon the labor tax rate
well as the prices

and inheritance

as

. Equilibrium prices do not depend upon the household side,

and can be determined from the policy choice of r and profit-maximizing conditions.
Having formulated the optimal consumption strategies for the two types of individuals,
we characterize the aggregate consumption, asset holdings, and bequest at time
individual type given

and

by

and the equilibrium prices. Two aggregate equilibrium

relations must be solved for the variables

and

.

21
There are two types of households

. The type-A has

and will in

equilibrium choose the annuity strategy A given the model economy. The type-B has

,

which is sufficiently large that the equilibrium is such that they chose not annuitize. The
measure of type-i of age j at

is

(4.1)

The aggregate consumption of the type-i households at time 0 is
(4.2)

:
.

Here we have used the fact that each subsequent generation has a consumption-age
profile that is higher by a factor of

in balanced growth.

Aggregate consumption is
(4.3)

.

Aggregate Asset Holdings
The aggregate net worth at time 0 of a type
(4.4)

is
.

Net worth is prior to consumption and receipt of wage income and includes net interest
income and dividend income. In the case of the intermediary, net worth includes
intermediation cost liabilities. Net worth is prior to consumption and is denominated in
units of the current period consumption good.

22
Aggregate Inheritance
At time 0 the measure of the people aged

who die and leave a bequest is

; thus, the total bequests given by these households is
.
Hence, the aggregate bequests at time 0 are
(4.5)

.

Aggregate Private Debt
The aggregate indebtedness of a type-B satisfies
,

(4.6)

because the price of existing capital in terms of the consumption good is
household is obligated to make a payment of

and the

.

5. Balance Sheets
Assets and liabilities are beginning of period numbers and are in units of the
consumption good. We consider only economies for which there is intermediated
borrowing and lending in equilibrium. Given there is a large amount of intermediated
borrowing and lending, these economies are the ones of empirical interest.
Type-A Sector: The assets of the type-A consist of pension fund reserves. They have no
liabilities. The value of these pension reserves (in terms of the consumption good) is:
Pension fund reserves =
follows:

. Their balance sheet is as

23

Balance Sheet of Type-A Households
Assets
Pension fund
reserves

Liabilities
0
Net worth

Hence, their net worth satisfies
.
Type-B Sector: Those following the no annuity strategy have aggregate debt
and hold all the economy’s capital,

. Their balance sheet is as follows:

Balance Sheet of Type-B Households
Assets

Liabilities

Net worth

Here we have adjusted the assets and liabilities by a factor

to get the net

worth in units of the consumption good. Their net worth is
.
Financial Intermediary Sector: The assets of the financial intermediary are the
liabilities of the government and the type-B households, while its liabilities are the
pension assets of type-A households and the amount payable for intermediation services.
The net worth of the financial intermediaries is zero.

24
Balance Sheet of the Intermediaries
Assets

Liabilities

Government debt =

Pension promises =

Private debt =

Amounts payable for
intermediation services =

Net worth = 0

Government: The assets of the government are the present value of the tax receipts on
labor income, while its liabilities are the debt it has outstanding.
Balance Sheet of the Government
Assets

Liabilities

Net worth = 0

Since labor is supplied inelastically and taxed at a rate
effectively owns a fraction

, the government

of an individual’s time endowment (now and in all future

periods). In our model economy, the net worth of the government is zero and government
debt is an asset for debt holders in our model.

25
6. Equilibrium Relations
We normalize Y to 1 and determine the value of a set of balanced growth
variables at

. All variables grow at rate

constant and equal to 40,

except aggregate labor supply, which is

, financial intermediation, and aggregate consumption. Given

that Y has been normalized to 1 at time 0, the cost share relationships determine time 0
capital stock K and wage e:
(6.1)
(6.2)
From the intermediary’s problem, the lending rate satisfies
(6.3)

.

Three Equilibrium Conditions
Prices
and

are determined from policy and technology. Therefore, only

are needed to completely specify the household budget constraints. Conditional on

these variables, aggregate consumption,

, and aggregate intermediation,

,

will be determined by aggregating individual household variables. Aggregation, given the
individual decisions conditional on

and

, is specified in Appendix 2.

One aggregate equilibrium condition is the aggregate resource constraint,
(6.4)
where
(6.5)

,
is investment. Intermediation services satisfy
.

We assume that type-B households hold all the capital and the intermediaries none. This

26
is done to resolve an unimportant indeterminacy. Increasing the amount of capital held by
a type-B and that type-B’s indebtedness by the same amount does not affect that type-B’s
net worth, which is what is relevant. This portfolio shift by a type-B household is offset
by a portfolio shifts by other type-B households. The aggregate indebtedness of a type-B
is denoted by

and is equal to

.

The second equilibrium condition is that the inheritance of households at a point
in time equals aggregate bequests at that point in time. We consider

and let

be the aggregate bequest at that time. The second equilibrium condition is
(6.6)

.
There is a third equilibrium condition, namely, the government’s budget

constraint. This constraint
,

equates payments to receipts. Given
, and the normalization

, the time 0 government

budget constraint is
(6.7)

.

Equilibrium
The first two equilibrium conditions are linear in

, so solving for a candidate

solution is straightforward. This solution is the equilibrium only if in addition (i) the best
strategy for type-B households is the no annuity strategy; (ii) the best strategy for type-A
households is the annuity strategy; (iii) type-B borrows and does not lend; and (iv) typeA lend and does not borrow. The reason for the last constraint is that these equilibrium
conditions hold provided that the no-borrowing constraint on annuity holders is not
binding and it will not be binding if (iv) holds.

27
7. Calibration
The parameters that need to be calibrated are those related to the
households

; the intermediation technology parameter { }; the

production good technology parameters
two policy parameters

; and the policy parameter

. The other

are endogenous. As mentioned before, the choice

as a

parameter and τ as an endogenous variable is only for convenience; reversing their roles
will not affect the results described in Section 8.

Many of these parameters are well documented in the literature; others are not.
We proceed by listing the parameters with the selected values and a brief motivation.

Parameters Associated with Individuals
(Annuity holders’ c grows at almost 2 percent over their lifetimes)
(Implies a post-retirement life expectancy of 20 years)
(Assumption: Type-A individuals have low bequest intensity)
(Assumption: Type-B individuals have high bequest intensity)
(Workers retire at chronological age 63)
(Specified so that the amount intermediated matches U.S. data)

Intermediation parameters
(Consistent with the average difference in borrowing and lending rates)

28
Policy parameters
(Assumption about government fiscal policy)
The motivation for this policy is that this has been the approximate return on lending by
households (See McGrattan and Prescott, 2003).
Goods production parameters
(Capital income share)
(Average growth rate of U.S. per capita output)
(Consistent with capital output ratio = 3.4, given
In calibrating

.

we proceed as follows. Our model economy has household,

government, and financial intermediary sectors. All nonfinancial business borrowing is
consolidated with the household sector. We start with the net interest income of the
financial intermediation sector. Fees are a small part of this sector’s product and most of
them are for transaction services, which is not intermediation in the sense used in this
study. Using data from NIPA16 for year 2007, the interest received amounted to 0.165
times gross national product (GNP)17 and interest paid amounted to 0.110 times GNP. To
estimate the services associated with intermediating borrowing and lending, we first
subtracted intermediation services furnished without payment to households as we did
not want to include implicit purchases of transaction services by the household. We also
subtracted part of bad debt viewing it as interest not received by the intermediary to
obtain an estimate of the cost of intermediating borrowing and lending between
households of 3.4 percent of GNP in 2007. See Table 1.

16
17

Source: NIPA (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2007) Tables 7.11 and 2.4.5.
Source: NIPA Table 1.7.5.

29
Using data from the Flow of Funds, we found the debt outstanding of our
household sector, which includes nonfinancial businesses, equals 1.72 times GNP.18 The
implied intermediation spread is thus 2.0 percent and in turn the calibrated

. This

number results in the after-tax returns being close to their historical averages (see
McGrattan and Prescott (2003, 2005)).
Table 1
Financial Intermediary Sector Accounts Relative to GNP Year 2007
Interest received

0.165

Table 7.11 NIPA line 28

Less interest paid

0.110

Table 7.11 NIPA line 4

Equals net interest income

0.055

Less services furnished without payment

0.016

Table 2.4.5 NIPA line 89

Less bad debt expenses

0.005

Table 7.16 NIPA line 12*

Equals services for intermediating household
borrowing and lending

Amount intermediated between households

0.034

1.721

Table D.3 Flow of Funds
(Total amount in column 1
less state, local, and federal
government)

*This datum is for 2005, the latest for which this datum is currently available. We assumed half of the total
bad debt was in that of financial intermediaries.

In dealing with transaction costs associated with buying and selling assets and
fees such as those paid by investors to say a trust company, we follow the convention
used by US national accounts and do not include them as a part of intermediation costs.
The assets in our model are capital K, government debt, Type B household debt, and
pension fund reserves. With regard to K transactions, say the brokerage fees associated
18

Source: Flow of Funds (Board of Governors, 2007) Table D.3. See Table 2 above for further details.

30
with transferring ownership of an owner occupied house, NIPA treats these costs as an
investment and justifies this as putting the house to more productive use.

With

government debt transfer of ownership costs are zero in our model and virtually zero in
fact. Pension fund reserves are not traded between households, and therefore there are
almost no costs associated with transferring ownership. The total costs of buying and
selling of household debt between financial intermediaries are small and are part of
intermediation costs. Households incur brokerage fees associated with transferring
ownership of financial securities between households. These fees are not payment for
intermediating debt between households and therefore not part of the cost of
intermediated borrowing and lending between households. Brokerage fees paid by
intermediaries are part of the costs of intermediating borrowing and lending between
households.
8. Results
We considered four values for
each value of

, a parameter for which we have little information. For

we search for the

for which the intermediated borrowing and lending

between households is 1.72 times GNP. The results are summarized in Table 2, which
shows results not sensitive to the size of the bequest preference parameter
the aggregate results are insensitive to

. Given that

, subsequently we deal only with the case

.19

19

Like Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), there is little consequence of inheritance for the net worth distribution.

31

Table 2
Summary of Aggregate Results

Economy

0.833

0.838

0.851

0.867

0.167

0.162

0.149

0.133

0.636

0.639

0.651

0.663

0.132

0.128

0.117

0.104

X

0.198

0.198

0.198

0.198

I

0.034

0.034

0.034

0.034

Y

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

Depreciation

0.13

0.13

0.13

0.13

Compensation

0.70

0.70

0.70

0.70

Profits

0.17

0.17

0.17

0.17

Type-A

6.29

6.33

6.42

6.53

Type-B

1.66

1.66

1.66

1.66

4.55

4.59

4.68

4.79

Bequest/Y

0.0341

0.0347

0.0365

0.0390

Tax rate

0.0650

0.0655

0.0668

0.0684

National Accounts

Net Worth

Government Debt/Y

32
Balance Sheet of Households

Table 3
Balance Sheet of Households
Assets

Liabilities

Table 3 details the aggregate balance sheet data for U.S households implied by
our model. Our model is calibrated so that both the privately held capital stock (
the intermediated household borrowing and lending (
government debt (

) and

) match US statistics;

) is endogenously determined. One test of our model is how well it

replicates this and other statistics, such as bequests and inheritances, for the U.S
economy. We examine each in turn.
Government Debt
Government debt in our model, which is 4.6 times GNP, may at first sight appear
large relative to U.S. federal, state and local government debt, which was only 0.5 GNP
in 2007. However, there are huge implicit annuity-like liabilities of the U.S. government,
such as Social Security Retirement and Medicare benefits. Households value the expected
present value of these annuity-like net benefits and consider them as assets that contribute
to their net worth. Hence, in the aggregate balance sheet of our model economy, the
empirical counterpart of model government debt is explicit government debt plus the

33
expected present value of these net benefits. Careful studies by Gokhale and Smetters
(2003 and 2006) estimate the present value of these net benefits as between 4.2 and 5
GNP.20 In light of this, the stock of government debt in our model is reasonable.
An additional point is that if no one had a bequest motive, the steady-state capital
stock would be the same, namely, 3.4 times GNP, and government debt in our model
would be slightly larger. Policy and not nature of bequest preferences is what determines
the capital-output ratio.
Bequests
A surprising finding is that the model’s prediction regarding the magnitude of the
bequests is insensitive to the strength of the bequest motive. We believe this insensitivity
is due to the fact that bequest expenditures in the intertemporal budget constraint are
small relative to the sum of all event contingent total expenditures, coupled with the fact
that the measure of agents who leave a bequest (type B) is a small fraction of the total
population.
Total annual bequests in our model, as seen in Table 3, are 0.035 times GNP for
. The aggregate value of estates in 2007 that exceeded $675,000 was 0.00123
times GNP.21 Some of these estates are inter-spousal and should not be included. This is
more than offset by bequest that were under the limit for which estate tax returns had to
be filed. Adding these and inter vivo transfers and adjusting for underreporting of gifts
associated with the transfer of family businesses to the younger generation would result
in aggregate bequests being close to model aggregate bequests.

20
21

Their estimates were $ 44 trillion in 2002 and $63 trillion in 2005.
Department of Treasury (2007), Historic Table 17, p. 203.

34
Modigliani’s (1988) estimate of bequest flows is close to the flow in our model.
He reports bequests of 0.02 times GNP. He adds life insurance, death benefits and newly
established trusts to conclude that bequests are at least 0.027 times GNP.
Another measure of the size of bequests is the amount an individual inherits
expressed in units of the individual’s annual wage at time of inheritance. Each individual
receives at chronological age 52 an amount equal to 1.98 times their annual wage at that
time. Menchick and David (1983) estimate average the inheritance received by all males
to be $20,000 (in 1967 dollars). We estimate the average gross annual wage for that year
as $8840, arriving at a ratio of inheritance received to annual wage equal to 2.26.22
However, correcting for inter-spousal transfers the inheritance received could well
reduced it to $13,220, which results in a ratio of inheritance received to annual wage of
1.5. These considerations suggest that inheritances are consistent with the predictions of
our model.23
Inheritance
Another variable of interest is the fraction of wealth that is inherited. A significant
component of wealth is human capital, which is the present value of wages in our model
world where labor is supplied inelastically. The other part is the present value of
inheritance. As shown in Table 4, human capital is about 95.5 percent of wealth at entry
into the workforce and would be higher if there were population growth. These results are
for a Type A households, who discount using a 3 percent rate. The share is a little lower
22

Nominal GDP in 1967 was $833 billion. Assuming that 70 percent of GDP is labor income (consistent
with our model economy) we obtain an estimate of total wage income of $583 billion in 1967. Then, since
the total employment in that year was 65.9 million, the average gross annual wage income is $8840.
23
We examined the consequence of population growth and found that they were small. Bequests fall to
0.03 times GNP as the population growth increases to the point at which the growth rate of the economy
equals the interest rate.

35
for type-B households who use a 5 percent discount rate. Anything that reduces the ratio
of bequests to GNP reduces this number, so for the model with a 1 percent population
growth rate, as in the United States, this ratio is near 97 percent.
Table 4
Inheritance as Fraction of Wealth at Entry into Workforce

Type-A

0.044

0.045

0.047

0.050

Type-B

0.035

0.036

0.038

0.040

The issues as to the importance of bequest for the size of the capital stock are
mute in our model, as policy determines the capital stock and not the nature of
preferences for bequests. However, a statistic of interest is the one estimated by Kotlikoff
and Summers (1981). This statistic is the present value of inheritances people alive have
received, using a 3 percent interest rate. Their estimate of this number is 0.80 times the
total household net worth. Modigliani’s (1988) estimate of this number is much smaller:
0.20. Modigliani (Table 1, page 19) presents a number of other estimates, all of which
range between 0.10 and 0.20. This ratio number for our model economy is 0.18, which is
in line with these estimates.
In our model economy 93 percent of bequests are accidental. We came up with
this number as follows. Setting

for type-B households and requiring type-B

households to follow the no annuity strategy results in this number. Treating these
accidental bequests as savings for retirement along with all type-A savings implies that
99 percent of savings is for retirement purposes and 1 percent is for bequests.

36
Testable Implications
Although our model was not developed to match both the explicit and implicit
liabilities of the government, the aggregate savings predicted by our theory are
approximately equal to that observed. The total government debt and bequests / GDP
implied by our model is in line with the US historical experience. This, we believe, is an
important testable implication.
Some Micro Findings
Our abstraction has implications for micro observations as well. Unlike the macro
findings, the model’s micro findings are not a quantitative theory of the consequence of
the bequest motive for the distributions of consumption, net worth, and equity holdings
and consequently must be interpreted with care. They do, however, show that the bequest
motive, or for that matter any factor that leads people to partially finance their capital
acquisitions with debt, is quantitatively important for these statistics. With this caveat, the
micro distributional relations for our model economy are as follows.
Figure 2 plots the lifetime consumption patterns of the two types of households.
Type-A’s consumption grows at a constant annual rate of 1.97 percent throughout their
lifetime. Type-B’s starts out lower and grows more rapidly during their working life,
with this growth rate being 3.95 percent. Upon retirement the consumption growth rate
turns negative, falling to -0.95 percent. At retirement a type-B retiree’s consumption is
higher than an equal age type-A retiree.24

24

There is a rich literature on the life cycle consumption patterns, including the works of Attanasio, Banks,
Meghir, and Weber (1999) and Hansen and Imrohoroglu (2008), among others. This is not the concern of
this paper, but the fact that life cycle patterns differ for those choosing to annuitize and those choosing
not to annuitize has implications for the empirical pattern of life cycle consumption.

37

Figure 2

Lifetime Consumption Pattern

Cross-sectional consumption
Figure 3 plots cross-sectional consumption by age for the two types. All type-A that are
alive have virtually the same consumption. Young type-B workers have lower
consumption and older workers have higher consumption. For the type-B retirees,
consumption level declines with age.

38

Figure 3
Cross-Sectional Consumption by Age

39
Net worth by age
In Figure 4 we plot net worth relative to current annual wage income, which has a
stationary distribution. At retirement the net worth of a type-A household is 12 times the
annual wage, and that of a type-B is 19 times the annual wage. The disparity in net worth
(corrected for age) is modest, being a maximum of about 1.6 at retirement age. After
retirement disparity falls until age 78, and then starts growing with the type-A household
becoming the one with the greater net worth. The jump in net worth at chronological age
52 is due to inheritance.

40

Figure 4
Net Worth as a Function of Age in Units of Annual Wage Income

Lorenz curves
Figure 5 plots the Lorenz curves for consumption, net worth, and capital or equity
holdings. In the case of capital, we assume all type-B households have the same ratio of
debt liabilities to capital in their portfolios in order to resolve the portfolio indeterminacy
at the individual level. We truncate the distribution at age 112, so the curves are not
exact, but are very good approximations given the small fraction of population over this
age.
Our model is not designed to address issues about wealth distribution as we have
abstracted from any heterogeneity in human capital. All agents have the same earnings
stream. Our principal findings are that there is almost no disparity in consumption levels

41
and sizable disparities in net worth levels. This shows that the dispersion in net worth is a
bad proxy for dispersion in consumption.25
In our model economy, all individuals have the same human capital endowments.
If the model were modified to have people earn proportionally different wages, to a first
approximation an individual’s allocation is proportional to that individual’s wage.26
Thus, introducing wage disparity would add disparity in consumption and net worth.
Introducing entrepreneurs (Cagetti and De Nardi (2006)) and idiosyncratic risk
(Castãneda, Díaz-Giménez, and Ríos-Rull (2003) and Chatterjee et al. (2007)) would
increase disparity as well.

25

The Gini coefficients for the Consumption and Net Worth Lorenz curves are 0.038 and 0.35,
respectively.
26
If bequests were distributed proportional to the human capital factor, the scaling result would hold
exactly.

42
Figure 5
Lorenz curve for Consumption, Net Worth, and Capital

Cost of financial market constraints
What are the gains to a household of having access to the equity market at no
intermediation cost? Table 5 reports the cost of not having this access, which was the
case for most Americans prior to the development of low-cost indexed mutual funds, as
being about 4.0 percent of wealth at time of entry into the workforce. This wealth is the
present value of labor income and inheritance.

43
Table 5
Cost to a Type-A of Not Having Access to the
Annuity Market in Units of Wealth at Entry into Workforce
Change in
1/3

0.77%

1

0.79%

3

0.84%

6

0.90%

Table 6
Cost to a Type-B of Not Being Permitted to Hold Equity Directly
in Units of Wealth at Entry into Workforce
Change in
1/3

1.24%

1

4.00%

3

9.74%

6

15.77%

Tables 5 and 6 show the percentage increase in either
into the workforce, which is necessary to compensate an

, that is wealth at time of entry
in wealth equivalents

if forced to switch to a system other than their preferred choice. Since both consumption
and bequest are linear functions of initial wealth, the percentage changes in both
consumptions and bequests are the same as the percentage change in initial wealth.
What are the costs to a type-A if for some reason, such as adverse selection
problems or legal constraints, they do not have access to annuity markets and must use
the equity option for saving? The cost is small, being approximately 0.8 percent of
lifetime consumption.

44
Implications for the Equity Premium
In our framework, there is no equity premium as there is no aggregate uncertainty.
The return on equity and the borrowing rate are both equal to 5%. This is a no arbitrage
condition. The return on government debt is 3%. If we use the conventional definition of
the equity premium – the return on a broad equity index less the return on government
debt – we would erroneously conclude that in our model the equity premium was 2%.
The difference in the government borrowing rate and the return on equity is not an equity
premium; it arises because of the wedge between borrowing and lending rates.
Analogously if in the U.S economy borrowing and lending rates for equity investors
differ, (and they do) the equity premium should be measured relative to the investor
borrowing rate rather than the government’s borrowing rate (the investor lending rate).
Measuring the premium relative to the government’s borrowing rate artificially increases
the premium for bearing aggregate risk by the difference between the investor’s
borrowing and lending rates.27 If such a correction were made to the results reported in
Mehra and Prescott (1985) the equity premium would be 4% rather than the reported 6%.

27

For a detailed exposition of this and related issues, the reader is referred to Mehra and Prescott (2008).

45
9. Concluding Comments
In this paper, we develop a heterogeneous household economy where households
differ along only one dimension: their preferences for bequest. In equilibrium,
households with a low desire to bequeath lend and hold annuities, while those with a high
desire to bequeath borrow and own capital. This is important because the total amount of
borrowing by households and the government must equal the amount lent by households.
Our simple framework mimics reality with respect to both the amount of intermediated
borrowing and lending between households and the average spread in borrowing and
lending rates resulting from intermediation costs. In addition, amount of aggregate
savings predicted by the theory is approximately equal to the observed amount of
aggregate savings. This is an important test of our theory, as it was not developed to
match both the explicit and implicit liabilities of the government.28
We view this as a first step in what we think will prove to be a productive
research program. Possible extensions include building in differential survival rates and
addressing the issues of adverse selection and moral hazard when pricing annuities. This
extension might justify our requirement that people choose between the annuity and the
no annuity strategies early in their careers. This research program, if successful, will
require extension of the theory of household lifetime consumption behavior because the
bequest motive is not the only salient factor that differentiates people. Differences in
preferences with respect to consumption today versus consumption in the future and
differences in preferences that give rise to differences in lifetime labor supply are likely
to be important as well.

28

We thank one of the referees for bringing this to our attention.

46
Another possible extension is to model non-steady-state behavior as in
Geanakoplos, Magill, and Quinzii (2004) who consider the importance of demographic
waves for stock market valuation or as in Braun, Ikeda, and Joines (2007) for saving
behavior within the overlapping generation framework.

47

Appendix 1: Proof of Proposition 1

The prices

, tax rate , and inheritance implied by
are given to an
individual. Note
. Let
represent the maximum attainable
utility of an agent of measure zero in this economy who follows strategy A (annuity) or B
(bequest) respectively as a function of
. Define
.

Proposition 1: If

then

.
Proof: The maximum utility as a function of
attainable by an agent who follows an
annuity strategy (A), taking as given the parameters of the economy, can be expressed as:
,
where

(

and

are defined in Section 3).

Similarly, the maximum utility as a type

who follows an annuity strategy (B) is
,

where

48

(

and

are defined in Section 3).

Using the properties of the logarithm function and defining

=

=

(A1.1)

Since the first term is independent of

it follows that

(A1.2)

where

,

which does not depend on

.

This

implies the second term in (A1.2) is positive, i.e.,

To prove our assertion that
a. We show that
b. We show that
c.

is positive, we proceed in three steps:
;
; and that

49

Some straightforward algebra yields

(A1.3)

From (A1.3) it is readily seen that
term tends to

. This follows since the last

and all the other terms are bounded. This coupled with the fact that
proves that

The second derivative

.

is negative by direct differentiation,
,

since the denominator is always positive and the numerator is negative.

Finally it can be shown that

under the condition stated in the theorem.

Notice that (taking the limit of A1.3) when
if

) equation A1.2) is positive if and only

.

The last term in the above expression has already been shown to be positive. Thus a
sufficient condition for this inequality is
.

This inequality can be written as

Since a), b), and c) are satisfied, it follows that

. QED

50
Appendix 2: Aggregation
General formulas
There are two types
. The A-type has
and in equilibrium choose the
is
annuity strategy given the model economy. The measure of type i of age j at
(A2.1)

Aggregate quantity for variable Z of type

agents at

is

,

(A2.2)

where

,

is the individual allocation of type-i at age j born at

. Notice that we have

used the fact that each subsequent generation has a consumption-age profile that is higher
by a factor of

under balanced growth. Aggregate quantity of Z at time 0,

Agent Type-B
Aggregate assets of agent type-B and aggregate bequest
The aggregate assets for B-type agents are computed using the law of motion of Net
Worth. From the individual problem,

From equations (3.4) and (3.7), the consumption for type B is given by

is

51

(A2.3)

where
(A2.4)

and
Using (A2.2) aggregate net worth is

The summation over j=0,…,T-1 is performed numerically, while for total net worth of the
retirees is

,

(A2.5)
where from the individual problem

Since
given by

all bequests are coming from the type-B, and as shown in Section 3.1 is

if a type-B dies prior to the end of the previous period subsequent to consuming, and zero
otherwise.
Since the measure of agents dying at each age
aggregate bequest is

is

the

52

Using (A2.5) it is straightforward to find that

or
(A2.6)

Aggregate consumption type B
Similarly, using (A2.2) and (A2.3) the aggregate consumption of type B agents at time 0
can be expressed as

(A2.7)

where

or

,

53

Agent Type A
Aggregate assets of agent type A
The aggregate bequest is measured in units of agent type B assets, therefore the
inheritance received by agent type A measured in her assets’ units is
. The aggregate assets for agents type A are computed using the law
of motion of Net Worth. From the individual problem,

(A2.8)

Using (A2.2) aggregate net worth is calculated as

As for type B, the summation for j=0,…,T is performed numerically. Since in the
calibration,
. From equation (3.11) consumption for type A agents, born at period
zero when they reach age j (at time j), is

Then, agents alive at time 0 of age j consume

(A2.9)

Using (A2.8) and (A2.9) net worth for retired agents can be written as
.
Then

54

Aggregate consumption type A
Again, using (A2.2) and (A2.9), the aggregate consumption of type A agents at time 0
can be expressed as
(A2.10)

,

where

or

,

where

Balance Sheets
Type B:
Type A:
Intermediary:
Notice that both the net worth of the intermediary and the government are 0.
Equilibrium Conditions
There are three equilibrium conditions that can potentially be used to solve the model:
1) Feasibility:

Y=

+X+

,

55
where
2) Bequest=inheritance:
3) Assets Markets

=

+

=

+K

one equation is redundant, and the solution is
Since this is a linear system in
straightforward. We chose to use the first two equilibrium conditions, and then we check
that the third one is satisfied as well.

56

References
Abel, A. B., and M. Warshawsky. 1988. “Specification of the Joy of Giving: Insights
from Altruism,” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(1), 145–149.
Altonji, J. G., F. Hayashi, and L. J. Kotlikoff. 1997. “Parental Altruism and Inter Vivos
Transfers: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy 105(6), 1121–
1166.
Attanasio, O., J. Banks, C. Meghir, and G. Weber. 1999. “Humps and Bumps in Lifetime
Consumption,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 17(1), 22-35.
Barro, R. J. 1974. “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy
82(6), 1095–1117.
Becker, G. S., and R. J. Barro. 1988. “A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of
Fertility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 103(1), 1–25.
Blanchard, O. J. 1985.

“Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political

Economy 93(2), 223–247.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2000. “Flow of Funds Accounts of
the United States,” Tables B.100, B.100.e, and B.100b.e.
Braun, G. A., D. Ikeda, and D. H. Joines, 2007. “The Saving Rate in Japan: Why It Has
Fallen and Why It Will Remain Low,” CIRIE-F Working Paper F-535.
Cagetti, M., and M. De Nardi, 2006. “Entrepreneurship, Frictions, and Wealth,” Journal
of Political Economy 114(5), 835–870.
Castãneda, A., J. Díaz-Giménez, and J. V. Ríos-Rull. 2003. “Accounting for U.S.
Earnings and Wealth Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy 111(4), 818–857.

57
Chatterjee, S., D. Corbae, M. Nakajima, and J.-V. Ríos-Rull. 2007. “A Quantitative
Theory of Unsecured Consumer Credit with Risk of Default,” Econometrica
75(6), 1525–1589.
Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra. 2007. “Junior Is Rich: Bequests as
Consumption,” Economic Theory 32(1), 125–155.
De Nardi, M. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links,” Review of
Economic Studies 71(7), 743–768.
De Nardi, M., S. Imrohoroglu, and T. J. Sargent. 1999. “Projected U.S. Demographics
and Social Security,” Review of Economic Dynamics 2(3), 575–615.
Díaz-Giménez, J., T. J. Fitzgerald, E. C. Prescott, and F. Alvarez. 1992. “Banking in
Computable General Equilibrium Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics
and Control 16(3–4), 533–559.
Doepke, M., and M. Schneider. 2006. “Inflation and the Redistribution of Nominal
Wealth,” Journal of Political Economy 114(6), 1069–1097.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., and D. Krueger. 2002. “Consumption over the Life Cycle:
Some Facts from Consumer Expenditure Survey Data,” NBER Working Paper
9382.
Fuster, L., A. Imrohoroglu, and S. Imrohoroglu. 2008. “Altruism, Incomplete Markets,
and Tax Reform,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55(1), 65–90.
Geanakoplos, J., M. Magill, and M. Quinzii. 2004. “Demography and the Long-Run
Predictability of the Stock Market,” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 1380R.
Gokhale, J., and K. Smetters. 2003. Fiscal and Generational Imbalances:
New Budget Measures for New Budget Priorities. Washington, D.C.: American
Enterprise Institute Press.

58

Gokhale, J., and K. Smetters. 2006. “Fiscal and Generational Imbalances: An Update,”
in James M. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 20 (Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Hansen, G. D., and S. Imrohoroglu. 2008. “Consumption over the Life Cycle: The Role
of Annuities,” Review of Economic Dynamics 11(3), 566–583.
Hurd, M. D. 1989. “Mortality Risk and Bequests,” Econometrica 57(4), 779–813.
Hurd, M. D., and B. G. Mundaca. 1989. “The Importance of Gifts and Inheritances
among the Affluent,” in The Measurement of Saving, Investment and Wealth,
Lipsey, R. E., and H. S. Tice (editors), Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kopczuk, W., and J. Lupton. 2007. “To Leave or Not to Leave: The Distribution of
Bequest Motives,” Review of Economic Studies 74(1): 207–235.
Kotlikoff, L. J., and L. H. Summers. 1981. “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in
Aggregate Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Political Economy 89(4), 706–732.
Laitner, J., and F. T. Juster. 1996. “New Evidence on Altruism: A Study of TIAA-CREF
Retirees,” American Economic Review 86(4), 893–908.
Laitner, J., and H. Ohlsson. 2001. “Bequest Motives: A Comparison of Sweden and the
United States,” Journal of Public Economics 79(1), 205–236.
Lettau, M., and H. Uhlig. 2000. “Can Habit Formation be Reconciled with Business
Cycle Facts?” Review of Economic Dynamics 3(1), 79–99.
McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott. 2000. “Is the Stock Market Overvalued?” Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 24(4), 20–40.
McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott. 2003. “Average Debt and Equity Returns:
Puzzling?” American Economic Review 93(2), 392–397.

59
McGrattan, E. R., and E. C. Prescott. 2005. “Taxes, Regulations, and the Value of U.S.
and U.K. Corporations,” Review of Economic Studies 72(3), 767–796.
Mehra, R., and E. C. Prescott. 1985. “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 15(2), 145–161.
Menchik, P. L., and M. David. 1983. “Income Distribution, Lifetime Savings, and
Bequests,” American Economic Review 73(4), 672–690.
Miller, M. H., and C. W. Upton. 1974. Macroeconomics: A Neoclassical Introduction,
Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.
Modigliani, F. 1986. “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations,”
American Economic Review 76(3), 297–313.
Modigliani, F. 1988. “The Role of Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Saving in
the Accumulation of Wealth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2), 15–40.
U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2000. “National Income
and Product Accounts,” Tables 7.11, 2.4.5.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. Internal Revenue Service. 2007. Statistics of Income
Bulletin 21(1).
Wilhelm, M. O. 1996. “Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs’ Earnings: Testing the
Altruistic Model of Bequests,” American Economic Review 86(4), 874–892.
Yaari, M. E. 1965. “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer,” Review of Economic Studies 32(2), 137–150.

