NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMANDING CUSTOMERS:
CONSUMERIST PATIENTS AND QUALITY OF CARE
Hai Fang
Nolan H. Miller
John A. Rizzo
Richard J. Zeckhauser
Working Paper 14350
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14350

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Hai Fang, Nolan H. Miller, John A. Rizzo, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Demanding Customers: Consumerist Patients and Quality of Care
Hai Fang, Nolan H. Miller, John A. Rizzo, and Richard J. Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 14350
September 2008
JEL No. D82,I11,I12
ABSTRACT
Consumerism arises when patients acquire and use medical information from sources apart from their
physicians, such as the Internet and direct-to-patient advertising. Consumerism has been hailed as
a means of improving quality. This need not be the result. Consumerist patients place additional
demands on their doctors’ time, thus imposing a negative externality on other patients. Our theoretical
model has the physician treat both consumerist and ordinary patient under a binding time budget.
Relative to a world in which consumerism does not exist, consumerism is never Pareto improving,
and in some cases harms both consumerist and ordinary patients. Data from a large national survey
of physicians shows that high levels of consumerism are associated with lower perceived quality.
Three different measures of quality were employed. The analysis uses instrumental variables to control
for the endogeneity of consumerism. A control function approach is employed, since our dependent
variable is ordered and categorical, not continuous.

Hai Fang
Health Economics Research Group
University of Miami
5665 Ponce de Leon Blvd.
Flipse Bldg., Rm 120
Coral Gables, FL 33124
hfang@miami.edu
Nolan H. Miller
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK St
Cambridge, MA 02138
nolan_miller@harvard.edu

John A. Rizzo
Stony Brook University
N-637 Social and Behavioral Sciences Bldg.
Stony Brook, NY 11794
John.Rizzo@stonybrook.edu
Richard J. Zeckhauser
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu

Demanding Customers: Consumerist Patients and Quality of Care
Hai Fang, Nolan H. Miller, John A. Rizzo and Richard J. Zeckhauser
September 2008
Abstract: Consumerism arises when patients acquire and use medical information from sources
apart from their physicians, such as the Internet and direct-to-patient advertising. Consumerism
has been hailed as a means of improving quality.

This need not be the result. Consumerist

patients place additional demands on their doctors’ time, thus imposing a negative externality on
other patients. Our theoretical model has the physician treat both consumerist and ordinary
patient under a binding time budget. Relative to a world in which consumerism does not exist,
consumerism is never Pareto improving, and in some cases harms both consumerist and ordinary
patients. Data from a large national survey of physicians shows that high levels of consumerism
are associated with lower perceived quality. Three different measures of quality were employed.
The analysis uses instrumental variables to control for the endogeneity of consumerism. A
control function approach is employed, since our dependent variable is ordered and categorical,
not continuous.
Keywords: consumerism, health care quality, physician time, time allocation, time budget
JEL categories: I12, I11, D82
*

Fang, Health Economics Research Group, University of Miami; Miller and Zeckhauser,

Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University; Rizzo, Department of Economics and
Department of Preventative Medicine, Stony Brook University.

1

I. INTRODUCTION
The attention of the US health policy community has increasingly focused on quality
problems in recent years. The shortfalls are well documented. In one of the most oftenmentioned studies, McGlynn et al. (2003) examined 439 markers for quality of care for 30
different conditions and found that, on average, patients receive only 54.9 percent of
recommended care. These omissions have significant costs. According to the National
Committee on Quality Assurance (NCQA, 2005, p. 10), gaps in health care quality lead to $2.8 $4.2 billion in additional medical costs, costs that would not have been incurred if high-quality
care had been delivered initially. The costs of low quality are felt well beyond the healthcare
sector. They account for between 39,000 and 83,000 preventable deaths each year, 83.1 million
additional sick days and $13 billion in lost productivity (NCQA, 2005, p. 10).
Over the past several decades, the US health care system has transformed from a model
dominated by private insurance companies that contracted with individual physicians and/or
providers to one in which managed care organizations played a very active role, and finally to
one in which decision making power once again devolved to individual patients and physicians.
However, rather than solving the problem of quality, this evolution has led to continuing
widespread problems of quality, what the Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2000) has termed the
“Quality Chasm”
For most economic goods, market competition among private suppliers is the principal
tool for promoting quality and controlling costs. Traditional fee-for-service reimbursement
fosters competition. Since patients are free to choose any provider, they will flock to those who
provide high quality care. And, given that quality attracts patients, providers have an incentive to
improve quality. However, the parts of health care quality that are easy to observe (e.g., courtesy

2

in the doctor’s office) are often not relevant for health outcomes, while the salient indicators of
quality for health outcomes (e.g., risk-adjusted morbidity and mortality) are notoriously difficult
to observe. As a result, we would not expect market forces to do a good job of focusing
providers’ attention on the most critical aspects of quality. Further, since patients cover only a
small portion of their costs at the point of consumption, we might expect inadequate cost control
to accompany gold plating of observable quality indicators and the misalignment of quality
incentives, (Relman, 1993). Indeed, costs did skyrocket during the era when fee-for-service
dominated and competition among doctors flourished.
Managed care rose to prominence in the early 1980s, largely as a response to the excesses
of the fee-for-service system. Cost-control was probably its major objective, but there were also
strong hopes that it would promote quality. Several features of managed care offered promise in
these two domains. Many managed care plans offer “one-stop shopping”; that is, patients may
receive all of their care within the managed-care network. In theory, this should promote better
quality of care by improving treatment continuity and information exchange among providers.
Moreover, managed care organizations have strong incentives to provide preventive care
(Dysinger, 1996), which may both promote quality of care and yield future cost savings.
Empirical evidence indicates that managed care in fact is associated with greater use of
preventive services (Balkrishnan et al., 2002; Rizzo, 2005). Having all care delivered under one
roof may promote greater efficiencies in production and/or economies of scale in service, leading
to cost savings (Sullivan, 2000; Brown and Pagan, 2006). Moreover, given capitation, the
underlying financial incentives could help to hold down costs.
While costs were constrained as manage care blossomed, especially during the mid-1990s,
health care costs resumed their upward trend in the late 1990s. Moreover, both patients and

3

providers became increasingly disenchanted with restrictions on treatment choices imposed by
managed care, believing that they had impaired quality, a phenomenon that became known as
“Managed Care Backlash” (Blendon et al., 1998; Enthoven and Singer, 1998; Miller and Luft,
1997, 2002, Miller 2006). Patients thought their inability to choose among physicians more
broadly hurt quality, and insisted on changes. In response to these patient pressures, restrictions
on physician choice in the HMO model declined significantly in the late 1990s; many HMOs
now offer broad access (Robinson, 2001; Draper et al., 2002). At the plan level, increases in
health insurance premiums and copayments (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2007) have no doubt
prompted consumers to increase scrutiny of their plan and treatment options.
Perhaps as a reaction to their dissatisfaction with managed care, consumers in recent
years have come to play a much more active role in their personal medical care decisions
(Robinson, 2005), a phenomenon that has become known as “consumerism” (Teutsch, 2003;
Rosenthal and Milstein, 2004; Dutta-Bergman, 2003; Havlin et al., 2003).1

At the same time,

there has been a rapid increase in the availability of medical information to consumers, from
health-care report card programs, direct-to-consumer advertising, and particularly over the
internet.
As in the case of private competition and managed care, many have argued that
consumerism will provide a lever to improve quality. As patients learn more about their medical
needs and the quality of different providers, they will flock to the best ones, which will, in turn,
give providers an incentive to increase quality. Further, since the success of modern medical
treatment often requires high levels of compliance by patients, consumerism promises the
additional benefit that, more-informed patients will be better patients. Moreover, to the extent
that physicians value patient input and involvement in decisionmaking, more inquisitive and

4

questioning patients may be seen as desirable and complementary to the physician's efforts to
provide high-quality care. For example, consumers – who have greater interest in their health
than do their physicians – might do considerable research on their conditions, which could
complement or stimulate the relevant knowledge of the doctor. More knowledge by consumers
could make them better able or more willing to follow the doctor’s instructions, for example in
taking prescribed medications.
While the potential of consumerism to improve quality is clear, there is a darker side to
the phenomenon, and a-priori, the relationship between consumerism and quality of care is
indeterminate. On the negative side, consumerist patients might follow their own beliefs, as
opposed to those of their more knowledgeable physicians, in effect undermining the physician’s
clinical autonomy, taking more physician time, and perverting the agency relationship. A recent
article on physician interactions with consumerist patients is quite telling:

A few months ago, Dr. David Golden says, he had to fire a patient for being
obnoxious. The patient had a cough. After examining him, Golden recommended
a medication. But the patient did his own research and became worried about
side effects. “He said, ‘But I read about this on the Internet, and I know this and I
know that, and I know I’m right.’ “remembered Golden, an allergist in Maryland.
Golden says he tried to explain why the side effects weren’t as bad as the patient
thought, and why the medicine would take care of his cough. “But he wasn’t open
to discussing anything. He countermanded everything I said. So I told him, `You
know it all, so go take care of yourself. I’m not your doctor any more.’ “Golden
says he’s all for empowered and educated patients, but some patients have

5

become so empowered, they’re actually putting their care in jeopardy. “I’ve been
doing this for 28 years, and unquestionably it’s gotten much worse,” Golden says.
(Cohen, 2008)

While such negative interactions are far from an inevitable consequence of consumerist
patients, there is no debate that more consumer involvement in decisionmaking has altered the
doctor-patient relationship. Virtually all observers agree. A recent editorial (2005) in the Lancet,
focused on consumerism and the doctor-patient relationship, but left open the question of effects
on quality:

Patients have a wealth of information at their fingertips through the internet.
What most do not have, however, is the skill and knowledge to sift useful and
valid information and evidence from useless or harmful advice. In a mutually
beneficial and effective patient-doctor partnership, medical expertise and
knowledge need to be an accepted and valued part of that interaction, just as
much as doctors need to have the time and skills to communicate preventive
measures and treatment choices to patients appropriately (p. 343)

Consumerist proclivities also have the potential to strongly affect the physician’s time
allocation, possibly in a negative fashion. Time is the prime scarce resource in the doctor-patient
relationship, and is a fundamental input into quality of care. It is the focus of our theoretical
model, and a central element of our empirical study. In this respect, consumerism could be

6

beneficial if it enabled patients to effectively demand more time from their doctor – who often
has an incentive to move on – when their condition merits more care and attention.
On the down side, consumerist patients may in effect be “time hogs,” the “demanding
customers” of our title, who describe their symptoms and knowledge at length, perhaps
recognizing that more minutes with the doctor may benefit them, if only marginally, even as it
takes critical time from others. In the worst case, physicians may have to spend extra time and
effort dissuading consumerist patients from requested treatments of dubious value. Recognizing
that consumerism could affect the productivity of physician time positively or negatively, the
effect of consumerism on the quality of care becomes an empirical issue, which we seek to
resolve in this study.
We wish to understand the effects of consumerism on the time physicians have to work
with their patients, and the resulting effects on quality of care. To date, there is no direct
evidence on the effects of consumerism on either time adequacy for office visits or the quality of
care. An ideal research design would relate the prevalence of consumerist practices, say the
proportion of consumerist patients within a particular physician practice, to objective measures
of health outcomes, e.g., frequency of cardiovascular events, or intermediate measures of quality,
such as whether diabetics have their eyes and feet examined regularly. Unfortunately, to our
knowledge, there are no studies that come close to linking either of these forms of data to
consumerist behavior. Good objective measures of quality, in particular, are extremely difficult
to find in the literature.
Given these limitations, we turn to a second-best measure. We use a significant data set
that reports on the degree of consumerism within physicians’ practices, and physicians’ own
assessments of whether they have the ability to deliver high quality care. While a physician’s

7

reports of the prevalence of consumerism in his practice and his perceived ability to provide
quality health care are not perfect measures, studying their relationship provides important
insights into the link between consumerism and quality at the level of the physician practice.
Our investigation employs a unique dataset that includes information on physician
perceptions about the quality of care indicators in their practices, as well as a measure of
consumerism, to test the model empirically. The results are striking. We find that increased
consumerism is perceived to adversely affect the quality of care a physician delivers. Moreover,
the magnitudes of these negative relationships appear to be substantial.
The rest of this paper is divided into six parts. Part II presents the theoretical model. Part
III describes the data and variables. The estimation strategy is spelled out in Part IV, and the
results are given in Part V. Part VI distills the results and their policy implications.

II. THEORETICAL MODEL: HOW CONSUMERISM AFFECTS QUALITY
Consumerist patients know more than their less-informed peers about their own health
and medical treatments, and usually have greater concerns about their health. The critical
theoretical question is how these characteristics translate into the ultimate quality of care
delivered to them and to patients as a whole. Our basic model addresses the doctor's allocation of
time to two classes of patients, consumerist and ordinary, assuming that she has a fixed patient
load.2 The fixed patient load implies that the doctor’s revenue is effectively fixed, and so we
treat the doctor as if she maximizes the average quality of the patients she treats. A more
complex model, where patient load could vary and physicians were concerned with income as
well, would not change the qualitative nature of the results.
When the doctor spends t minutes with an ordinary patient, health quality is produced

8

according to ho=h(t). It is assumed that h(t) is strictly increasing and strictly concave, with
h(0)=0 and h'(0)<∞. That is, there are positive but decreasing returns to time with any patient,
and quality for zero time is normalized to 0. To simplify, we assume that all patients suffer the
same representative condition.
The health-time relationship for an ordinary patient is ho=h(t). Suppose that fraction μ, 0
≤ μ ≤ 1, of patients coming into the doctor's office is consumerist. Consumerist patients differ
from ordinary patients in two ways, which cut in opposite directions. First, because they are
more knowledgeable and concerned, they can enhance productivity from time spent with the
doctor. For example, they may be more effective in describing symptoms, or better able to follow
instructions. The consumerist’s potential to enhance the productivity of time spent with the
doctor is represented by the parameter a ≥ 1, which multiplies the productivity of an entire
doctor-patient encounter of a given length.
Second, despite their superior knowledge and attentiveness, they may take the doctor's
time for low priority activities through continual probing. They may hope to convince the doctor
of their expertise or to secure more information for themselves, expecting in the process to
benefit from more time from the doctor, or they may simply be information “vacuum cleaners.”
Thus they might inquire “Couldn't this be condition X?” They may ask to have things explained,
when that adds little or no value, or they may inquire about irrelevant treatments. The parameter
p, where 0 ≤ p ≤ 1, represents the fraction of the doctor's time with the consumerist devoted to
high- as opposed to low-productivity communication. A minute of low productivity
communication has productivity b, where b<1. Thus if a physician spends t minutes with a
consumerist patient, the effective time spent with that consumerist is te = (p+b(1-p))t. For
notational convenience, let r = p + b(1-p).

9

Taking both factors into account, the time-health relationship for a consumerist patient is
thus hc = a h(r t). Suppose that the doctor's average time spent per patient must less than or equal
to T. The quality-maximizing doctor, able to identify types, chooses how much time to spend
with each consumerist and each ordinary patient. Let to denote the time spent with each ordinary
patient, and let tc denote the time spent with each consumerist, the doctor's problem is to choose
to and tc in order to maximize average quality subject to the constraint that average time per
patient be less than or equal to T:
max 1     h  to     ah  rtc  ,
to , tc
s.t. 1    to  tc  T .

Deriving and analyzing the first-order conditions for this problem shows that, if the doctor
devotes a positive amount of time to each type of patient, her optimal choices solve:
h  to   arh  rtc  ,

where asterisks denote optimal values of to and tc. Note the factor ar, which multiplies the
marginal value of health for consumerist patients on the right-hand side of this expression. This
factor represents the net effect of the two aspects of consumerism (i.e., that consumerists are
more productive patients, but possibly less efficient users of the doctor’s time). When ar>1, the
first effect outweighs the second, while if ar<1, the second effect outweighs the first. Thus, if the
doctor sees both types of patients (i.e., spends a positive amount of time with each type), then if
ar<1, effective time spent with ordinary patients is greater than effective time spent with
consumerists (to*>rtc* ) while the opposite conclusion holds (to*<rtc*) if ar>1.
While the doctor’s time allocation is of some interest, our ultimate goal is to characterize
the effect of consumerism on quality. That is, we want to determine a positive fraction μ of
consumerist patients affects average quality. To facilitate intuition and illustrate possibilities, it is
10

useful to consider the extreme case where marginal utility from quality is linear up to some limit,
after which it falls to zero. That is, let h(t) = kt – ½ t2 for 0≤ t ≤ k and h(t) = ½ k2 for t > k.3
There are two basic cases to consider: ar>1, and ar<1.4

Case 1:

ar>1. In this case, the consumerists’ better use of the doctor’s information (a>1)

outweighs their tendency to take up the doctor’s time for low-valued interactions. The marginal
utility of the tth minute spent with an ordinary patient is h'(t) = k-t, while the marginal utility of
the tth minute spent with a consumerist patient is arh'(rt) = ark-ar2t. Thus, when ar>1, the
marginal-utility of time curve for consumerists lies everywhere above the marginal-utility curve
for ordinary patients. See Figure 1.
(Insert Figure 1.)
In this case, when the doctor's time budget is tight, i.e., T is small, the doctor will devote
all her time to consumerists, because they are much more effective producers of quality than
ordinary patients. As the doctor's time budget increases, the doctor spends more and more total
time with the consumerists, working her way down the consumerists' marginal value curve up to
the point, shown as t, in the figure, where the marginal health benefit of the last minute spent
with a consumerist equals the marginal health benefit of the first minute spent with an ordinary
patient. Since the marginal health benefit of time for ordinary patients when to = 0 is h'(0) = k,
this occurs when k=ar(k-rT'/μ), or μk(ar-1)/ar2 = T'.

When the total time budget is T',

consumerist patients receive t1 = k(ar-1)/ar2 minutes of care. At ti, the doctor begins spending a
positive amount of time with each kind of patient. The solution to the doctor's problem is found
by solving:
k  to*  ark  ar 2tc* , and

tc*  1    to*  T ,
11

(1)

which has solution:
tc* 

T  k  ar  11   
, and
ar 2 1     

ar 2T   k  ar  1
t 
.
ar 2 1     

(2)

*
o

Eventually, as T continues to increase, the marginal health benefit of spending additional
time with either type of patient reaches zero. At this point, even if the doctor's time budget
continues to increase, the doctor gives no more time to either type of patient. This occurs when
h'(t*o) = 0, or T'' = k(r+μ-rμ)/r. Thus, the full solution is given by:
 T /
 T k ar 1 1 
tc   ar2 1   

 k / r

if

0  T  T ,

if

T   T  T , and

if

T  T ;

and
0


2
 ar T  k ar 1
to   ar 2 1  

k


if

0  T  T ,

if

T   T  T , and

if

T  T .

Figure 2 shows t*o and t*c as functions of the overall time budget, T.
(Insert Figure 2.)
Next, we characterize, for any time budget T, how consumerism affects quality. Since we
are primarily interested in determining the impact on quality of the presence of consumerists, the
baseline case we consider is one in which all patients are ordinary. In the baseline case, all
patients are identical, and each receives T minutes of care. Relative to the situation where every
patient is ordinary, since T/μ >T, for 0 ≤ T ≤ T' were there consumerists in the population, they
would get more quality than they would get in a world where no patient was consumerist.
12

Consumerists also get more quality than they would in the baseline case when T>T'', since
ah(r(T/r)) = a h(T) > h(T). Since tc* is a continuous function of T, consumerists would only get
less quality than in the baseline case if tc* = T for some T' < T < T''. It is straightforward to
verify that no such solution exists, and hence when ar>1 consumerists always receive more
quality than do the ordinaries who populate the baseline case.
Next, consider how consumerism affects the quality received by ordinary patients. Note
that when ar>1, consumerists always receive more time than non-consumerists. Since for T<T'',
μtc* + (1-μ)to* = T, this implies that to* < T, and hence that ordinary patients receive less quality
when consumerists are present than they would in a world without consumerism. For T ≥ T'',
ordinary patients get the same quality with or without consumerists, since the doctor’s timebudget constraint does not bind.
Figure 3 shows how quality changes as a function of T. Average quality must be higher
with consumerism than without. To see this, note that the marginal quality curve for
consumerists lies everywhere above the marginal quality curve for ordinary patients. Thus if the
doctor were to devote T minutes to every patient in a world with consumerism, the average
quality would be larger with consumerists than without simply, because when ar > 1
consumerists convert time into quality more efficiently than do ordinary patients. Given that the
doctor is maximizing average quality, average quality must always be higher with consumerism
than without.
(Insert Figure 3.)
Case 2: ar<1. Unlike in Case 1, here the marginal quality curves for consumerists and ordinary
patients cross, as illustrated in Figure 4. Thus, consumerists are no longer always more efficient
quality producers than ordinary patients. At low levels of time, the doctor's time is better used to

13

concentrate on ordinary patients, since the lower quality per minute of the consumerists’
information outweighs the fact that they are more productive consumers of the doctor's advice.
On the other hand, once time is abundant, the second effect dominates the first, and the
maximizing doctor concentrates more time on consumerists.
(Insert Figure 4.)
For low levels of T, it is optimal for the doctor to devote all of her time to ordinary patients. In
this range, each ordinary patient receives T/(1-μ) minutes of time, and each consumerist receives
0. This is true up until the point where the marginal quality of time spent on ordinary patients
equals ark, or k – T’/(1- μ ) = ark. Solving, this yields T0 =(1–μ )(1 – ar)k.
As in the previous case, once the marginal quality for ordinary patients drops to the point
where it is worthwhile to spend time on consumerists, the solution to the problem is found by
solving the equations in (1), which yields solution (2). This remains the solution up until the
point where the marginal utility of quality equals zero, which once again occurs at T'' = k(r+μ –
rμ)/r. Thus the solution to the doctor's problem in Case 3 is given by:

0


T

k
ar
1 1 

tc   ar 2 1   

 k / r

if

0  T  T 0,

if

T 0  T  T , and
T  T ;

if

and
T / 1    if
 ar 2T  k ar 1
to   ar 2 1   if

k
if


0  T  T ,
T 0  T  T , and .
T  T .

Clearly, consumerists receive less time than ordinary patients when 0 ≤ T ≤T0, and
consumerists receive more time than ordinary patients when T≥T''. Since tc* and to* increase
linearly for T0 ≤ T ≤T'' , this implies that there is a critical time level, TX, such that ordinary
patients receive more time for T<TX and consumerists receive more time for T>TX. Further, tc*
14

increases more rapidly with T than to* for

T0 ≤ T ≤T'' . Figure 5 shows the optimal time spent

with each type of patient as a function of T.
(Insert Figure 5.)
Having characterized the solution, we turn once again to the question of how, for any
time budget, quality with consumerism compares to quality in the baseline case. For very tight
time budgets, 0 ≤ T ≤T0, consumerists get zero time and hence zero quality, and ordinary patients
get more time and quality than they do in the baseline case. Average quality with consumerism is
lower than in the baseline case, since the additional time spent on consumerists is spent less
productively than it would be in the baseline case.
As before, for very high levels of time, T≥T'', both consumerists and ordinary patients
receive time up until the point where the marginal benefit from additional care falls to zero. Thus
consumerists receive more quality, and ordinary patients receive the same amount of quality as
do the ordinary patients who comprise the baseline case. Over this range, since the maximum
quality for a consumerist is higher than the maximum quality for an ordinary patient, average
quality is once again higher with consumerism than in the baseline case.
For intermediate levels of T, it is straightforward to show that health quality for
consumerists rises more steeply with T than does health quality for ordinary patients (because
the marginal quality curve is flatter for consumerists than ordinary patients). This implies that as
T ranges from T0 to T'', the quality curve for consumerists crosses the quality curve for ordinary
patients once (Figure 6).
Figure 6 has several notable features. As explained above, for high levels of time,
consumerists receive more quality than do the ordinaries of the baseline case, and this increases
average quality. For low levels of time, consumerists get zero time, and ordinary consumers

15

receive more time than in the baseline case. The overall result is that average quality falls
relative to the baseline case. The interesting part of the problem is what happens for intermediate
time budgets. Since the quality curves are continuous and cross but once, average quality starts
lower than in the baseline case, but then rises above it, starting at point A in Figure 6.
(Insert Figure 6.)
Another notable feature of Figure 6 is that there is a range of time budgets over which
both consumerists and ordinary patients do worse than in the baseline case. To see why this must
be so, consider the point where the marginal benefit curves for consumerists and nonconsumerists cross, labeled T* in Figure 4. If the time budget is T*, then the doctor allocates the
same amount of time to consumerists and ordinary patients. For that budget, ordinary patients get
the same quality that they would get in a world without consumerism, while consumerists get
less quality than would every patient in a world without consumerism (since the consumerist's
marginal benefit curve lies everywhere below the marginal benefit curve for ordinary patients to
the left of T* in Figure 4).
Now, suppose that the time budget increases slightly to T* + Δ. Since the consumerists'
marginal benefit curve lies above the ordinary patients' marginal benefit curve to the right of T*,
consumerists receive a disproportionate share of this additional time. Thus, ordinary patients get
less than T* + Δ minutes of time, on average. This implies that they do worse in a world with
consumerism than they do without consumerism (since in the latter world they receive T* + Δ
minutes of time). On the other hand, since at time budget T* consumerists do strictly worse in a
world with consumerism than people do without consumerism, by continuity they also do strictly
worse at time budget T* + Δ. Thus, at T* + Δ both consumerists and ordinary patients suffer from
the presence of consumerists, and by continuity this is also true for a range of time budgets

16

around T* + Δ.

Discussion and Qualifications of the Theoretical Model
The model shows that consumerism may affect quality in many ways, some counter to
naïve intuition. This was starkly illustrated by the fact that, provided that the doctor’s timebudget binds, consumerism is never Pareto improving. Relative to a world in which all patients
are ordinary, consumerism always harms either consumerists or ordinary patients (and
sometimes both).
Even in a world where consumerists are more productive users of the doctor’s
information but do not “waste” the doctor’s time (i.e., a > 1 and r = 1), consumerism harms
ordinary patients. Here, the doctor chooses to spend more time with consumerists, since they
benefit more from it. However, this necessarily leaves less time for ordinary patients. Although
average quality increases in this case, ordinary patients suffer. Thus, at the very least,
consumerism has distributional consequences that should be taken into account when discussing
its merits.
If we introduce the idea that a consumerist may not make efficient use of the doctor’s
time (i.e., r < 1), this raises the possibility that consumerism harms all patients. This is possible
when the marginal value of time spent with consumerists is relatively low relative to ordinary
patients early on, but higher after some point. In this case, the doctor must spend a lot of
unproductive time with consumerist patients before they get information that is (relatively) highvalued, thus leaving little time for ordinary patients. Ordinary patients suffer because they
receive too little time from the doctor, while consumerists suffer because they make poor use of
the time they take, especially the “early minutes” whose marginal value is low relative to time

17

spent with ordinary patients.
For the sake of illustration we have assumed that the doctor has a fixed time budget and
number of patients. The presence of consumerists imposes an externality, sometimes negative
sometimes positive, on ordinary patients and on each other. This would remain true even if the
doctor’s time budget were elastic, as long as it was not so elastic that she always devoted enough
hours to reach a particular level of quality. If the doctor were inclined to vary T substantially,
then the doctor would respond to the advent of consumerism by adjusting total working hours. If
that adjustment were upwards, obviously, a Pareto improvement could result. If the doctor
adjusted the number of patients, increasing their numbers could not lead to a Pareto
improvement, and cutting their numbers leads to Pareto noncomparability, since some patients
go from being seen to being treated elsewhere. ,
The model presented here is simple. However, the basic insights of the model, that
consumerism need not benefit everyone and, in fact, may harm everyone, extend to more
complex functional forms. Indeed, the fact that these phenomena arise in such a simple model
suggests that they would be readily found in more complex models.

III. DATA AND VARIABLES

Data
We employ physician survey data from the 2000-01 Community Tracking Study (CTS),
conducted by the Gallup Poll and maintained at the Center for Studying Health System Change.
It includes 12,406 physicians who are engaged in direct patient care for at least 20 hours per

18

week in 60 selected communities in the United States. The response rate of the CTS physician
survey is above 60 percent 5 (Strunk and Reschovsky, 2002). The survey inquires about a
physician’s percent of consumerist patients, adequacy of time with patients, and the quality of
health care s/he delivers, as well as a wealth of information on the physician’s specialty, practice
and demographic characteristics, income, involvement with managed care arrangements, and
perceptions about competitive pressures. After excluding approximately 4 percent of physicians
who did not respond to questions about consumerist patients, the study sample includes 11,936
respondents.

Dependent Variables
We consider three dependent variables, each of which provides a slightly different insight
into physicians’ perceptions of the quality of care they provide. All three quality of care variables
are measured on a 5-point Likert scale. Possible physician responses to our three quality
questions are: 1) disagree strongly, 2) disagree somewhat, 3) neither agree nor disagree, 4) agree
somewhat, and 5) agree strongly.
Our theoretical model recognizes that consumerist patients may take up more physician
time than do ordinary patients. Thus, we first seek to examine the effect of consumerism on
physicians’ perceptions about the adequacy of time with their patients. Although the question
does not directly inquire about quality, time adequacy can be viewed as a measure of the
physician’s view of her ability to provide quality care. If time is inadequate, presumably he could
be doing more for patients if he had more time.

19

Quality Measure 1 (Q1): Strength of agreement: I have adequate time to spend with my
patients during typical office/patient visits.

We turn next to two more-direct indicators of quality of care. The first considers whether
the physician believes he has adequate time to spend with his patients, the second shows whether
the physician believes that he can provide quality of care to all the patients, and the third
indicates whether the physician believes that he can keep continuing relationships with patients
to promote quality.

Quality Measure 2 (Q2): Strength of agreement: it is possible to provide high quality care to
all of my patients.

It is recommended that doctors and patients maintain continuing relationships as a means
to promote trust, communication, understanding of the patient’s overall condition, and thus
quality of care. The third quality question is:

Quality Measure 3 (Q3): Strength of agreement: it is possible to maintain the kind of continuing
relationships with patients over time that promote the delivery of high quality care.

Independent Variables
The independent variable of primary interest is a measure of consumerism in the
physician’s practice. We also employ a number of controls to help isolate the effect of
consumerism on out outcome variables.

20

Consumerism measure. The CTS physician survey asked physicians the critical
question for our purposes, because it provides direct evidence on the extent of consumerism in a
physician’s patient caseload:
During the last month, what percentage of your patients talked about medical
conditions, tests, treatments, or drugs they had read or heard bout from various
sources other than you, such as the Internet, their friends, relatives, TV, radio,
books, or magazines?
The response to this question gives our measure of the percent of consumerist patients in the
physician’s patient caseload. As noted earlier, consumerism takes many forms, and any attempt
to define or measure it is open to criticism. The strength of this measure is that it captures the
features that comprise the essence of consumerism; namely, gleaning medical information from
sources other than one's doctor and engaging one’s doctor in discussions about alternative
treatment options. This measure of consumerism also accords with the one in our theoretical
model.
Other explanatory variables. In our analysis, we also control for a variety of physician
demographic and practice characteristics that may affect time adequacy and the quality of care.
These variables include physician gender, race, board certification status, and domestic or
foreign medical graduate. We also control for physician specialty (general/family practice,
internal medicine, medical specialty, surgical specialty, psychiatry, and obstetrics/gynecology
with general/family practice as the reference group), practice experience (categorized into groups
to account for potential non-linearities: less than or equal to 5 years, 6-14 years, 15-24 years, and
greater than or equal to 25 years with 6-14 years as the reference group), type of practice (solo/2
physicians practice, group practice with 3 physicians or more, HMO practice, medical school,

21

hospital, and other practice type, with solo/2 physicians practice works as the reference group),
annual practice income and annual hours of work.
To help control for the characteristics of patients within a physician’s practice, we
include the percent of the physician's revenue from managed care, Medicaid and Medicare.
Competitive pressures in the physician's practice area may also affect health care quality. Thus
we use binary variables indicating whether the physician perceives his market area to be very
competitive, somewhat competitive, or not competitive.
Instrumental variables

As will be discussed more fully below, our consumerism

measure may be endogenous. To cope with this, we employ instrumental variables estimation.
As the first step, we merged the CTS physician survey with the CTS household survey for the
same year, utilizing data on the 60 distinct CTS survey areas. The CTS household survey had
59,725 respondents in approximately 33,000 households (Center for Studying Health System
Change, 2003b). We then employed information from the household survey to provide
instrumental variables for the measure of consumerist patients in each physician’s practice area.
The 2000-2001 CTS household survey asked each respondent a direct question about
consumerism.
During the past year, did you look for or get information about a personal health
concern from sources other than your physicians: (1) Internet; (2) friends or
relatives; (3) TV or radio; (4) book or magazines; (5) health care professionals
(excluding physicians); (6) health care organizations; or (7) somewhere else?
Respondents in the CTS household survey answered whether s/he got information from
each of above 7 sources, and we started by constructing 7 binary variables representing a “yes”
or “no” answer each information source. However, these measures were highly collinear because

22

a respondent may use several sources for medical information. In examining these data, we
found that friends or relatives were the most commonly-cited source of information, though other
sources were important as well. This is consistent with findings in the previous literature, namely
that people often trust the medical information from their friends and relatives besides their
doctors (see e.g., Marshall et al., 2000; Schwartz et al., 2005; Wilson et al., 2007). We therefore
constructed two instrumental variables from these data:
Instrument 1: A dummy variable equal to 1 if the respondent got medical
information about a personal health concern from friends or relatives and equals
to 0 otherwise;
and
Instrument 2: A count variable indicating the total number of sources from which
the respondent obtained medical information other than his or her physician.
We then calculated the mean values of the two instrumental variables for the 60 CTS
survey areas. Each instrumental variable thus measures the extent to which patients in a survey
area acquire medical information from sources other than their physicians. We anticipated that
both instrumental variables would be strongly and positively correlated with the percentage of
consumerist patients that each physician treats. This expectation was fulfilled. Because these two
instrumental variables are strongly correlated, however, they are used separately.

III. ESTIMATION STRATEGY
Model Specification

23

We will estimate the effect of consumerism on each of the three quality measures
described above. We assume that the quality of care that a physician perceives take the following
functional form:
Q = β0 + Xβ1 + Cβ2 + ε

(3)

where
Q

=

quality of care measure: Q1, Q2, or Q3;

X

=

a vector of physician demographic/practice characteristics;

C

=

consumerism measure;

β0 - β2 =

coefficients to be estimated; and

ε

a disturbance term.

=

The estimated coefficient β2 shows the effect of consumerism on the quality of care measure, and
is the parameter of key interest. If β2 is positive, then consumerism improves the quality of care.
On the other hand, a negative value for this coefficient means that consumerism is associated
with lower quality perceived by physicians. Our theoretical model hypothesized that consumerist
patients take more physician time, but showed the conditions under which either positive or
negative effect on care quality are possible.
Endogeneity. The above specification does not recognize that the measure of
consumerism may be endogenous. Endogeneity may enter due to either omitted variables or
simultaneity (Wooldridge, 2001). If it is present, the estimated coefficient β2 in equation (3) will
be biased due to correlation between the consumerism measure C and the disturbance term ε. To
illustrate a potential source of bias, physicians and patients are not randomly selected, and
consumerist patients may choose their physicians based on some criteria that researchers cannot
observe. Those physicians who tend to match with consumerist patients may be more tolerant of

24

these patients, have more time for each patient, and/or may have different views on how
consumerism affects their ability to provide high quality of care. The endogeneity due to this
matching issue may over-estimate the positive effect of consumerism or under-estimate the
negative effect of consumerism.
In addition, endogeneity may arise if people who receive poor care or are in poor health
feel a greater need to acquire information about their care. If either were true, then the singleequation approach would over-estimate the negative effect of consumerism or under-estimate the
positive effect of consumerism. To address this endogeneity issue, we write the consumerism
equation as:
C = α0 + Xα1 + Zα2 + u

(4)

where
Z

=

instrumental variable(s);

α0 - α2 =

coefficients to be estimated; and

u

a disturbance term.

=

If both the quality measure and consumerism were continuous, traditional two-stage least
squares would yield a consistent estimate of β2. But if, as in the present case, all the quality of
care measures are ordered and categorical variables, two-stage least squares is not appropriate
(Terza, Basu, and Rathouz, 2008).
The control function6 model as a two-step method is available to consistently estimate the
effect of consumerism on the quality of care in this case (Smith and Blundell, 1986; Rivers and
Vuong, 1988, Wooldridge, 2001). The first step for implementing the control function approach
is to estimate equation (4) via ordinary least squares (OLS) and obtain the estimated residual û.

25

Then we append the estimated residual in equation (3) as a new covariate and estimate the
following equation:
Y = β0 + Xβ1 + Cβ2 + ûβ3 + e

(5)

This estimation approach also provides an exogeneity test of the consumerism variable
(Hausman, 1978, 1983; Wooldridge, 2002). Although pure maximum likelihood estimation is
more efficient, this two-step method as a limited information procedure is quite straightforward
and still produces consistent estimates of the model coefficients β0 - β3 (Terza, Basu, and
Rathouz, 2008). In addition, maximum likelihood estimation depends on the joint distribution
assumed between two disturbance terms, and “sometimes it can be computationally difficult to
get iterations to converge” (Wooldridge, 2001). In the case where the second-stage dependent
variable is continuous, so that two-stage least squares estimation is appropriate, this two-step
method as a limited information procedure produces exactly the same results as two-stage least
squares (Anderson, 2005). Due to the two-step feature of the model, the standard errors in the
second step will be adjusted by nonparametric bootstrap techniques using 200 replications. Biascorrected statistical levels are reported for estimated coefficients in the tables.

V. RESULTS
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for our study sample. The mean values of the three
quality measures are respectively 3.40, 3.96 and 3.82 on the ordered and categorical scales
between 1 and 5. The independent variable that is our focus is the measure of the percent of
patients who are consumerist. On average, physicians have 16.7 percent of patients in this
category.
(Insert Table 1)

26

Associations between consumerism and the quality of care. Before turning to
multivariate evidence and the rigorous analysis and testing it allows, Figure 1 provides
information on the association between the percentage of a physician’s patients who are
consumerist and time adequacy measure. As Figure 7 indicates, physicians having more
consumerist patients are more likely to answer “disagree” with quality measure Q1 (time
adequacy). This negative correlation is statistically significant at the 1 percent level 7 . The
relationship between consumerist patient percentage and the other two quality measures are also
negative as shown in Figures 7.
(Insert Figure 7)
Thus, even at the grossest level, it appears that physicians report a negative relationship between
consumerism and quality.
Multivariate evidence. It is possible that some third intervening variable affects both
consumerism and the quality of care. Hence, it is essential to determine whether these patterns
persist in multivariate analysis. Table 2 provides the results of multivariate ordered probit
regression analyses predicting the first quality of care measure. In the single equation model,
there is a statistically significant, negative relationship between consumerism and quality (Q1).
However, the magnitude of the coefficient is small and unlikely to be of practical significance.
(Insert Table 2)
The second and third columns control for endogeneity, each using one of the two
instrumental variables. To implement the control function correction for endogeneity, we first
estimate the models predicting the percentage of consumerist patients. We use each instrument
separately to check the robustness of the results to an alternative choice of instruments. These
results, provided in Appendix A1, show that each instrumental variable correlates strongly and

27

positively with the percentage of consumerist patients; moreover, their coefficients are highly
significant. We also perform under-identification and weak identification tests for each
instrumental variable. The results of these tests indicate that our instruments are sound. The fitted
residuals from the control function models in Table 2 are statistically significant, indicating that
the consumerism measure is endogenous. Controlling for endogeneity, we find a negative and
significant effect of consumerism on the first quality of care measure. Moreover, the magnitude
of this effect is substantially larger in absolute value than that with single equation model: a ten
percentage point increase in consumerism would lower the answers to our question by a full
point.
The coefficients on the fitted residuals are positive, indicating that the disturbance terms
between the quality equation and consumerism equation are positively correlated (Wooldridge,
2001). What factors might produce this pattern? Patients might have preferences for their
physician choices. Consumerist patients, thus being both more informed and more demanding,
might prefer physicians who are more likely to have adequate time to spend with patients and are
willing to listen to their patients. If so, the single equation model, which does not adjust for
patient selection effects, would understate the negative effects of consumerism on the time
adequacy measure.
(Insert Table 3)
Tables 3 and 4 report the multivariate results for the other two quality of care measures.
The control function models again reveal negative, statistically significant, relationships between
consumerism and these quality measures. A ten percentage point increase in consumerism would
lower the answers to the quality questions by roughly four tenths of apoint, except for Q3 and
instrument 2, where there is a seven tenths of a point decrease The control function models also

28

indicate that the consumerism measure is endogenous. Consistent with the results in Table 2, the
endogeneity-corrected estimates in Tables 3 and 4 again reveal a stronger negative relationship
between consumerism and the quality of care than did the single equation model. Once again,
selection effects could explain these patterns – e.g., consumerist patients select higher-quality
doctors.
(Insert Table 4)
To gain a better sense of the impact of consumerism, we next consider the impact of
increasing consumerism on the distribution of the doctors’ responses to the quality questions.
Figure 8 calculates the predicted probabilities for the first quality measure (time adequacy) with
different consumerism levels, controlling for the endogeneity of consumerism with instrument 1.
We set the shares of consumerist patients among all the patients from 5 percent (25th percentile
of consumerism measure), 10 percent (50th percentile of consumerism measure), and 20 percent
(75th percentile of consumerism measure). We find that, as the share of consumerist patients
rises, substantially more physicians disagree strongly or disagree somewhat that they have
adequate time to spend with patients, suggesting that consumerist patients do occupy more
physician time during office visits. When the level of consumerism lies at the 25th percentile, 6.6
percent of physicians strongly disagree that they have adequate time to spend with patients
during typical office visits. These predicted probabilities of disagreeing strongly increase to 13.3
percent when the level of consumerism is 50th percentile and 35.3 percent when the level of
consumerism is 75th percentile. Figure 8 also shows the predicted probabilities of agreeing
strongly that the physician has adequate time are 55.21 percent, 42.83 percent, and 23.97 percent,
respectively, as the levels of consumerism rise from 25th percentile to 75th percentile.
(Insert Figure 8)

29

The predicted probabilities of the second and third quality of care measures using
instrument 1 are reported in Figures 9 and 10. The trends are similar to those in the time measure.
The predicted probabilities of quality measures using the instrument 2 are similar to those
reported in Figures 8-10 and are available from the authors upon request.
(Insert Figure 9)
(Insert Figure 10)
Though our focus is on the effects of consumerism, this study yields additional insights
about the quality of care. For example, other results indicate that physicians in more competitive
markets perceive greater difficulty in providing high quality care in the second stage. Greater
physician involvement in managed care is also associated with less perceived ability to provide
high quality of care. Relative to general/family practitioners (the reference specialty), most
physician specialists perceive a greater ability to provide high quality of care. A notable
exception is psychiatry, where physicians perceive significantly less ability to provide high
quality care. Younger physicians are generally more likely to believe that they can provide high
quality of care.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
The changing relationships between physicians and their patients stimulated by the rise of
consumerism may have profound implications for the quality of medical care. To date, however,
the literature has not examined, much less quantified this relationship. Our theoretical model
shows that consumerism need not unambiguously improve quality, while the empirical results
show strong and consistent evidence that physicians with more consumerist patients are
substantially less likely to believe that they can deliver high quality of care. These results are

30

found with a single equation model (ordered probit estimation). They are much stronger when
we employ instrumental variables to correct for endogeneity of the consumerism measure. The
findings apply for each of our three alternative quality indicators.
We should mention a caveat: our results rely on physicians’ perception of quality, which
may differ from actual quality. However, as long as perceived quality is (positively) correlated
with actual quality, and this divergence does not vary systematically with consumerism, our
results still have merit.
The negative association between consumerism and our quality of care measures holds
potentially serious implications for the success of patient empowerment. Though perhaps more
knowledgeable, consumerist patients may turn out to claim excess time to the disbenefit of other
patients. If large numbers of patients in a practice are consumerist, a form of rat race may emerge
among them. Efforts by many patients to claim disproportionate amounts of time – as may
happen with grabby parents on a teacher’s night – may lead to none of them getting it, and all
being dissatisfied. This raises the additional risk that their physician may feel underappreciated
and over attacked.
These findings remind us that providing consumers with more health care information
and increasing their role in medical decision making bring costs as well as benefits. Our
theoretical model shows the possibility that the net results of consumerism for quality could well
be negative. Our empirical results indicate that alas they are.
The rise in consumerism has changed the nature of the agency relationship between
physicians and their patients. This agency relationship lies at the heart of the performance on
medical markets, as Arrow (1963) noted many years ago. We have long known that faithful

31

agents are critical for effective medical performance. Modern developments have made it
important to study the impact of better-informed but more demanding principals.

32

REFERENCES
Anderson, T.W. 2005. “Origins of the limited information maximum likelihood and two-stage
least squares estimators.” Journal of Econometrics, 127(1): 1-16.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care.” American
Economic Review, 53(5): 941-973.
Balkrishnan, Rajesh, Mark A. Hall, Don Mehrabi, G. John Chen, Steven R. Feldman, and Alan B.
Fleischer. 2002. “Capitation payment, length of visit, and preventive services: evidence from
a national sample of outpatient physicians.” American Journal of Managed Care, 8(4): 332340.
Blendon, Robert J., Mollyann Brodie, John M. Benson, Drew E. Altman, Larry Levitt, Tina Hoff,
and Larry Hugick. 1998. “Understanding the Managed Care Backlash.” Health Affairs, 17(4):
80-94.
Brown, H. Shelton and Jose A. Pagan. 2006. “Managed care and the scale efficiency of US
hospitals.” International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, 6(4): 278-289.
Center for Studying Health System Change. 2003a. “Community Tracking Study physician
survey methodology report, 2000-21 (round three), appendices.” Technical Publication No.
38, http://www.hschange.org/CONTENT/570/570a.pdf (accessed August 8, 2008).
Center for Studying Health System Change. 2003b. “Community Tracking Study household
survey mythology report, 2000-01 (round three) main report.” Technical Publication No. 46,
http://www.hschange.org/CONTENT/602/602.pdf (accessed August 8, 2008)

33

Cohen, Elizabeth. 2008. “Are you and obnoxious patient?”
http://www.cnn.com/2008/HEALTH/01/23/ep.obnoxious/index.html (Accessed August 8,
2008)
Draper, Debra A., Robert E. Hurley, Cara S. Lesser, and Bradley C. Strunk. 2002. “The changing
face of managed care.” Health Affairs, 21(1): 11-23.
Dutta-Bergman, Mohan J. 2003. “Developing a profile of consumer intention to seek out health
information beyond a doctor.” Health Marketing Quarterly, 21(1/2): 91-112.
Dysinger, W.S. 1996. “Preventive medicine training and managed care: current status and
models for the future.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 12(3): 145-150.
Editorial. 2005. Will consumerism lead to better health? Lancet, 366(9483): 343.
Enthoven, Alan C., and Sara J. Singer. 1998. “The managed care backlash and the task force in
California.” Health Affairs, 17(4): 95-110.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1978. “Specification tests in econometrics.” Econometrica, 46: 1251-1271.
Hausman, Jerry A. 1983. “Specification and estimation of simultaneous equations models” in
Handbook of Econometrics, ed. Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligator. 391-448.
Amsterdam: North Holland..
Havlin, Linda J., Michael F. McAllister, and David H. Slavney. 2003. “How to inject
consumerism into your existing health plans.” Employee Benefits Journal, 28(3): 7-14.
Institute of Medicine, Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the Twenty-first
Century (Washington, National Academy Press, 2000).
34

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2007. “Changes in employer-sponsored health insurance
sponsorship, eligibility, and participation: 2001 to 2005.” Menlo Park, CA: Kaiser
Family Foundation. (Accessed August 8, 2008).
Marshall, Martin N., Paul G. Shekell, Sheila Leatherman, and Robert H. Brook. 2000. “The
public release of performance data, what do we expect to gain? A review of the evidence.”
Journal of American Medical Association, 283(14): 1866-1874.
McGlynn, Elizabeth, Steven Asch, John Adams, Joan Keesey, Jennifer Hicks, Alison
DeCristofaro and Eve Kerr. 2003. “The Quality of Health Care Delivered to Adults in the
United States.” The New England Journal of Medicine, 348(26), pp 2635-2645.
Miller, Nolan H. 2006. “Insurer-provider integration, credible commitment, and managed-care
backlash.” Journal of Health Economics, 25(5): 861-876.
Miller, Robert H., and Harold S. Luft. 1997. “Does managed care lead to better or worse quality
of care?” Health Affairs, 16(5): 7-25.
Miller, Robert H., and Harold S. Luft. 2002. “HMO plan performance update: an analysis of the
literature, 1997-2001.” Health Affairs, 21(4): 63-86.
National Committee on Quality Assurance. The State of Health Care Quality 2005: Industry
Trends and Analysis. http://www.ncqa.org/Docs/SOHCQ_2005.pdf.
Relman, Arnold S. 1993. “Controlling costs by ‘managed competition’ – would it work?” New
England Journal of Medicine, 328(2): 133-135.

35

Rivers, Douglas, and Quang H. Vuong. 1988. “Limited information estimators and exogeneity
test for simultaneous probit models.” Journal of Econometrics, 39(3): 347-366.
Rizzo, John A. 2005. “Are HMOs bad for health maintenance?” Health Economics, 14(11):
1117-1131.
Robinson, James C. 2001. “The end of managed care.” Journal of the American Medical
Association, 285(20): 2622-2628.
Robinson, James C. 2005. “Managed consumerism in health care.” Health Affairs, 24(6): 14781489.
Rosenthal, Meredith, and Arnold Milstein. 2004. “Awakening consumer stewardship of health
benefits: prevalence and differentiation of new health plan models.” Health Services
Research, 39(4p2): 1055-1070.
Schwartz, Lisa M., Steven Woloshin, and John D. Birkmeyer. 2005. “How do elderly patients
decide where to go for major surgery? telephone interview survey.” British Medical Journal,
331(7520): 821-824.
Smith, Richard J, and Richard W. Blundell. 1986. “An exogeneity test for a simultaneous
equation Tobit model with an application to labor supply.” Econometrica, 54(3): 679-685.
Strunk, Bradley, and James D. Reschovsky. “Kinder and gentler: physicians and managed care,
1997-2001.” 2002. Center for studying Health System Change Tracking Report, No.5: 1-4.
http://www.hschange.com/CONTENT/486/ (Accessed August 8, 2008)
Sullivan, Kip. 2000. “On the ‘efficiency’ of managed plans.” Health Affairs, 19(4): 139-148.

36

Terza, Joseph V., Anirban Basu, and Paul J. Rathouz. 2008. “Two-stage residual inclusion
estimation: addressing endogeneity in health econometric modeling.” Journal of Health
Economics, 27(3): 531-543.
Teutsch, Carol. 2003. “Patient-doctor communication.” Medical Clinics of North America, 87(5),
1115-1145.
Wilensky, Gail. 2006. “Consumer-driven health plans: early evidence and potential impact on
hospitals.” Health Affairs, 25(1): 174-185.
Wilson, Chad T., Steven Woloshin, Lisa M. Schwartz. 2007. “Choosing where to have major
surgery, who makes the decision?” Archives of Surgery, 142(3): 242-246.
Wooldridge, Jerry M. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. The MIT
Press.

37

Table 1: Names and summary statistics for study variables, N = 11,936
Variables
Quality of care 1
Physicians have adequate time to spend with patients
during typical office visits
Distribution (%)
1. disagree strongly
2. disagree somewhat
3. neither agree nor disagree
4. agree somewhat
5. agree strongly
total

Mean
3.40

(1.42)

12.93
23.19
2.35
34.39
27.14
100.00

Quality of care 2
Physicians can provide high quality care to all of
patients
Distribution (%)
1. disagree strongly
2. disagree somewhat
3. neither agree nor disagree
4. agree somewhat
5. agree strongly
total

3.96

(1.22)

5.10
14.56
1.94
36.48
41.92
100.00

Quality of care 3
Physicians can maintain continuing relationships with
patients to promote high quality care
Distribution (%)
1. disagree strongly
2. disagree somewhat
3. neither agree nor disagree
4. agree somewhat
5. agree strongly
total

3.82

(1.29)

7.63
15.17
2.67
36.15
38.38
100.00

Consumerist patient percentage
Instrumental variables for consumerist patient percentage
Mean percentage of people in CTS survey areas who
get medical information from friends or relatives1
Mean number of sources from which people in CTS
survey areas get medical information1
Other explanatory variables
Annual practice income in $100,000
Annual practice hours in 1,000
Proportion of revenue from managed care
Proportion of revenue from Medicare
Proportion of revenue from Medicaid
Male (dummy variable)
Board certified (dummy variable)
Foreign medical school graduate (dummy variable)
Race (dummy variables)

38

Min

Max

1

5

0
0
0
0
0

100
100
100
100
100

1

5

0
0
0
0
0

100
100
100
100
100

1

5

0
0
0
0
0

100
100
100
100
100

16.71

(16.87)

0

85

19.21

(2.15)

11.91

27.25

0.71

(0.08)

0.44

1.02

1.58
2.52
0.46
0.30
0.15
0.74
0.88
0.21

(0.83)
(0.81)
(0.28)
(0.23)
(0.18)

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

4.00
8.40
1
1
1
1
1
1

White
Black
other race
Practice specialty (dummy variables)
general/family practice
internal medicine
pediatrics
medical specialty
surgical specialty
psychiatry
obstetrics/gynecology
Practice experience (dummy variables)
less than or equal to 5 years
6-14 years
15-24 years
more than or equal to 25 years
Practice type (dummy variables)
solo/2 physicians
group practice >=3 physicians
HMO
medical school
hospital based
other practice type
Practice market competition status (dummy variables)
not at all competitive
somewhat competitive
very competitive

0.79
0.04
0.17

0
0
0

1
1
1

0.26
0.21
0.15
0.19
0.11
0.04
0.04

0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0.04
0.40
0.32
0.24

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

0.35
0.29
0.05
0.08
0.13
0.10

0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1

0.34
0.45
0.21

0
0
0

1
1
1

Data source: Community Tracking Study (CTS) physician survey 2000-2001.
Note: standard deviations are reported in the parentheses.
1. Instrumental variables are Community Tracking Study (CTS) household survey 2000-2001.

39

Table 2: Consumerism and quality of care 1
Q1: Physicians have adequate time to spend with patients
during typical office visits
Variables

Consumerist patient percentage
Fitted residual from the first stage
Other explanatory variables
Annual practice income in $100,000
Annual practice hours in 1,000
Proportion of revenue from managed care
Proportion of revenue from Medicare
Proportion of revenue from Medicaid
Male
Board certified
Foreign medical school graduate
Race
White (reference)
Black
other race
Practice specialty
general/family practice (reference)
internal medicine
pediatrics
medical specialty
surgical specialty
psychiatry
obstetrics/gynecology
Practice experience
less than or equal to 5 years
6-14 years (reference)
15-24 years
more than or equal to 25 years
Practice type
solo/2 physicians (reference)
group practice >=3 physicians
HMO
medical school
hospital based
other practice type
Practice market competition status
not at all competitive (reference)
somewhat competitive
very competitive

Ordered probit model (coefficient)
Single equation
Control function model
model
-0.003
N/A

***

Instrument 11
-0.098 ***
0.096 ***

-0.01
-0.14
-0.47
-0.08
-0.24
0.16
-0.19
0.07

***
***
*
***
***
***
***

-0.03
0.02
-0.19
0.16
-0.84
-0.29
-0.18
0.07

-0.02
0.07

**

0.03
0.18
0.22
0.38
0.17
0.29

***
***
***
***
***

-0.02

**

Instrument 22
-0.109 ***
0.107 ***

***
***
***
***
***
**

-0.04
0.04
-0.16
0.18
0.91
-0.35
-0.18
0.07

**
**
***
***
***
***
**

-0.19
-0.10

***
**

-0.21
-0.12

***
***

0.14
-0.13
0.16
0.40
0.54
0.71

***
**
***
***
***
***

0.16
-0.16
0.15
0.40
0.59
0.76

***
**
***
***
***
***

0.16

***

0.18

***

0.01
0.30

-0.15
0.08

***
*

-0.17
0.06

***

***

-0.27
-0.35
-0.24
-0.16
-0.30

***
***
***
***
***

-0.29
-0.34
-0.17
-0.32
-0.43

***
***
***
***
***

-0.30
-0.34
-0.16
-0.33
-0.44

***
***
***
***
***

-0.08
-0.11

***
***

0.01
0.13

***

0.02
0.16

***

* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.

N/A: not applicable.
1
Instrument 1 is mean percentage of people in CTS survey areas who get medical information from friends or
relatives.
2
Instrument 2 is Mean number of sources from which people in CTS survey areas get medical information.

40

Table 3: Consumerism and quality of care 2
Variables

Consumerist patient percentage
Fitted residual from the first stage
Other explanatory variables
Annual practice income in $100,000
Annual practice hours in 1,000
Proportion of revenue from managed care
Proportion of revenue from Medicare
Proportion of revenue from Medicaid
Male
Board certified
Foreign medical school graduate
Race
White (reference)
Black
other race
Practice specialty
general/family practice (reference)
internal medicine
pediatrics
medical specialty
surgical specialty
psychiatry
obstetrics/gynecology
Practice experience
less than or equal to 5 years
6-14 years (reference)
15-24 years
more than or equal to 25 years
Practice type
solo/2 physicians (reference)
group practice >=3 physicians
HMO
medical school
hospital based
other practice type
Practice market competition status
not at all competitive (reference)
somewhat competitive
very competitive

Q2: Physicians can provide high quality care to all of patients
Ordered probit model (coefficient)
Single equation
Control function model
model
-0.004
N/A

***

0.08
-0.08
-0.22
-0.02
-0.32
0.14
-0.05
0.04

***
***
***
***
***

Instrument 11
-0.037 **
0.033 **

0.07
-0.03
-0.12
0.07
-0.53
-0.02
-0.05
0.04

***
**
***

Instrument 22
-0.037 **
0.034 *

0.07
-0.02
-0.12
0.07
-0.53
-0.02
-0.05
0.04

***
*
***

-0.06
0.09

-0.12
0.03

**

-0.12
0.03

**

***

0.12
0.35
0.12
0.14
-0.25
0.17

***
***
***
***
***
***

0.16
0.24
0.10
0.14
-0.12
0.32

***
***
***
***

***
***
***
***

***

0.16
0.24
0.10
0.14
-0.12
0.32

0.10

**

0.16

***

0.16

***

-0.06
0.13

**
***

-0.11
0.05

***

-0.12
0.05

***

0.03
0.31
0.04
0.08
-0.04

-0.08
-0.16

***
**

***
***

0.02
0.31
0.06
0.02
-0.08

-0.05
-0.08

***

**

*

0.02
0.31
0.06
0.02
-0.08

-0.05
-0.08

***

***

*

*

* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.

N/A: not applicable.
1
Instrument 1 is mean percentage of people in CTS survey areas who get medical information from friends or
relatives.
2
Instrument 2 is Mean number of sources from which people in CTS survey areas get medical information.

41

Table 4: Consumerism and quality of care 3
Q3: Physicians can maintain continuing relationships with
patients to promote high quality care
Variables

Consumerist patient percentage
Fitted residual from the first stage
Other explanatory variables
Annual practice income in $100,000
Annual practice hours in 1,000
Proportion of revenue from managed care
Proportion of revenue from Medicare
Proportion of revenue from Medicaid
Male
Board certified
Foreign medical school graduate
Race
White (reference)
Black
other race
Practice specialty
general/family practice (reference)
internal medicine
pediatrics
medical specialty
surgical specialty
psychiatry
obstetrics/gynecology
Practice experience
less than or equal to 5 years
6-14 years (reference)
15-24 years
more than or equal to 25 years
Practice type
solo/2 physicians (reference)
group practice >=3 physicians
HMO
medical school
hospital based
other practice type
Practice market competition status
not at all competitive (reference)
somewhat competitive
very competitive

Ordered probit model (coefficient)
Single equation
Control function model
model
Instrument 11
-0.040 **
-0.039 **

-0.002
N/A

***

0.07
-0.04
-0.41
0.03
-0.03
0.04
-0.07
0.12

***
***
***

**
***

0.06
0.03
-0.30
0.12
-0.27
-0.14
-0.06
0.12

0.10
0.15

*
***

0.03
0.08

-0.06
0.17
-0.11
-0.09
-0.30
-0.12

*
***
***
**
***
**

-0.01
0.04
-0.13
-0.08
-0.15
0.05

0.17

***

0.25

-0.13
0.02

***

-0.19
-0.07

0.04
0.38
0.09
0.05
0.02

-0.12
-0.22

***
**

***
***

0.03
0.38
0.12
-0.02
-0.03

-0.08
-0.12

***

Instrument 22
-0.070 **
0.069 **

***
*
**
*
*
***

0.05
0.08
-0.21
0.20
-0.46
-0.29
-0.06
0.12

**

-0.03
0.03

***
**
***
***
***
***
*
***

0.03
-0.05
-0.14
-0.08
-0.03
0.18

***
*

***

0.30

***

***

-0.24
-0.14

***
***

***
**
*

***
***

***
**

0.02
0.38
0.14
-0.07
-0.07

-0.05
-0.04

*

***
***

*

* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.

N/A: not applicable.
1
Instrument 1 is mean percentage of people in CTS survey areas who get medical information from friends or
relatives.
2
Instrument 2 is Mean number of sources from which people in CTS survey areas get medical information.

42

Figure 1: Marginal Benefit: ar > 1.
Marginal
Benefit

Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient

t1

Time Per Patient

Figure 2: Optimal Time Allocation: ar > 1.
Optimal
Time Spent
With Each
Patient

Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient
Average Patient
tc*
to*

T'

T''
Average Time Per Patient (T)

Figure 3: Optimal Quality: ar > 1.
Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient

Quality

T'

Baseline Case
Average Patient

T''
Average Time Per Patient (T)

43

Figure 4: Marginal Benefit: ar<1.
Marginal
Benefit

Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient

t2 T*

Time Per Patient

Figure 5: Optimal Time Allocation: ar < 1.
Optimal
Time Spent
With Each
Patient

Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient
Average Patient
t c*
to*

T0

T''
Average Time Per Patient (T)

Figure 6: Optimal Quality: ar<1.
Ordinary Patient
Consumerist Patient

Quality

T0

Baseline Case
Average Patient

T''
T*
A
Average Time Per Patient (T)

44

Figure 7: Bivariate relationship between consumerism and quality of care

20

Quality of Care 1: Have Adequate Time to Spend
with Patients during Typical Office Visits
18.98

Consumerist patients(%)
5
10
15

17.36
16.53

16.71
15.18

disagree
somewhat

neither

agree
somewhat

agree
strongly

1

2

3

4

5

0

disagree
strongly

Data source: Community Tracking Study (CTS) physician survey 2000 - 2001

20

Quality of Care 2: Can Provide High Quality Care
to All of Patients
21.25
18.79

Consumerist patients(%)
5
10
15

17.78
16.99
15.43

disagree
somewhat

neither

agree
somewhat

agree
strongly

1

2

3

4

5

0

disagree
strongly

Data source: Community Tracking Study (CTS) physician survey 2000 - 2001

20

Quality of Care 3: Can Maintain Continuing Relationships
with Patients to Promote High Quality Care
19.46

Consumerist patients(%)
5
10
15

18.02
16.59

16.51

15.57

disagree
somewhat

neither

agree
somewhat

agree
strongly

1

2

3

4

5

0

disagree
strongly

Data source: Community Tracking Study (CTS) physician survey 2000 - 2001

45

Figure 8: Predicted probabilities of Quality of Care 1 by levels of consumerism
2. Disagree Somewhat

3. Neither Agree Nor Disagree

40
20

35.30

17.52

13.30

20.88

12.72

0

6.60
C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

60

4. Agree Somewhat

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

1.40

1.67

1.56

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

5. Agree Strongly
55.21

40

42.83

24.07

24.68

0

23.97
18.29

20

Predictd Probability of(%) of Q1

60

1. Disagree Strongly

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

Consumerism (C) = 25th %
Consumerism (C) = 75th %

Consumerism (C) = 50th %

Graphs by quality of care 1

Figure 9: Predicted probabilities of quality of care 2 by levels of consumerism
2. Disagree Somewhat

3. Neither Agree Nor Disagree

40
0

20

17.56
2.87

4.21

C=25th

C=50th

8.36

C=75th

4. Agree Somewhat

C=25th

12.01

C=50th

C=75th

1.36

1.62

2.09

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

5. Agree Strongly
56.78

60
40

9.51

50.23

29.49

31.93

C=25th

C=50th

37.46

34.53

20
0

Predictd Probability (%) of Q2

60

1. Disagree Strongly

C=75th

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

Consumerism (C) = 25th %
Consumerism (C) = 75th %

Consumerism (C) = 50th %

Graphs by quality of care 2

46

Figure 10: Predicted probabilities of quality of care measure 3 by levels of consumerism
2. Disagree Somewhat

3. Neither Agree Nor Disagree

40
0

20

17.84
12.73
4.53

6.59

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

60

4. Agree Somewhat

10.18

C=25th

12.70

C=50th

C=75th

1.91

2.24

2.78

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

5. Agree Strongly
54.06

40

47.18

29.32

31.29

32.50

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

34.15

20
0

Predictd Probability (%) of Q3

60

1. Disagree Strongly

C=25th

C=50th

C=75th

Consumerism (C) = 25th %
Consumerism (C) = 75th %

Consumerism (C) = 50th %

Graphs by quality of care 3

47

Appendix A1: Estimation of the first stage
Consumerist patient percentage
The first stage estimation

Variables
Instrumental variables for consumerist patient percentage
Instrument 1: mean percentage of people in CTS survey areas
who get medical information from friends or relatives
Instrument 2: mean number of sources from which people in
CTS survey areas get medical information
Other explanatory variables
Annual practice income in $100,000
Annual practice hours in 1,000
Proportion of revenue from managed care
Proportion of revenue from Medicare
Proportion of revenue from Medicaid
Male
Board certified
Foreign medical school graduate
Race
White (reference)
Black
other race
Practice specialty
general/family practice (reference)
internal medicine
pediatrics
medical specialty
surgical specialty
psychiatry
obstetrics/gynecology
Practice experience
less than or equal to 5 years
6-14 years (reference)
15-24 years
more than or equal to 25 years
Practice type
solo/2 physicians (reference)
group practice >=3 physicians
HMO
medical school
hospital based
other practice type
Practice market competition status
not at all competitive (reference)
somewhat competitive
very competitive
Constant
Tests for instrumental variables

Instrument 1

Instrument 2

0.30

N/A

N/A

-0.25
1.74
2.78
2.74
-6.05
-4.71
0.03
-0.10

Under-identification test, Anderson LM statistic
Weak identification test, Crag-Donald Wald statistic

***

6.90

***
***
***
***
***

**
***

-1.85
-1.77

**
***

1.05
-3.24
-0.69
0.04
3.74
4.36

**
***

**
***

***
***

1.07
-3.22
-0.69
0.05
3.73
4.37

1.94

***

1.92

***

-1.69
-2.35

***
***

-1.68
-2.35

***
***

-0.23
0.08
0.81
-1.57
-1.30

***
**

-0.24
0.04
0.80
-1.55
-1.30

***
**

0.93
2.48
10.13

***
***
***

0.94
2.49
11.00

***
***
***

* significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.

48

***
***
***
***
***

-1.83
-1.74

18.20
18.19

N/A: not applicable.

-0.25
1.75
2.75
2.74
-6.06
-4.72
0.03
-0.10

***

13.58
13.57

***
***

ENDNOTES
1

The term “consumerism” is also used in a different context with a quite different meaning. It is

sometimes associated with “consumer-driven health plans,” which feature high deductibles, often
coupled with health savings accounts. See Wilensky (2006).
2

For explanatory purposes, we will treat the physician as female and patients as male.

3

While this assumption facilitates the analysis, the graphical arguments show that the qualitative

results generalize to more general functional forms. Further, the goal of the model is to illustrate
that the relationship between consumerism and quality is complex, and that consumerism need
not improve quality. Given that this is true for the simple functional form employed here, it is all
the more likely to be so in less well-behaved environments.
4

For brevity, we do not present the knife-edge case where ar=1. The analysis is available from

the authors.
5

A review of the CTS database concluded that “there was little evidence of a systematic under

representation among demographic and practice characteristics available for all physicians from
the American Medical Association Masterfile” (Center for Studying Health System Change,
2003a, p. C19-C20).
6

Terza, Basu, and Rathouz (2008) term this model as two-stage residual inclusion estimation.

7

By the test of analysis of variance (ANOVA).

49

