                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            TRADES OF THE LIVING DEAD:
STYLE DIFFERENCES, STYLE PERSISTENCE AND PERFORMANCE OF CURRENCY FUND MANAGERS

                                              Momtchil Pojarliev
                                              Richard M. Levich

                                             Working Paper 14355
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w14355


                           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         September 2008




      We appreciate comments from Neville Bulgin and his colleagues at Deutsche Bank on this paper.
      The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
      National Bureau of Economic Research.

      NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
      reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
      NBER publications.

      © 2008 by Momtchil Pojarliev and Richard M. Levich. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
      not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
      including © notice, is given to the source.
Trades of the Living Dead: Style Differences, Style Persistence and Performance of Currency
Fund Managers
Momtchil Pojarliev and Richard M. Levich
NBER Working Paper No. 14355
September 2008
JEL No. F31,G11,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

We make use of a new database on daily currency fund manager returns over a three-year period, 2005-08.
This higher frequency data allows us to estimate both alpha measures of performance and beta style
factors on a yearly basis, which in turn allows us to test for persistence. We find no evidence to support
alpha persistence; a manager's alpha in one year is not significantly related to his alpha in the prior
year. On the other hand, there is substantial evidence for style persistence; funds that rely on carry,
trend or value trading or with a long/short bias toward currency volatility are likely to maintain that
style in the following year. In addition, we are able to examine the performance of managers that survive
through the entire sample period, versus those that drop out. We find significant differences in both
the investment styles of living versus deceased funds, as well as their realized alpha performance measures.
We conjecture that both style differences and ineffective market timing, rather than market conditions,
have impacted performance outcomes and induced some managers to close their funds.


Momtchil Pojarliev
Hermes Investment Management Limited
Lloyds Chambers, 1 Portsoken Street
London E1 8HZ England
m.pojarliev@hermes.co.uk

Richard M. Levich
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
RLEVICH@STERN.NYU.EDU
     Trades of the Living Dead: Style Differences,
    Style Persistence and Performance of Currency
                    Fund Managers


1. Introduction

A large number of academic and professional studies support the notion that various

types of currency trading strategies can be quite profitable.1 Knowing that currency

alpha can be easily transported into a wide range of investment products, the asset

management industry is naturally very interested in currency as an asset class.



However, recent performance of currency managers has been disappointing. For

example, both the Parker FX index and the Barclay Currency Traders Index (BCTI),

which track the performance of currency managers, have underperformed cash (risk

free returns) over the three years ending March 2008 (see Table 1).2 Performance

over a three-year term is an important measure as it sometimes is associated with the

“average life” of an investment mandate.3



In part, these lacklustre returns may reflect the disappointing performance of various

well-known currency strategies such as carry trading, trend following, and value

1
  Research has focused on three types of trading strategies. The carry trade or forward rate bias strategy
relies on the general tendency for currencies with high interest rates to appreciate. See Froot and Thaler
(1990) for a survey and Burnside, et al. (2006) for a recent study. Technical trend following strategies
rely on persistent movements in spot exchange rates. See Irwin and Park (2007) and Neely, Weller and
Ulrich (2007) for surveys. Value investing strategies based on mean reversion to long run PPP
exchange rates offer another approach. Studies prepared at Citibank (2003) and Deutsche Bank (2007)
suggest that simple value trading strategies have been profitable.
2
  Some alternative currency managers’ indices (the CTA Equal Weighted Currency Index and the CTA
Asset Weighted Currency Index prepared by the Centre for International Securities and Derivatives
Markets) show a positive return over this period. Nevertheless, opinion in the currency management
industry remains strong that average returns have been poor in this period.



                                                                                                         2
investing. Figure 1 shows the performance of three examples of these currency

trading strategies for the three years between April 2005 and March 2008. The carry

strategy showed essentially zero return over the first 18 months, and then exhibited a

strong run up until June 2007. But carry has given back its gains since the U.S. credit

crunch began in summer 2007. As expected, the spike in currency volatility (Figure 2)

coincides with the underperformance of carry trades. Returns from trend following

moved mostly sideways throughout the period, although trend started to perform well

in 2008. The value trading strategy oscillated between 100 and 110 but closed the

period as the worst performing strategy of the three with a slightly negative return.

This may not be a surprise given the climb in the spot EUR/USD rate towards 1.60,

presumably further away from its “fair” value.



In earlier research, Pojarliev and Levich (PL, 2008) show that a significant part of the

variation of the returns of professional currency managers can be explained by these

three trading strategies and an indicator of currency volatility. PL redefine the alpha in

currency management as only that portion of the excess returns which can not be

explained by these four factors. In this paper, we take a closer look at the returns of

professional currency managers by estimating their alpha performance measures and

style betas over successive annual intervals. We are interested in the following

questions: First, is past performance any indication for future performance (are alphas

persistent)? Second, are investment styles (beta exposure) persistent? Third, what

differences in performance are there between funds that survive throughout the

sample period and those that do not? And finally, what explains difference in

performance between funds that survive and those that do not?

3
  Recently, Gross (2005) suggests that three to four years is the “average life” of investment firms, i.e.
the time frame before an average client will leave if performance disappoints.

                                                                                                             3
To address these questions, we rely on data for 80 currency managers for three years

between April 2005 and March 2008. We estimate alpha performance measures and

style betas using the four factor model proposed in PL (2008). We use higher

frequency, weekly return data to obtain efficient parameters estimates for annual

periods. Moreover, our database includes “dead funds” which allows us to correct for

backfill and survivorship bias, and examine differences between living and deceased

funds.



Overall, the results are quite interesting. We find no alpha persistence. Past

performance by an individual manager seems to offer no indication for his future

performance. However, we detect significant style persistence indicating that

managers have a tendency to stick to the same investment style (or strategy). This

may be good as it raises investor confidence that managers will stick with their

original or mandated strategy. But at the same time, persistence suggests that

managers are less willing to exploit market timing or reallocate their positions when

other strategies look more promising. Because consultants usually “penalize”

managers who do not stick to the same investment style, some style persistence may

be an attempt by managers to enhance credibility with investment consultants.



We also find some important differences between managers who perform well (and

survive) versus managers who perform poorly (and drop out of the database). Not

surprisingly, the set of funds that died over our sample achieved a significant negative

alpha and an alpha significantly less than for funds that survived until the ending date.

Moreover, the surviving or live funds showed greater association (in terms of R-


                                                                                       4
squared) with the four style factors than those funds that performed poorly and

eventually died. Furthermore, contrary to the presumption of the market that

underperformance of the trend-following rule has been responsible for the

diminishing returns of professional currency managers, we find that the strong

performance of the carry strategy until the credit crunch in the summer of 2007 was

devastating for many managers, who apparently were betting on liquidation of carry

trades.



In the next section of the paper, we lay out our methodology for relating currency

fund returns to style factors and describe the data in our study. In section 3, we report

our empirical evidence on currency fund performance over the entire three-year

period for indices constructed to represent various groups of managers, including

those who survive through the entire data sample (the “live” funds) and those who

drop out (the “dead” funds). In section 4, we examine the empirical evidence for

individual managers over the three-year period and over one-year intervals and report

our results for persistence in alpha (i.e. performance) and persistence in beta (i.e.

style). Conclusions and implications of our findings are in the final section.




                                                                                       5
2. Methodology and Data Description

To measure the systematic components of currency returns (the betas) and isolate the

portion due to skill, we follow the approach used in PL (2008) and adopt a standard

factor model of the form:


                       Rt = α + ∑i β i Fi ,t + ε t                                   (1)

where

        R is the excess return generated by the currency manager, defined as the total
        return ( Rt* ) less the periodic risk-free rate ( RF , t )

        α is a measure of active manager skill,

        F is a beta factor, that requires a systematic risk premium in the market,

        β is a coefficient or factor loading that measures the sensitivity of the
        manager’s returns to the factor, and

        ε is a random error term.


To implement this approach, we require data on currency manager returns and factors

that proxy for types of trading strategies and exposures that currency managers would

be likely to utilize. Our empirical proxies for these factors are based on data for the

major currencies that make up the vast bulk of foreign exchange trading volume.4



Currency Manager Returns

In this study, we aim to estimate alphas of currency managers over annual periods.

Thus, using monthly data is not an option as twelve observations are not enough to

obtain robust estimates. It is challenging to obtain higher frequency data for the

returns of professional currency managers as hedge fund data providers usually




                                                                                           6
collect monthly performance data. In this study, we make use of a new database of

currency managers who are part of the Deutsche Bank (DB) FXSelect platform.5

Launched in March 2005, FXSelect is an open platform, which allows clients of

Deutsche Bank to allocate their funds to different currency managers. Any currency

manager can apply for registration in the platform and be accepted if he satisfies the

following criteria:



a) Managers must be able to provide a daily track record for at least the last 18

months verified by a third party

b) They cannot have had more than a 20% draw-down of assets under management

over the last 12 months

c) Assets under management must be at least 15 million USD

d) Satisfactory criminal and regulatory searches on key individuals



While FXSelect is a new venture, the platform is presumably an attractive means for

professional currency managers to enhance their visibility and grow their client base.

As such, we believe that the FXSelect data offer a fair means of assessing

performance in the currency management industry.6 Most importantly for this study,

daily returns data on the FXSelect platform are available, thus providing us with

sufficient data to conduct an analysis of 12-month periods.




4
  The April 2007 survey of global foreign exchange turnover conducted by the Bank for International
Settlements in 2007 shows that the G10 currencies accounted for an average 90.1% of all currency
turnovers.
5
  We are grateful to Neville Bulgin and Rashid Hoosenally from Deutsche Bank for supplying the data.
More information about FXSelect can be find in the brochure “FXSelect: An Asset Allocation
Solution,” Deutsche Bank, Global Markets Foreign Exchange, 2006.
6
  Many (about 25%) of the managers in the FXSelect database are also included in other well known
hedge fund databases (CISDM and TASS). As another example for the visibility of the platform,



                                                                                                   7
Deutsche Bank provided daily returns data (gross of fees) for all managers who were

actively trading on the platform since its exception. To correct for accounting errors

and eliminate outliers, we transformed the daily returns into weekly returns by using

Wednesday observations.7 Weekly data provide 52 observations for each 12-month

period, which is sufficient to obtain reasonably efficient parameter estimates with a

four factor model.



Backfill and Survivorship biases

Performance evaluation needs to control for the usual biases affecting databases. In

particular, backfill and survivorship biases might be severe. As indicated earlier,

managers were required to submit at least 18 months of performance data before

being considered for the platform. As a manager could choose the time when to

approach Deutsche Bank, waiting for the “best” 18 months of past performance would

have been possible. To correct for backfill bias, we use returns after a manager has

actually joined the platform and started trading. Also, during our sample period, many

managers have joined and exited the platform due to a poor performance. We label

these managers “dead” funds. Figure 3 shows the number of “dead” funds (as of

April 2008), the number of “live” funds and the total number of funds from April

2005 until March 2008. Figure 3 illustrates the magnitude of the survivorship bias.

While 22 funds started in the platform in April 2005, only 15 of these funds (68%)

survived until April 2008. Almost 1/3 of the funds exited the platform within three

years after listing, as we show later most likely due to poor performance. This



Deutsche Bank recently launched the Mercer Currency Manager Index – a multimanager product based
on managers from the FXSelect platform chosen by Mercer Investment Consulting.
7
  We decided to use Wednesday as fewer bank holidays fall on Wednesday. Managers were based in
different locations (US, UK, Australia, Switzerland, Monaco, Spain, Sweden, Germany, Ireland and
Canada).

                                                                                               8
highlights the necessity of including the performance of dead funds in the analyses.8

We obtained data for 80 funds in total, but only 15 of these funds had a complete 3-

year track record.



Data for Risk Factors

Carry Factor

We use the Deutsche Bank G10 Harvest Index as the proxy for the returns of a carry

strategy.9 This index reflects the return of being long the 3 high-yielding currencies

against being short the 3 low-yielding currencies within the G10 currency universe.

The index is rebalanced quarterly. Every quarter the currencies are re-ranked

according to their current 3-month Libor rate. The Bloomberg code for this factor is

DBHVG10U Index.



Trend Factor

As a proxy for the trend-following factor, we use the AFX Currency Management

Index.10 The AFX Index is based on trading in seven currency pairs weighted by their

volume of turnover in the spot market, with returns for each pair based on an equally-




8
  Not correcting for backfill and survivorship biases resulted in significant alpha estimates for the
average manager in 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 and 2006. The average alpha for 2007 was also
estimated to be positive, but was not significantly different from zero. These results contrast strongly
with the reported results after correcting for backfill and survivorship biases, where none of the annual
periods average alphas was found to be significantly different from zero.
9
  In this paper, we were not able to use the same proxies for risk factors as in PL (2008) as the Citi
indices were provided to us only on a monthly base. On the other hand, the Deutsche Bank indices are
available as daily data in Bloomberg. To check the validity of using different indices for proxies of the
risk factors, we redid the regressions reported in PL (2008) for the period, which overlaps with this
study, using indices from Deutsche Bank. There was essentially no difference in the empirical results
whether we used Deutsche Bank or Citi factors as right hand side variables.
10
   Monthly data for this index are available at the AFX web site
(http://www.ljmu.ac.uk/LBS/93557.htm). We are grateful to Jason Laws from the Liverpool John
Moore University for providing daily data. We transformed the daily returns into weekly returns by
using the Wednesday observations.

                                                                                                        9
weighted portfolio of three moving average rules (32, 61 and 117 days).11 Earlier

research by Lequeux and Acar (1998) showed that this measure was a good proxy for

a trend-following style among professional managers. The AFX Index is a well

established proxy for trend-following strategies. It has been used for a number of

years in various research papers, and therefore is known to researchers in this field.



Value Factor

We use the Deutsche Bank FX PPP Index as the proxy for the returns of a value

strategy. To gauge relative value, Deutsche Bank prepares a ranking based on the

average daily spot rate over the last three months divided by the PPP exchange rate as

published annually by the OECD. The FX PPP index reflects the return of being long

the 3 currencies with the highest rank (undervalued currencies) against being short the

3 currencies with the lowest rank (overvalued currencies) within G10 currency

universe. The Bloomberg code for this factor is DBPPPUSF Index.



Currency Volatility Factor

We use the Deutsche Bank Currency Volatility Index as the proxy for foreign

exchange volatility. This index is calculated as the weighted average of 3-month

implied volatility for nine major currency pairs (as provided by the British Bankers

Association) with weights based on trading volume in the BIS surveys.12 The

Bloomberg code for this factor is CVIX Index.




11
   The seven currency pairs are EUR-USD, USD-JPY, USD-CHF, GBP-USD, EUR-JPY, EUR-GBP,
and EUR-CHF.
12
   The nine currency pairs are EUR-USD, USD-JPY, USD-CHF, USD-CAD, AUD-USD, GBP-USD,
EUR-JPY, EUR-GBP, and EUR-CHF.

                                                                                         10
3. Empirical Results on Currency Return Indices

Grouping Managers into Fund of Funds

To measure the overall returns for managers included on DB FXSelect, we construct

several portfolios representing all available funds and certain subsets of funds. The

first “fund-of-funds” (FoF) portfolio is compromised of equally weighted positions in

each of the funds available on the platform on every Wednesday over the sample

period. The return on this index can be defined as:



                                               nt
                                  R FOF ,t =   ∑R
                                               j =1
                                                      j ,t   / nt                 (2)


where

        Rj.t is the weekly return for manager j at time t

        nt is the number of managers available on the platform at time t



This portfolio is rebalanced weekly with newly listed funds added and “dead” funds

excluded from our fund-of-funds portfolio. As a result, every one of the 80 managers

who were on the platform between April 2005 and March 2008 is included in our

fund–of-funds index during their active period on the platform. From Figure 3, we see

that nt ranges from a low of 22 funds in April 2005 rising steadily to a high of 65

funds in December 2006 and then levelling off. The FoF portfolio is our primary

gauge of performance of managers on the DB FXSelect platform and represents an

investable index.




                                                                                  11
Figure 4 plots the cumulative performance of the FoF portfolio. The performance is

positive, highlighting the attraction of currency as an alternative asset class.13

However, almost all of the performance is generated in the last 12 months. This

performance pattern is consistent with the performance of the Parker FX index and

the BCTI (see Table 1).14



To gain additional perspective on the performance of funds on the DB FXSelect

platform, we construct two other portfolios, one consisting only of “dead” funds, i.e.

the funds which were no longer on the platform in April 2008, and a second portfolio

of “live” funds, i.e. those that were still active as of April 2008. The returns on these

two funds are defined in an analogous way to our FoF, namely



                                                  nD ,t
                                       R D ,t =   ∑R
                                                   j =1
                                                           D
                                                           j ,t   / n D ,t                             (3)


                                                  nL , t
                                       R L ,t =   ∑R
                                                   j =1
                                                           L
                                                           j ,t   / n L ,t                             (4)




where

         R Dj , y is the weekly return for manager of dead fund j at time t

         R Lj , y is the weekly return for manager of live fund j at time t


13
   The annualized Sharpe ratio of the FoF portfolio is 0.56, comparable with the Sharpe ratios of the
S&P 500 index (0.30), MSCI World index (0.71) and the Lehman Global Aggregate bond index (0.75)
during this period. Furthermore, the attraction of currencies as an alpha source is visible trough the low
correlation with the other asset classes. The correlation of the returns on the FoF portfolio with the
returns on the S&P 500, MSCI World and Lehman Global Aggregate indices is -0.4%, 12% and 23%,
respectively. The Sharpe ratio is computed as the average excess annualized monthly return (including
dividends) divided by the annualized standard deviation of the excess returns. We use the 1- month
LIBID (LIBOR less 12.5 bps) as the risk free rate.
14
   The correlation over this 3-year period between the monthly returns on the FoF portfolio and the
monthly returns on the Parker FX index and the returns on the BCTI is 67% and 65%, respectively.



                                                                                                        12
        nD,t is the number of managers classified as dead as of April 2008 but available

                 on the platform at time t

        nL,t is the number of managers classified as living as of April 2008 and

                 available on the platform at time t



For example, the dead portfolio would have invested in 7 funds as of April 2005,

increasing to 20 at the end of 2006 and consisting of only one manager in March 2008

(see Figure 3). The number of living funds reached 59 in March 2008, Compared to

the investable FoF index, our “Dead” and “Live” portfolios represent an “in-sample”

experiment, which could be conducted only by looking backwards as we did not know

which funds are going to die or remain on the platform. The cumulative performance

of these two portfolios as shown in Figure 5 clearly differs and we will analyze this

more closely in the next section.



Regression Results on Return Indices

Following the approach in PL (2008), we estimate equation (1) using 156 weekly

observations over the 3-year sample period, April 2005 – March 2008. We regress the

returns of these 3 portfolios (FoF, Live and Dead) on the four risk factors described in

the previous section. Alpha is the estimated intercept term, i.e. that portion of excess

returns not explained by the four factor model, or

                          αˆ = Rt − ∑i βˆi Fi ,t                                       (5)


Overall, the results in Table 2 support the four-factor model of currency trading

returns. The model explains roughly 53% of the variability of the “FoF” portfolio


Over a longer period, from February 1987 to April 2008, the correlation between the returns on the
Parker FX index and the returns on the BCTI is 90%.

                                                                                                     13
returns. Trend appears to be the most significant factor. The trend coefficient is 0.40,

larger than for any other factor and highly significant. On average, the managers on

the FXSelect platform seem to rely on trend-following. The trend factor alone

explains 40% of the variability of the excess returns of the “FoF” portfolio (we have

regressed the returns of “FoF” portfolio on each individual factor, but do not report

the results). The carry coefficient is also positive and significant. The value

coefficient is significant but negative, indicating that on average managers were

positioned to profit from further deviations from PPP. The volatility coefficient is

positive but not significant at the 10% level in a 2-tail test.



Our point estimate for alpha in the “FoF” portfolio is zero and not significant. This

result implies that managers included in the FXSelect platform were not able to

generate alpha on average between April 2005 and March 2008. This confirms the

presumption in the market that this period has been extremely challenging for

currency managers. It is also consistent with previous research (PL 2008) that as a

group, currency managers were not able to generate significant alpha returns over the

long run (between 1990 and 2006). The returns in our sample are gross of fees, which

means that the average alpha would be negative after management fees. Managers

often charge a 2% per annum management fee and 20% performance fee, but fees do

vary.



As the population of funds in the FXSelect platform changed over the 3-year period, it

is interesting to explore differences in the performance of Live versus Dead funds, as

defined by equations (3) and (4). Figure 5 reveals that live funds achieved a

cumulative value of 108.7 far better than dead funds where value sank to only 91.6


                                                                                     14
after 3 years. Put differently, the live funds earned about 2.8% per annum (with an

information ratio of 0.91) compared to dead funds which earned -2.8% per annum

(with an information ratio of -1.21).15 We examine the performance of live and dead

funds more closely with various regression tests. Several observations stand out in

Table 2.



First, the alpha for the “Live” portfolio is quite high at almost 3 bps per week (or

1.4% per year). Although, not significant, this alpha suggests that this group of

managers might have at least roughly covered their management fees. The alpha for

the “Dead” portfolio is negative and significant. The “dead” managers lost about 6.5

bps per week (or roughly 3.3% per year). A t-test for the equality of the alphas of the

“Live” and the “Dead” portfolio rejects the null hypothesis of equal means at the 95%

confidence level (p-value = 0.0107). This may well explain why the “dead” funds

exited the trading platform.



Second, the “live” managers have a positive and significant carry coefficient, but the

“dead” managers have a negative and significant carry coefficient. Both groups are

significantly exposed to trend, although the “live” managers have almost twice as

much trend exposure as the “dead” managers. This is a very interesting result as it

suggests that “betting against carry” was an important reason why the “dead”

managers underperformed. There has been a presumption in the market, that the

recent underperformance of trend-following rules (the AFX is roughly flat in the

period under consideration) has been the main reason for the disappointing

performance of professional currency managers. Our results suggest that this


15
     An information ratio is the ratio of excess returns divided by their standard deviation.

                                                                                                15
presumption may be misplaced. Our results show that the strong performance of carry

(up to the beginning of the credit crunch in July 2007) had a substantial impact on

managers who were betting against the carry strategy. Ironically, although some

managers might have been punished due to heavy exposure to carry after July 2007

(e.g. NZD/JPY dropped 23% between July 24, 2007 and August 16, 2007), many

managers seem to have suffered heavy losses prior to that by betting against carry.



Third, the “live” managers have a negative and significant exposure to the value

factor and the “dead” managers have a positive, but not significant value coefficient.

Betting against PPP and for continuation of departures from fair value seems to have

helped the surviving managers to remain on the platform.



Finally, the R-square for the “live” managers (55%) is much higher than the 18% R-

square for “dead” managers. Anson (2008) theorizes that there is a trade-off between

beta style returns and alpha returns. In short, strategies that mimic an index cannot

earn returns that lead to outperformance. In an earlier study (PL, 2008), we found

evidence supporting Anson’s conjecture, namely that currency managers with high R-

square tend to have lower alpha, and vice versa. In the DB FXSelect sample which

includes live and dead funds, our results suggest that live managers tended to track the

four factors more closely, earning beta returns, which should have helped them

remain in operation. And indeed the live managers in our sample earned positive

(although not significant) alpha as well. With weaker linkages to the four style

factors, the dead managers were positioned to execute “pure” alpha seeking strategies.

Unfortunately, in this instance, the dead managers realized significant negative alpha.




                                                                                      16
So while being an alpha manager is good in the sense that it would justify active

management fees - it is good only as long as the managers are able to deliver positive

returns. Beta chasers might find it more difficult to justify alpha fees, but sticking

close to the benchmark (the four trading strategies) has apparently helped them to stay

in business. This result is consistent with a common strategy in the asset management

industry. The bulk of assets under management are allocated close to the benchmark

as large deviations from the benchmark expose the manager to significant business

risk in case of underperformance.



To better understand this anomaly of high (low) R-square and high (low) alpha, we

re-estimated the regressions for “live” and “dead” funds in Table 2 including

quadratic terms for each factor to test for market timing.16 The results for “live”

managers show positive and significant timing ability with respect to the trend

following factor (see Table 3). Once this effect is included, the point estimate for

alpha for live managers drops to -2.7 bps per week from +2.7 bps per week.,

suggesting that all of their alpha could be accounted for by timing skills in trend

following.17



The “dead” managers also have positive timing skill in trend, but on the other hand,

they exhibit negative timing skills for volatility.18 The actual returns of “dead”

managers were made worse by taking positions that faltered when volatility increased.


16
   Lo (2007) proposes a quadratic term as a way to detect market timing skills.
17
   Having estimated the alpha of the live managers with the 4-factor model and with the market timing
model (8-factors) we were able to test for equality in the alphas. A t-test rejects the null hypothesis of
equal means at the 90% confidence level (p-value = 0.0866). Thus, market timing has significantly
contributed to the superior returns of the live managers.
18
   The coefficient of the squared volatility term is significant only at the 10% level. However, in an
alternative specification of the market timing model, which omits the volatility factor, the dead
managers exhibit a significant negative market timing ability in the carry strategy at the 5% level.

                                                                                                        17
Overall, our analysis suggests that market timing skills had no significant positive

impact on the returns of dead managers.19



4. Empirical Results for Individual Managers

Full three-year sample period

Table 4 summarizes the results for the individual currency managers with a track

record spanning the entire 3-year period. The first row of Table 4 shows the results for

an equally weighted portfolio (“Index” portfolio) consisting of all 15 managers. As in

the case of the “Live” and “Dead” portfolios, this is a backward looking exercise as

we did not know which managers who were on the platform in April 2005 would

remain until March 2008.



For the 15 individual managers, Table 4 shows that trend was the most important

factor over the 3-year period. Trend is significant for more than half of the managers

(8). Carry is significant for 7 managers, but three of the managers had a significant

negative exposure to carry. It seems that while 25% of the managers were exhibiting

carry exposure, a similar number were betting on liquidation of carry trades. Value

was significant only for 5 managers and four of these managers had a negative

exposure to value, i.e. they were betting for further deviation from PPP. Volatility was

significant for 4 managers – two managers would have benefited from falling

volatility environment (the volatility coefficient was negative and significant) and two

managers would have benefited from rising volatility environment (positive and

significant volatility beta). Finally, none of the managers was able to deliver


19
  A t-test for the equality of the alphas estimated with the 4-factor model and with the market timing
model did not rejects the null hypothesis of equal means for the dead managers. Market timing did not
improve the returns of the dead managers as the positive market timing in trend was offset with
negative market timing in volatility.

                                                                                                     18
significant alpha as defined by our four factor model. Manager L28 was the best of all

with alpha estimated at 12 bps per week (about 6.0% per year) and significant at the

90% confidence level.



Table 5 reports the annualized excess returns, standard deviations and information

ratios for these 15 managers. The average excess annual return is positive, ranging

from -3.30% (L58) to 16.10% (L29) and the volatility ranges from 3.53% (L10) to

19.28% (L29). The average information ratio is 0.37. However, this average

information ratio overstates the performance of the average manager during this

challenging period as it is not adjusted for survivorship bias. The fourth column of

Table 5 ranks the managers by their information ratio. Manager L28 is ranked first

(IR equals 1.17) and manager L58 is ranked last (fifteen) with an information ratio of

-0.35.



We also report the annualized alpha return, the standard deviation of alpha returns

(tracking error) and the alternative information ratio (IR*) as defined in PL (2008). 20

Rank* is therefore the ranking of the managers by their IR*. Note that manager L35

experiences the largest improvement in ranking; he jumps to place 8th from place 12th.

This is not a surprise as his R-square was the second smallest (see Table 3). Less than

6% of the variability of his returns could be explained by the exposure to the four

factors.




20
  The information ratio (IR) is defined as the ratio of excess returns to their standard deviation. If we
assume that all returns are excess returns, then IR = Rj /σ(Rj) , where Rj is the annualized average
excess return and σ(Rj) is its annualized standard deviation. Using equation (1) to estimate alpha, PL
define the alternative information ratio as IR* = άj /σ(άj).

                                                                                                            19
The average IR* is smaller (0.24) than the average IR (0.37). This suggests that

significant part of the returns of the average manager could be contributed to exposure

to the four risk factors and it is not pure alpha.



Successive one-year samples

To investigate performance and style persistence, we estimate equation (1) using 52

weekly observations on successive one-year periods. Table 6 to 8 show the results for

three periods: April 2005 to March 2006, April 2006 to March 2007 and April 2007 to

March 2008. For each sub-period, we include those managers who have a full

performance track record in the respective period. We start with 22 funds in the first

sub-period. Twenty-one of these managers have also a full performance history in the

second sub-period (manager D10 exited the platform in January 2007 – after a total

return of -12% since entering) and is not included in the second sub-period. An

additional 31 managers joined the platform between May 2005 and April 2006 and

have a full track record available trough the second sub-period. Thus, the total number

of managers with a performance track record between April 2006 and March 2007

rises to 52. The last sub-period contains 46 currency managers. Twenty-one managers

did not make it through the last 12 months after joining the platform sometime before

April 2007. This illustrates again the magnitude of the survivorship bias and the

necessity to include the performance of the “dead” funds in the analyses.



Several results stand out from the analysis. First, the data continue to support the four

factor model over shorter periods, specifically for these three one-year sub-periods.

To gauge the explanatory power of the model on an index level, we have proceeded as

in the section above and constructed three equally-weighed portfolios, which consist


                                                                                      20
of the managers with a full history in the respective sub-period. These

portfolios/indices are in the row labelled “Index.” In the three 12-month periods

ending March 2006, March 2007 and March 2008, the four factors explain 50.0%,

61.3% and 67.3% respectively of the variability of the returns in these portfolios.

Looking at individual managers, the median R-squares are 19.7%, 20.8% and 26.2%

over the three successive periods. On a year-by-year basis, between 10-25% of

individual managers exhibit an R-square exceeding 50% (the highest R-square, 81%,

was recorded for manager L9 in the third sub-period), while roughly the same fraction

produce an R-square under 10%.



Second, the importance of trend seems to be declining while the importance of carry

seems to be rising and exceeded trend in the last sub-period. Table 9 shows the

fraction of the managers with significant exposure to each individual factor for the

different sub-periods. While trend was the most important factor between April 2005

and March 2006 with 50% of the managers significantly exposed to it, trend was only

second to last in terms of importance between March 2007 and April 2008 with only

28% of the managers significantly exposed to it. Ironically, this was also the period

where trend started to perform well again as a strategy. Trend yielded 0.1% in the first

sub-period, 1.11% in the second sub-period and 6.12% in the last sub-period. Carry

shows a similar picture: it yielded its worst performance (-3.4%) in the third sub-

period, where 50% of the managers were significantly exposed to it (18 with positive

coefficient and 5 with a negative coefficient). This suggests a reason to avoid not only

“crowded” trades, but also “crowded” styles as well. When a trading style becomes

“crowded” it appears as if performance in that style declines.21


21
     The relationship between crowding and performance is a topic we leave for future research.

                                                                                                  21
Third, only a small fraction of managers (10-17%) were significantly exposed to

value and volatility with the exception of the last sub-period in which value was the

second most important factor (after carry) with 37% of the managers exhibiting

significant value beta. However, while half of these managers were betting for mean-

reversion towards the PPP exchange rate, the other half was betting for further

deviation from PPP.



Performance persistence

To investigate the question of whether managers who have been performed well in the

past continue to perform well in the future, we follow Aggarwal and Jorion (2008)

and report the results for the following regression


                       α jt = δ 0 + δ 1α jt −1 + µ jt                            (6)


       Where αj is the excess return for fund manager j that is not explained by the
       four factors, or


                       αˆ j = R j ,t − ∑i βˆi , j Fi ,t                          (7)




Table 10 presents the results. We have 21 funds in the second sub-period, which were

also active in the first sub-period and 37 in the third sub-period, which were also

active in the second sub-period. Neither regression yields a significant coefficient on

the previous year’s alpha. This result suggests that past excess performance as

measured by alpha is not related to future performance. Although, δ1 is positive, it is

not significantly different from zero.




                                                                                       22
As an alternative way to gauge performance persistence, we form portfolios based on

performance quartiles. The performance of the best performing (ranked by alpha

return, performance in the first quartile Q1) managers in the first sub-period is

aggregated by constructing an equally weighted portfolio, labelled the Q1 portfolio.

We also aggregate the performance of the bottom quartile managers into a Q4

portfolio. Comparing the performance of the Q1 and the Q4 portfolio in the second

sub-period is a way to gauge persistence.22 The average weekly alpha for the Q1

portfolio in the second sub-sample was 1.4 bps (or 0.7% annualized), higher than the

average weekly alpha of the Q4 portfolio -11 bps (or -5.8% annualized). This is an

indication for some persistence. However, a t-test for the difference in the means does

not reject the hypothesis of equal average alpha.



We performed the same exercise for the third sub-period (comparing the performance

of managers who were in the top quartile in the second sub-period with the

performance of the managers who were in the bottom quartile in the second sub-

period). Again, there is no evidence of performance persistence. The average alpha

for the Q4 portfolio was even higher (3.6 bps or 1.88% annualized) than the average

alpha of the Q1 portfolio (2.8 bps or 1.46% annualized). Thus, the managers who

were in the bottom quartile (ranked on alpha) between April 2006 and March 2007

outperformed during the following 12 months those managers who were in the top

quartile between April 2006 and March 2007. Again, a t-test for the difference in the

means did not reject the hypothesis of equal average alpha.




22
  Managers who did not survive during the following 12 months are included as long as they are on the
platform. Although Carpenter and Lynch (1999) recommend comparing top and bottom decile
portfolios, because of our small sample size, we follow Aggarwal and Jorion (2008) and compare top
and bottom quartile portfolios

                                                                                                  23
Note, that the methodology in equation (6) estimates the average persistence (from

year t to year t+1) for a cross section of managers rather than the persistence over

time for a specific manager.23 Thus, our rejection of persistence does not mean that

not a single manager is able to deliver persistent performance. Indeed, in a previous

study Levich and Pojarliev (2008) report that of the 8 managers with significant alpha

over a 3-year period (2001-03), fully 7 managers continued to make positive alpha in

the following 3-year period (2004-06).24 No manager showed significant alpha in the

second period who did not produce alpha in the first sub-period. Although, the

average manager does not show persistence, some skilled managers do.



Style persistence

To check for style persistence, we perform regressions similar to (6) estimating cross

sectional regressions for each one of the four betas. Table 11 reports the results.



The results indicate strong persistence for the trend factor and carry factor. The

coefficients for both carry and trend for year t-1 are positive and highly significant.

This suggests that managers who are exposed to carry in period t-1 are likely to

maintain significant carry exposure in period t. The same result is valid for the trend

factor. Value is persistent only from the second into the third sub-period, but not from

the first into the second sub-period. We do not detect persistence for volatility, which

is also consistent with the finding that this is the least important factor.




23
   The later would require many estimates of alpha for manager j over successive periods to estimate
that manager’s δ1 persistence factor.
24
   We should caution that in this paper our tests for performance persistence rely on performance
measured over only one year. The one-year period may be too short to accurately access underlying
performance. The differences between performance persistence when estimating performance over
different periods (1-year, 3-years and 5-years) is a topic we leave for a future research. In addition, we


                                                                                                        24
Style persistence can be interpreted as either good or bad news. It is good news, since

an investor might expect that his currency manager will continue to follow the same

investment style. This would allow endowment and pension fund sponsors to issue

mandates that diversify their style exposure. On the other hand, it is bad news, since

style persistence would indicate less market timing ability, i.e. switching between

styles when one style fails to perform well.



5. Conclusions

In this paper, we estimate cross sectional annual alphas for professional currency

managers for the three years between April 2005 and March 2008. With data for all

managers on the DB FXSelect platform since inception, even those who eventually

exit, we can control for survivorship and backfill bias.



The results confirm results from our earlier study, namely that four factors

representing the returns of well–known currency trading strategies and currency

volatility explain a significant part of returns of professional currency managers. We

extend those results by demonstrating that the relationship is present in a different

time period (2005-08 versus 2001-06 in the earlier study) and for shorter intervals of 3

years and 1 year. More importantly, obtaining annual alphas and style betas allows us

to test for performance and style persistence. We find no indication of performance

persistence, but we do find statistically significant evidence of style persistence.



These results have important implications for the investment management industry.

Plan sponsors should be careful when selecting currency managers based only on past


examine only two intervals, which may be too few to detect persistence especially if persistence is
weak.

                                                                                                      25
performance data. As in other venues of investment management, in this sample of

currency managers it appears that past performance is no indication for future

performance. On the other hand, style persistence indicates that choosing currency

managers with different styles makes sense as they are likely to maintain their style,

and thus continue to offer a diversification benefit. Plan sponsors usually seek to hire

more than one currency manager with different styles to obtain diversification

benefits. From this perspective, our evidence for style persistence is welcome.

However, style persistence may imply that individual managers are less able to

exploit market timing ability.



In addition, we document some significant differences between managers who did not

survive our three-year sample and managers who were still alive and active in April

2008. Not surprisingly, we find that surviving managers produced alpha that was

higher than exiting managers, and with a difference of about 9.5 bps per week (or

nearly 5% per year), the difference is both statistically and economically significant.

Our analysis suggests that living mangers generally tracked our four factors more

closely (with a higher R-square) than managers that would eventually die. Sticking

closer to the “benchmarks” has helped some managers to stay in business.

Components of their investment strategies, as evidenced by the sign of factor

coefficients, varied as well. Contrary to the presumption in the market that the recent

underperformance of trend-following strategies was the main reason for the lacklustre

performance of currency managers over the last three years, we found that “betting for

liquidation of carry strategies” caused more damage for some managers. Additional

tests suggest that live managers owe some of their success to timing skills in the trend




                                                                                     26
following strategy, whereas dead managers demonstrated negative timing with respect

to volatility.



Overall, our results lend further support to the notion that style factors explain a

substantial part of returns for indices composed of professional currency fund

managers. While the track records of individual managers – their strategies and

performance, as well as their longevity – vary considerably, managers appear to have

two things in common – a lack of performance persistence and a tendency for style

persistence.



Our results are subject to the limitation that we analyzed only the currency managers

listed on the DB FXSelect platform. Furthermore, since the platform was launched in

March 2005, the available data cover a relative short period of 3 years (2005-08).

Further research may help to understand what factors influence the performance of

individual managers.




                                                                                  27
References

Aggarwal, R.K. and P. Jorion. 2008. “The Performance of Emerging Hedge Fund
Managers,” working paper.

Anson, M. 2008. “The Beta Continuum: From Classic Beta to Bulk Beta,” Journal of
Portfolio Management, vol. 34, no. 2 (Winter): 53-64.

Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleschelski, and S. Rebelo. 2006. “The Returns to
Currency Speculation,” NBER working paper 12916.

Carpenter, J.N. and A.W. Lynch. 1999. “Survivorship bias and attrition effects in
measures of performance persistence,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 54, no 3
(December): 337-74.

Citibank, CitiFX Risk Advisory Group. 2003. “Investor Strategy: A Fresh Look at
Purchasing Power Parity.”

Deutsche Bank. “Currencies: Value Investing,” March 29, 2007.

Froot, K. and R. Thaler. 1990. “Anomalies: Foreign Exchange,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 4, no. 3 (Summer): 179-92.

Gross, W. 2005. “Consistent Alpha Generation through Structure,” Financial Analysts
Journal, vol. 61, no. 5 (Sept-Oct): 40-43.

Irvin, S. and C. Park. 2007. "What Do We Know About the Profitability of Technical
Analysis?" . Journal of Economic Surveys, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 786-826.

Lequeux, P. and E. Acar. 1998. “A Dynamic Benchmark for Managed Currencies
Funds” European Journal of Finance, vol. 4, no.4 (December): 311-30.

Levich, R. and M. Pojarliev. 2008. “Separating Alpha and Beta Returns: A New
Benchmark for Currency Managers”, at www.VoxEU.org, Centre for Economic
Policy Research policy portal.

Lo, Andrew W. 2007. “Where Do Alphas Come From? A New Measure of the Value
of Active Investment Management,” MIT working paper.

Neely, C. J., P. A. Weller, and J.M. Ulrich. 2007. “The Adaptive Markets Hypothesis:
Evidence from the Foreign Exchange Market,” working paper, Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis.

Pojarliev, M. and R.M. Levich. 2008. “Do Professional Currency Managers Beat the
Benchmark?” Financial Analysts Journal, (forthcoming).




                                                                                 28
      Figure 1: Cumulative Excess Returns of Currency Trading Strategies


                                               Performance of Carry, Trend and Value Factors
                                                   Weekly Data, March 2005 - March 2008

120




110




100




90
                                   March 29, 2006                                March 28, 2007                               March 26, 2008
                                   Carry: 99.04                                  Carry: 105.44                                Carry: 101.19
                                   Trend: 99.97                                  Trend: 101.02                                Trend: 107.31
                                   Value: 104.03                                 Value: 104.03                                Value: 99.62


80
03/30/05     06/30/05   09/30/05    12/30/05   03/30/06   06/30/06    09/30/06    12/30/06   03/30/07   06/30/07   09/30/07    12/30/07   03/30/08

                                                              Carry        Trend          Value




      The Carry Index return is represented by the Deutsche Bank G10 Harvest Index as the proxy for the
      returns of a carry strategy. This index reflects the return of being long the 3 high-yielding currencies
      against being short the 3 low-yielding currencies within G10 currency universe. The index is
      rebalanced quarterly.

      The Trend Index return is represented by the AFX Currency Management Index. The AFX Index is
      based on trading in seven currency pairs (EUR-USD, USD-JPY, USD-CHF, GBP-USD, EUR-JPY,
      EUR-GBP, and EUR-CHF) weighted by their volume of turnover in the spot market, with returns for
      each pair based on an equally-weighted portfolio of three moving average rules (32, 61 and 117 days).

      The Value Index return is represented by the Deutsche Bank FX PPP Index. The average daily spot rate
      over the last three months is divided by the PPP exchange rate as published annually by the OECD and
      ranked. This index reflects the return of being long the 3 currencies with the highest rank (undervalued
      currencies) against being short the 3 currencies with the lowest rank (overvalued currencies) within
      G10 currency universe.

      Source: Deutsche Bank, Bloomberg, Liverpool John Moores University




                                                                                                                               29
           Figure 2: Currency Volatility


                                                             Currency Volatility




13




10




 7




 4
30/03/05     30/06/05   30/09/05   30/12/05   30/03/06   30/06/06   30/09/06   30/12/06   30/03/07   30/06/07   30/09/07   30/12/07




           The Deutsche Bank Currency Volatility Index as the proxy for foreign exchange volatility. This index
           is calculated as the weighted average of 3-month implied volatility for nine major currency pairs (EUR-
           USD, USD-JPY, USD-CHF, USD-CAD, AUD-USD, GBP-USD, EUR-JPY, EUR-GBP, and EUR-
           CHF) as provided by the British Bankers Association with weights based on trading volume in the BIS
           surveys

           Source: Deutsche Bank, Bloomberg.




                                                                                                                           30
           Figure 3: Number of Funds on the Deutsche Bank FXSelect Platform


                                     Number of Funds on the Deutsche Bank FXSelect Platform
                                  Number Live, Dead and Total, weekly April 6, 2006 - March 28, 2008

70



60



50



40



30



20



10



 0
4/6/2005   7/6/2005   10/6/2005    1/6/2006   4/6/2006   7/6/2006   10/6/2006   1/6/2007    4/6/2007   7/6/2007   10/6/2007   1/6/2008

                                                           LIVE       DEAD          TOTAL


           “Live” funds are those on the platform in week t and still active and on the platform in April 2008.
           “Dead” funds are those on the platform in week t but inactive and no longer on the platform as of April
           2008.
           “Total” is the sum of “Live” and “Dead” funds on the platform in week t.


           Source: Deutsche Bank and authors calculations.




                                                                                                                              31
           Figure 4: Cumulative Performance of the “FoF” Portfolio

                                              Cummulative Performance of the FoF Portfolio

106


105


104


103


102


101


100


99


98


97


96
30/03/05     30/06/05   30/09/05   30/12/05    30/03/06   30/06/06   30/09/06   30/12/06   30/03/07   30/06/07   30/09/07   30/12/07




           This portfolio is an equally weighted portfolio of all funds on the Deutsche Bank FXSelect platform,
           rebalanced weekly with newly listed funds added and dead funds excluded from the portfolio.

           Source: Deutsche Bank and authors calculations.




                                                                                                                            32
            Figure 5: Cumulative Performance of the “Live” and “Dead” Portfolios


                                           Performance of the "Live" and "Dead" portfolios

110




105




100




 95




 90
3/30/2005   6/30/2005   9/30/2005 12/30/2005 3/30/2006   6/30/2006   9/30/2006 12/30/2006 3/30/2007   6/30/2007   9/30/2007 12/30/2007

                                                           DEAD FUNDS          LIVE FUNDS


            Cumulative performance on two portfolios of funds listed on the Deutsche Bank FXSelect platform.
            One portfolio consists only of “dead” funds, i.e. the funds which were no longer on the platform in
            April 2008, and a second portfolio consists of “live” funds, i.e. those that were still active as of April
            2008.

            Source: Deutsche Bank and authors calculations.




                                                                                                                              33
Table 1: Cumulative Excess Returns of Currency Indices

                             FoF Portfolio         Parker FX        Parker FX Index           Barclay
                             DB FXSelect             Index          Scaled Returns           Currency
                                                   Reported                                Traders Index

        1 year,
April 07 to March 08             4.08%               2.44%                0.77%                1.23%

       2 years,
April 06 to March 08             3.54%               0.00%                -0.70%               -1.51%

       3 years,
April 05 to March 08             4.66%              -0.49%                -1.42%               -3.29%


The FoF portfolio is compromised of equally weighted positions in each of the funds available on the
Deutsche Bank FXSelect platform on every Wednesday over the sample period. These are gross returns
before taking fees into account. Source: Deutsche Bank.

Parker FX index reported excess returns are the net of fees returns on the FX Parker Index less the risk
free rate. As a proxy for the risk free rate we use 1-month LIBID (LIBOR less 12.5 bps). Source:
Parker Global Strategies, LLC and Bloomberg.

Parker FX Index scaled returns are the net of fees returns on the Parker FX index, in excess of short
term interest rates and scaled to a 5% volatility. Source: Parker Global Strategies, LLC.

Barclay Currency Traders Index returns are the net of fees returns on the Barclay Currency Traders
Index less the risk free rate. As a proxy for the risk free rate we use 1-month LIBID (LIBOR less 12.5
bps). Source: BarclayHedge, British Bankers Association and Bloomberg.




                                                                                                     34
Table 2: Regression Results for “Fund of Funds” Portfolios, April 2005 to March 2008

Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ε j ,t for portfolios j = 1, …3.
Based on 156 weekly observations, 4/06/2005-3/26/2008


                                         Beta                       Beta                    Beta                      Beta                       R-         F-Stat        D-W
                  Alpha       T-Stat     Carry        T-Stat       Trend        T-Stat      Value        T-Stat     Volatility    T-Stat      Square
   “FoF”         0.00001       0.31       0.14         6.03         0.40        10.88       -0.08        -3.85        0.12         1.53        0.534        43.30         2.21
   “Live”        0.00027       1.16       0.19         7.21         0.45        10.70       -0.10        -4.25        0.15         1.74        0.550        46.24         2.27
  “Dead”        -0.00064      -2.31      -0.06        -2.12         0.23         4.57        0.02         0.75       -0.01        -0.15        0.183        8.48          2.41


The Deutsche Bank G10 Harvest Index is the proxy for the returns of a Carry strategy. This index reflects the return of being long the 3 high-yielding currencies
against being short the 3 low-yielding currencies within G10 currency universe. The index is rebalances quarterly. Every quarter the currencies are re-ranked
according to their current 3 months Libor rate. Source: Deutsche Bank and Bloomberg.

The AFX Index reflects returns on a trend following strategy involving three moving average rules applied to seven currency pairs, weighted by the volume of
turnover in the spot market. Monthly data are available at http://cwis.livjm.ac.uk/AFE/AFE_docs/AFX_Monthly.xls. Source: Liverpool John Moores University.

The Deutsche Bank FX PPP Index is the proxy for the returns of a Value strategy. The average daily spot rate over the last three months is divided by the PPP
exchange rate as published annually by the OECD and ranked. This index reflects the return of being long the 3 currencies with the highest rank (undervalued
currencies) against being short the 3 currencies with the lowest rank (overvalued currencies) within G10 currency universe. Source: Deutsche Bank and Bloomberg.

The Deutsche Bank Currency Volatility Index (CVIX index) is the proxy for the foreign exchange volatility. It is calculated as the weighted arithmetic average of
the 3 months level of implied volatility for all major currency pairs (provided by BBA) and weighted by traded market volume. Source: Deutsche Bank and
Bloomberg.




                                                                                                                                                                     35
         Table 3: Market Timing Model

         Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ∑i γ i , j Fi ,2t + µ j ,t
         Based on 156 weekly observations, 4/06/2005-3/26/2008



            Alpha*     T-St.      β        T-St.      β         T-       β       T-St.      β     T-St.     γ     T-St.     γ      T-       γ    T-St.     γ     T-St.    R2       F-    D-W
                                Carry               Trend       St.    Value               Vol.           Carry           Trend    St.   Value           Vol.                     Stat
“Live”      -2.7bps    -0.85    0.18       6.70      0.40      9.02    -0.09     -4.01     0.07   0.72    -0.24   -0.21   13.29   3.02    0.99   1.05    3.30    0.31    0.581   25.54   2.36

“Dead”      -9 bps     -2.41     -0.09    -2.91      0.15      3.03     0.04     1.40      0.01   0.09    -1.23   -0.95   17.09   3.35   0.79    0.72    -20.2   -1.65   0.278   7.09    2.43



         * In decimal form, the alphas are -0.00027 and 0.00090 for live and dead funds respectively.

         See notes to Table 2 for explanation of factors.




                                                                                                                                                                                 36
Table 4: Regression Results for Individual Currency Managers, April 2005 to March 2008

Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ε j ,t for managers j = 1, …15.
Based on 156 weekly observations, 4/06/2005-3/26/2008

                                           Beta                       Beta                      Beta                Beta                   R-    F-Stat        D-W
                  Alpha        T-Stat      Carry        T-Stat       Trend         T-Stat       Value    T-Stat   Volatility   T-Stat   Square
   “Index”       0.00040        1.27       0.10          2.89         0.51          9.03        -0.12    -3.58      0.08        0.69     0.411   26.37         2.07

      L6         -0.00057      -0.50        0.55          4.23        1.07          5.15         -0.04   -0.35      -0.10      -0.22    0.271    14.09         2.16
     L10         -0.00001      -0.05       -0.01         -0.32        0.09         1.32          -0.01   -0.39       0.26       1.80    0.074    3.04          1.85
     L15         -0.00092      -0.76        0.17          1.29        0.97          4.44         -0.42   -3.31       0.15       0.34    0.174    7.99          2.17
     L28          0.00116      1.85*       -0.00         -0.07        0.09         0.87          -0.08   -1.26       0.38       1.57    0.057    2.31          1.80
     L29          0.00321       1.56       -0.48         -2.08        -0.68        -1.84          0.06    0.30       1.24       1.57    0.105    4.43          2.23
     L30          0.00001       0.09       -0.05         -0.57        0.08         0.53           0.21    2.21       0.32       0.94    0.055    2.21          2.41
     L35          0.00026       0.21        0.07          0.54        0.21         1.00          -0.08   -0.65      -1.00      -2.15    0.059    2.37          2.29
     L42          0.00194       1.47       -0.94         -6.31        -0.24        -1.01          0.21    1.50      -0.42      -0.84    0.268    13.84         2.09
     L46          0.00036       0.67        0.07          1.18         0.19         2.06         -0.10   -1.83       0.47       2.34    0.104    4.40          1.95
     L47          0.00036       0.89       -0.15         -3.37        0.03         0.45          -0.31   -0.73      -0.05      -0.32    0.134    5.88          2.25
     L49          0.00079       1.64       -0.05         -1.04        0.23          2.65         -0.05   -1.05       0.36       1.96    0.167    7.57          2.20
     L50         -0.00086      -0.64        0.29          1.95        1.77          7.34         -0.23   -1.64       1.28       2.50    0.360    21.25         1.92
     L52          0.00080       0.68        0.67          5.08        2.05          9.65         -0.35   -2.86      -0.47      -1.05    0.464    32.75         2.45
     L53          0.00018       0.13        0.66          4.30        1.44          5.85         -0.47   -3.28      -0.53      -1.02    0.294    15.75         2.54
     L58         -0.00077      -1.07        0.75          9.26        0.37          2.89         -0.37   -4.93      -0.64      -2.32    0.535    43.45         2.13

L6, L10 etc. stand for returns the managers, who were live (still on the platform) as of April 2008.
See notes to Table 2 for explanation of factors.



                                                                                                                                                          37
Table 5: Performance of Individual Currency Managers


                    Average
                                                                                             Average
                    Excess                                                                                     Tracking
  Manager                             Std. Dev.              IR              Rank            Annual                                  IR*               Rank*
                    Annual                                                                                       Error
                                                                                              Alpha
                    Return
      L6             -0.08%            11.957%             -0.01               13             -3.01%            10.20%              -0.30               12
     L10              0.40%             3.532%              0.11               10             -0.11%             3.40%              -0.03               11
     L15             -2.18%            11.828%             -0.18               14             -4.82%            10.75%              -0.45               14
     L28              6.73%             5.732%              1.17               1               6.08%             5.56%               1.09                1
     L29            16.10%             19.282%              0.83               3              16.74%            18.24%               0.92                3
     L30              1.03%             8.123%              0.13               9               0.46%             7.90%               0.06               10
     L35              0.80%            11.084%              0.07               12              1.36%            10.75%               0.13                8
     L42              8.34%            13.654%              0.61               5              10.10%            11.68%               0.86                4
     L46              2.93%             4.972%              0.59               6               1.87%             4.71%               0.40                7
     L47              1.79%             3.844%              0.47               7               1.89%             3.58%               0.53                5
     L49              5.07%             4.693%              1.08               2               4.14%             4.28%               0.97                2
     L50              1.49%            14.800%              0.10               11             -4.49%            11.84%              -0.38               13
     L52              9.16%            14.253%              0.64                4              4.21%            10.43%               0.40                6
     L53              4.34%            14.380%              0.30                8              0.97%            12.08%               0.08                9
     L58             -3.30%             9.307%             -0.35               15             -4.02%             6.35%              -0.63               15

  Average             3.51%                                 0.37                               2.09%                                0.24

IR = Rj /σ(Rj) , where Rj is the annualized average excess return and σ(Rj) is its annualized standard deviation.
IR* = αj /σ(αj), where αj is the average annual alpha estimated from equation (1) and σ(αj) is its annualized standard deviation, or tracking error.




                                                                                                                                                               38
Table 6: Regression Results for Individual Currency Managers, April 2005 to March 2006

Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ε j ,t for managers j = 1, …22.
Based on 52 weekly observations, 4/06/2005-3/29/2006


                                        Beta                      Beta                     Beta               Beta                   R-    F-Stat        D-W
                 Alpha       T-Stat     Carry        T-Stat      Trend        T-Stat       Value   T-Stat   Volatility   T-Stat   Square
   “Index”      0.00026       0.58      -0.05        -0.68        0.36         4.60         0.07    1.18      0.27        0.92     0.500   11.76         2.04

     L6          0.00019       0.08       0.54        1.45         0.83        2.14         0.15    0.46       0.54       0.37    0.269    4.34          2.44
    L10          0.00043       0.62      -0.13       -1.10         0.04        0.39         0.04    0.38       1.00       2.19    0.150    2.09          2.07
    L15         -0.00206      -0.81      -0.12       -0.29        0.33        0.74          0.51    1.40       1.58       0.96    0.147    2.04          2.28
    L28          0.00104       1.11       0.03        0.21         0.13        0.84        -0.09   -0.69      -0.69      -1.14    0.036    0.45          1.11
    L29          0.00511       1.10      -0.39       -0.50        -0.75       -0.92        -0.47   -0.69       2.10       0.69    0.104    1.37          2.13
    L30         -0.00064      -0.33      -0.01       -0.05        -0.19       -0.57         0.41    1.47       0.29       0.23    0.079    1.02          2.50
    L35          0.00092       0.78       0.21        1.09         0.22        1.09        -0.40   -2.35       0.13       0.17    0.117    1.56          1.45
    L42          0.00193       1.64      -0.53       -2.70        -0.70       -3.41         0.15    0.91       1.05       1.37    0.342    6.12          1.64
    L46          0.00029      0.37        0.20        1.59         0.38        2.83        -0.31   -2.70      -0.10      -0.20    0.181    2.61          2.44
    L47          0.00001       0.05      -0.14       -1.04         0.26        1.84        -0.22   -1.86       0.33       0.62    0.250    3.93          2.44
    L49          0.00082       1.04      -0.07       -0.59         0.38        2.76        -0.04   -0.41       0.73       1.43    0.254    4.01          2.21
    L50         -0.00119      -0.63      -0.48       -1.54         1.53        4.64        -0.10   -0.36       2.72       2.22    0.500    11.77         1.94
    L52          0.00101      0.53        0.38        1.21         2.06        6.26         0.43    1.57      -1.30      -1.06    0.661    22.92         1.99
    L53          0.00047       0.18      -0.26       -0.63         1.09        2.50         0.71    1.95      -1.15      -0.71    0.331    5.82          2.14
    L58         -0.00169      -1.12       0.66        2.62         0.11        0.42        -0.20   -0.92      -1.82      -1.84    0.213    3.18          1.96
    D3           0.00001       0.01      -0.24       -0.79        -0.69       -2.11         0.24    0.90      -0.28      -0.23    0.106    1.40          2.03
    D5          -0.00134      -0.99      -0.12       -0.54         1.19        5.06         0.62    3.18      -1.81      -2.07    0.641    21.01         2.22
    D6          -0.00001      -0.15       0.11        1.10         0.34        3.31        -0.15   -1.78       0.42       1.09    0.250    3.93          1.58
    D10         -0.00164      -0.55      -0.18       -0.36         0.30        0.58         0.43    0.99      -0.63      -0.33    0.061    0.77          2.84



                                                                                                                                                    39
     D14         -0.00030       -0.24       -0.39   -1.92   0.91    4.34    0.07     0.41   0.80   1.02   0.450   9.63        2.10
     D15          0.00143        1.04       -0.11   -0.50   0.23    0.98    -0.17   -0.89   1.67   1.87   0.157   2.19        1.54
     D21          0.00100        1.45       -0.06   -0.55   -0.14   -1.22   0.09     0.95   0.34   0.76   0.037   0.46        1.78

See notes to Table 2 for explanation of factors.




                                                                                                                         40
Table 7: Regression Results for Individual Currency Managers, April 2006 to March 2007

Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ε j ,t for managers j = 1, …52.
Based on 52 weekly observations, 4/05/2006-3/28/2007

                                        Beta                      Beta                     Beta               Beta                   R-    F-Stat        D-W
                 Alpha       T-Stat     Carry        T-Stat      Trend        T-Stat       Value   T-Stat   Volatility   T-Stat   Square
   “Index”      -0.00017     -0.53      0.14          2.62        0.35         4.96        -0.12   -1.88      0.39        2.79     0.613   18.63         2.45

      L1        -0.00031      -0.15       0.44        1.27        -0.37       -0.84        -0.18   -0.44       0.80       0.91    0.074    0.95          2.06
      L2         0.00043       0.41       0.11        0.60         1.11        4.79         0.93    4.40      -0.98      -2.13    0.691    26.33         1.74
      L3        -0.00244      -0.78       0.59        1.07        -0.43       -0.61        -0.54   -0.85       3.67       2.63    0.184    2.66          2.34
     L6         -0.00124      -0.71       0.97        3.18         1.32        3.38        -0.59   -1.64      -1.69      -2.18    0.332    5.86          2.11
     L10        -0.00048      -0.76       0.10        0.95         0.13        0.97        -0.09   -0.72       0.36       1.29    0.128    1.74          1.79
     L12        -0.00099      -2.75       0.02        0.38        -0.11       -1.38        -0.07   -1.07       0.00       0.02    0.077    0.98          2.45
     L13        -0.00038      -0.57      -0.18       -1.60         0.23        1.60         0.07    0.54      -0.40      -1.35    0.140    1.92          1.89
     L14        -0.00076      -0.37       0.69        1.92         0.98        2.13        -1.00   -2.40       0.57       0.63    0.281    4.61          1.97
     L15        -0.00019      -0.13       0.29        1.16         0.52        1.65        -1.23   -4.23       0.37       0.59    0.548    14.26         1.94
     L21        -0.00001      -0.07       0.13       0.68         0.73         2.90        -0.26   -1.15       0.28       0.57    0.294    4.91          1.94
     L22        -0.00026      -0.45      -0.16       -1.63         0.08        0.65         0.19    1.64       0.09       0.36    0.078    1.00          2.32
     L23         0.00232       0.77       0.93       1.76         1.93         2.85        -1.73   -2.80       0.71       0.53    0.390    7.53          1.89
     L24        -0.00093      -1.85      -0.06       -0.74         0.00        0.05        -0.13   -1.28      -0.41      -1.83    0.204    3.03          1.98
     L27        -0.00072      -0.38       1.12        3.32         0.45        1.06        -0.43   -1.11       0.82       0.97    0.297    4.98          2.28
     L28         0.00331       2.26      -0.33       -1.31        -0.27       -0.83         0.27    0.90       1.55       2.38    0.159    2.23          1.88
     L29         0.00037       0.16      -1.08       -2.80        -0.56       -1.15         0.72   1.61        1.88       1.93    0.236    3.63          2.47
     L30         0.00028       0.18      -0.28       -1.06        0.28         0.82         0.28   0.91       -0.07      -0.11    0.043    0.53          2.27
     L32         0.00059       0.38       0.46        1.69        0.32         0.92         0.25   0.80        0.52       0.75    0.273    4.43          1.98
     L33        -0.00160      -0.70      -0.30       -0.76        -0.75       -1.48         0.66   1.42        1.67       1.64    0.092    1.20          1.92



                                                                                                                                                    41
L34   -0.00042   -0.76    0.03    0.38   0.07    0.58    0.07     0.64   -0.02   -0.10   0.067   0.85         1.41
L35   -0.00120   -0.69    0.44    1.44    1.14   2.92    -0.44   -1.24   -1.27   -1.64   0.173   2.47         2.22
L38    0.00078    0.62    0.11    0.49   0.43    1.54    -0.10   -0.39    0.28    0.50   0.101   1.32         1.84
L41   -0.00107   -0.80    0.36    1.53   0.78     2.61   -0.10   -0.37   -0.21   -0.35   0.189   2.75         2.16
L42   -0.00051   -0.42   -0.35   -1.67   -0.18   -0.66   -0.01   -0.04    1.58    2.95   0.376   7.10         1.68
L43   -0.00060   -0.77    0.01    0.13    0.07    0.45   -0.15   -0.96    0.53    1.54   0.192   2.81         1.47
L45    0.00119    0.52    1.23    3.06    0.73   1.43    -0.80   -1.71    0.04    0.04   0.212   3.18         2.18
L46   -0.00001   -0.03    0.10    0.81    0.44    2.62   -0.10   -0.67    0.03    0.09   0.185   2.68         1.63
L47    0.00135    2.20    0.22    2.05   -0.15   -1.12   -0.42   -3.40    0.02    0.08   0.248   3.89         1.67
L49    0.00106    1.10    0.12    0.72   0.23    1.07    -0.16   -0.84    0.83    1.93   0.221   3.35         2.27
L50   -0.00057   -0.26    0.35    0.93    2.37    4.90   -0.45   -1.03    1.04    1.09   0.508   12.13        2.34
L51    0.00045    0.31   -0.06   -0.25   0.00    0.02    -0.33   -1.14   -0.61   -0.96   0.106   1.40         2.09
L52   -0.00216   -1.17    0.35    1.08    1.53    3.70    0.05    0.15    1.11    1.35   0.378   7.16         2.68
L53   -0.00110   -0.51    0.23    0.62    0.15   0.32    -0.28   -0.64    1.02    1.07   0.069   0.88         2.56
L54   -0.00020   -0.33    0.16    1.44   0.41     2.93   -0.12   -0.99    0.04    0.14   0.230   3.52         1.93
L55    0.00054    0.25    0.64    1.68   0.16    0.34     0.72    1.61   -0.66   -0.68   0.451   9.66         2.11
L56   -0.00028   -0.20    0.12    0.49   1.82     5.81   -0.24   -0.83    1.80    2.91   0.674   24.34        1.76
L58   -0.00030   -0.38    0.34    2.46    0.67    3.78   -0.01   -0.10   -0.31   -0.89   0.381   7.25         2.65
D1    -0.00126   -2.35   -0.05   -0.59   0.02    0.22    -0.06   -0.55    0.11    0.50   0.117   1.57         2.35
D2    -0.00181   -1.08   -1.00   -3.40   -0.19   -0.51    0.66    1.93    1.27    1.70   0.293   4.87         2.27
D3     0.00364    1.34    0.13    0.27   -0.97   -1.59   -0.06   -0.10    0.43    0.35   0.064   0.82         2.38
D4    -0.00001   -0.55   -0.01   -0.46   -0.02   -0.66    0.03    1.09    0.13    1.91   0.082   1.05         1.90
D5    -0.00240   -1.55    0.45    1.68    1.36    3.93   -0.05   -0.17    0.03    0.05   0.339   6.04         1.81
D6     0.00034    0.46   -0.17   -1.33    0.39    2.39    0.10    0.67    0.19    0.61   0.253   3.99         2.05
D7    -0.00152   -0.73   -0.31   -0.87   -0.00   -0.01   -0.04   -0.10   -0.03   -0.03   0.062   0.79         2.14
D11   -0.00160   -0.83    0.18    0.54   -0.47   -1.09   -0.45   -1.15    0.39    0.45   0.065   0.83         2.44
D12    0.00161    1.17    0.12    0.52    0.14   0.47    -0.18   -0.63    0.71    1.16   0.087   1.13         2.14
D14   -0.00040   -0.40    0.00    0.03    1.10    4.80    0.00    0.01   -0.13   -0.29   0.396   7.73         1.80
D15   -0.00028   -0.27   -0.13   -0.73    0.52    2.23    0.04    0.19    0.75    1.63   0.312   5.34         1.80




                                                                                                         42
     D17          -0.0001       -0.21       0.06   0.85   -0.10   -1.08   -0.05   -0.61   0.61     3.25   0.227   3.47        2.33
     D19          0.00054        0.36       0.08   0.32   -0.23   -0.69   -0.04   -0.15   0.65     0.99   0.025   0.31        2.36
     D20         -0.00038       -0.51       0.27   2.12    0.52    3.15   -0.22   -1.49   0.63     1.94   0.414   8.32        1.76
     D21          0.00109        1.33       0.18   1.29   0.18    1.00    -0.29   -1.74   -0.11   -0.32   0.089   1.16        2.03

See notes to Table 2 for explanation of factors.




                                                                                                                         43
Table 8: Regression Results for Individual Currency Managers, April 2007 to March 2008

Regression Results for R j ,t = α j + ∑i β i , j Fi ,t + ε j ,t for managers j = 1, …46.
Based on 52 weekly observations, 4/04/2007-3/26/2008

                                        Beta                      Beta                     Beta               Beta                   R-    F-Stat        D-W
                 Alpha       T-Stat     Carry        T-Stat      Trend        T-Stat       Value   T-Stat   Volatility   T-Stat   Square
   “Index”      0.00047       1.17      0.22          6.15        0.37         4.76        -0.12   -3.51      0.15        1.17     0.673   24.27         2.20

     L1         -0.00186      -0.96       0.06        0.39        0.20         0.53         0.02    0.17       0.46       0.73    0.036    0.44          1.74
     L2          0.00001       0.01       0.80        3.16        0.99         1.82         0.34    1.43       0.55       0.61    0.339    6.04          1.77
     L3          0.00042       0.12       0.57        1.82        0.73         1.08        -0.42   -1.38       2.44       2.15    0.185    2.67          2.18
     L6         -0.00205      -0.93       0.57        2.84        1.19         2.78        -0.18   -0.96       0.30       0.42    0.329    5.77          1.92
      L8        -0.00008      -0.34       1.41        6.45        0.96         2.06        -1.05   -5.04       0.82       1.04    0.672    24.14         2.63
      L9         0.00026       0.20       1.05        8.75        0.62         2.45        -0.33   -2.94      -0.31      -0.73    0.813    51.20         1.99
     L10         0.00019       0.27      -0.06       -0.93        0.06         0.44         0.00    0.04       0.04       0.19    0.069    0.88          1.70
     L12        -0.00021      -0.28      -0.02       -0.29        -0.07       -0.53         0.03    0.52      -0.26      -1.05    0.068    0.86          1.68
     L13        -0.00001      -0.03      -0.06       -1.06        -0.04       -0.31        -0.05   -0.95       0.08       0.37    0.107    1.41          1.80
     L14         0.00236       1.22       0.04        0.28         0.69        1.85        -0.40   -2.37      -0.11      -0.18    0.206    3.06          1.91
     L15        -0.00035      -0.17       0.19        1.02        1.02         2.55        -0.48   -2.69      -0.15      -0.23    0.293    4.89          1.97
     L17         0.00112       0.73       0.32        2.32        -0.18       -0.60        -0.30   -2.23       0.52       1.04    0.172    2.45          2.17
     L19        -0.00083      -0.83      -0.18       -1.98        0.38         1.95        -0.08   -0.98      -0.73      -2.23    0.194    2.84          2.02
     L20         0.00199       1.32       0.30        2.20        0.90         3.06         0.02    0.18       0.08       0.17    0.290    4.81          2.11
     L21         0.00040       0.21       0.09        0.52        0.01         0.04        -0.40   -2.45      -0.42      -0.67    0.186    2.70          1.74
     L22         0.00022       0.20      -0.20       -2.06        -0.13       -0.62         0.02    0.31      -0.09      -0.25    0.150    2.08          2.37
     L23         0.00647       1.93       0.24        0.80        -0.08       -0.13        -0.59   -2.03      -1.43      -1.30    0.255    4.04          2.28
     L24        -0.00018      -0.15      -0.08       -0.72         0.28        1.20         0.10    1.02      -0.11      -0.29    0.061    0.76          1.97
     L25        -0.00001      -0.04      -0.15       -1.19         0.41        1.53         0.03    0.26       0.57       1.25    0.306    5.19          1.55



                                                                                                                                                    44
     L27         -0.00004       -0.25        0.91    5.60    0.77   2.22    -0.29   -1.91   -0.11   -0.19   0.628   19.86        2.14
     L28         -0.00059       -0.82        0.02    0.33    0.25    1.80   -0.08   -1.37    0.33    1.43   0.230   3.53         2.20
     L29          0.00590        1.56       -0.46   -1.34   -0.01   -0.01    0.58    1.75    0.45    0.36   0.169   2.40         2.14
     L30          0.00032        0.25        0.00    0.06   0.08    0.32     0.15    1.35    0.52    1.25   0.142   1.96         1.94
     L32         -0.00026       -0.11        1.12    5.53    1.06   2.46    -0.14   -0.76   -0.26   -0.35   0.627   19.79        2.38
     L33          0.00107        0.50       -0.68   -3.53   -0.01   -0.03    0.32    1.71    0.96    1.37   0.542   13.92        1.91
     L34          0.00159       0.54         0.85    3.24   -0.10   -0.19   -0.56   -2.22    2.13    2.24   0.211   3.16         1.36
     L35          0.00251        0.81       -0.09   -0.33   -0.07   -0.12    0.23    0.87   -1.77   -1.74   0.132   1.79         2.37
     L36         -0.00117       -1.33       -0.11   -1.47   -0.07   -0.44   -0.06   -0.89    0.23    0.81   0.203   3.00         2.78
     L38          0.00070        0.40       -0.12   -0.78    0.64   1.88    -0.09   -0.59    0.27    0.47   0.193   2.82         2.19
     L39         -0.00374       -1.43        0.05    0.21   -0.53   -1.04    0.80    3.50    0.11    0.13   0.274   4.45         1.90
     L41          0.00039       0.33         0.46    4.27    0.52    2.28   -0.03   -0.29   -0.10   -0.27   0.505   12.01        2.24
     L42          0.00683        2.00       -1.77   -5.69    0.57    0.86    0.55    1.85   -3.65   -3.27   0.426   8.72         2.03
     L43         -0.00077       -0.85        0.00    0.03    0.13    0.76   -0.20   -2.57   -0.32   -1.10   0.215   3.23         2.11
     L44         -0.00530       -2.01        0.22    0.92   -0.63   -1.24   -0.11   -0.51   1.76     2.03   0.097   1.27         1.52
     L45          0.00012        0.07        1.08    7.55   0.36    1.18    -0.45   -3.33    0.56    1.09   0.702   27.69        2.42
     L46          0.00070        0.55        0.10    0.92   -0.01   -0.07   -0.10   -0.92    0.77    1.85   0.097   1.27         1.84
     L47          0.00011        0.22       -0.23   -5.03    0.11    1.10    0.09    2.19   -0.35   -2.07   0.420   8.52         2.69
     L49          0.00103        1.35       -0.15   -2.16   -0.09   -0.60   -0.08   -1.22    0.11    0.46   0.268   4.31         2.00
     L50         -0.00035       -0.12        0.54    2.08    1.67   2.98     0.10    0.42   1.47     1.56   0.303   5.13         1.79
     L51         -0.00097       -0.95        0.19    2.05    0.32   1.62    -0.00   -0.04   0.77     2.32   0.237   3.66         2.17
     L52          0.00351        1.76        0.67    3.68    1.08    2.80   -0.88   -5.09   -0.26   -0.40   0.597   17.43        2.18
     L53          0.00001        0.00        0.95    4.81    1.34   3.17    -0.89   -4.73    0.17    0.24   0.624   19.55        2.38
     L54          0.00097       1.58         0.33    6.04    0.50   4.25    -0.18   -3.45    0.08    0.43   0.677   24.68        2.42
     L55          0.00258       1.55         0.49    3.26    0.03   0.12     0.13    0.95   0.11     0.20   0.351   6.38         1.87
     L56          0.00044        0.24        0.29    1.77   1.11    3.11    -0.40   -2.54    1.31    2.19   0.406   8.03         1.54
     L58         -0.00043       -0.32        0.86    7.04    0.30    1.16   -0.37   -3.20   -0.41   -0.93   0.758   36.86        1.92

See notes to Table 2 for explanation of factors.




                                                                                                                            45
Table 9: Fraction of Managers with Significant Betas

             Carry Beta    Trend Beta     Value Beta   Volatility
                                                       Beta
April 05 –       9%            50%           14%          14%
March 06
April 06 –       15%           35%           10%          13%
March 07
April 07 –       50%           28%           37%          17%
March 08




Table 10: Alpha Regressions

This exhibit presents the results of cross-sectional regressions of:
α jt = δ 0 + δ 1α jt −1 + µ jt .

                                                          Coefficient,
               Number of      Intercept       T-Stat      Alpha
                Funds                                     Year t-1       T-Stat   R-Square
April 06 –        21          -0.00001         -0.01         0.11         0.53      0.015
March 07
April 07 –         37          0.00085         2.53            0.16      0.53          0.008
March 08




                                                                                  46
Table 11: Beta Regressions

This exhibit presents the results of cross-sectional regressions                   of:
β jtk = λ0 + λt −1 β jtk + ε it , for k =1,…4 (carry, trend, value, volatility).


Panel A.                                          Coefficient,
Carry         Number of                           Beta Carry
               Funds        Intercept    T-Stat   Year t-1         T-Stat   R-Square
April 06 –       21            0.13       1.66         0.68         2.70      0.278
March 07
April 07 –        37          0.04        0.54         0.74         4.50      0.369
March 08


Panel B                                           Coefficient,
Trend         Number of                           Beta Trend
               Funds        Intercept    T-Stat   Year t-1         T-Stat   R-Square
April 06 –       21            0.17       1.50         0.88         6.12      0.663
March 07
April 07 –        37          0.26        3.16         0.34         3.40      0.248
March 08


Panel C                                           Coefficient,
Value         Number of                           Beta Value
               Funds        Intercept    T-Stat   Year t-1         T-Stat   R-Square
April 06 –       21           -0.10      -1.22        -0.26        -1.01      0.051
March 07
April 07 –        37          -0.07      -1.41         0.34         3.75      0.287
March 08



Panel D                                           Coefficient,
Volatility    Number of                           Beta Vol.
               Funds        Intercept    T-Stat   Year t-1         T-Stat   R-Square
April 06 –       21            0.32       1.64         0.15         0.95      0.045
March 07
April 07 –        37          0.02        0.11         0.22         1.32      0.047
March 08




                                                                                      47
