                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ROY MODEL SORTING AND NON-RANDOM SELECTION IN THE VALUATION
                        OF A STATISTICAL LIFE

                                            Thomas DeLeire
                                          Christopher Timmins

                                          Working Paper 14364
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14364


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2008




The authors would like to thank Joe Aldy, Matt Kahn, John List, Chris Rohlfs, Laura Taylor, Joe Terza,
and all the participants in the Duke Applied Microeconomics Lunch, the Yale and Earth Institute Environmental
Economics Seminars, the ASHE biannual meetings, the NBER Summer Institute, and the University
of Chicago econometrics workshop for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Thomas DeLeire and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Roy Model Sorting and Non-Random Selection in the Valuation of a Statistical Life
Thomas DeLeire and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 14364
September 2008
JEL No. J17,J31,Q5,Q51

                                              ABSTRACT

Wage-hedonics is used to recover the value of a statistical life by exploiting the fact that workers choosing
riskier occupations will be compensated with a higher wage. However, Roy (1951) suggests that observed
wage distributions will be distorted if individuals select into jobs according to idiosyncratic returns.
We illustrate how this type of sorting may bias wage-hedonic VSL estimates and describe two estimators
that correct for it. Using data from the CPS, we recover VSL estimates that are three to four times
larger than those based on the traditional techniques, statistically significant, and robust to a wide array
of specifications.


Thomas DeLeire
La Follette School of Public Affairs
University of Wisconsin - Madison
1225 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
tdeleire@lafollette.wisc.edu

Christopher Timmins
Department of Economics
Duke University
209 Social Sciences Building
P.O. Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708-0097
and NBER
christopher.timmins@duke.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

         Cost-benefit analyses of environmental, workplace, and product safety regulations

frequently require estimates of the monetary value of fatality risk reductions. This value

typically comes in the form of the value of a statistical life (or, alternatively, the value of

a statistical death averted) and is often estimated with wage-hedonic methods.1 Workers

are compensated for choosing to work in risky jobs. However, workers vary in their

idiosyncratic skills and the return to these skills may vary greatly across occupations. In

this paper we show that worker sorting based on idiosyncratic returns can bias value of

statistical life (VSL) estimates derived with the wage-hedonic technique, and we

demonstrate two new empirical strategies to correct for this source of bias. In particular,

we employ techniques introduced by Bayer, Khan, and Timmins (2007) to control for

polychotomous selection when individuals care about more than just pecuniary returns.

These techniques extend the idea originally posited in the Roy model (1951), which

explains occupational sorting as a function of only wages. The extension is appropriate

for wage-hedonics since, in those models, workers sort across occupations based on non-

pecuniary job attributes like fatality risk in addition to their wages.2

         Correcting for this bias is both empirically important and has significant policy

implications. For example, we estimate the VSL for men aged 18-60 to be roughly three

1
  The value of a statistical life (VSL) is constructed from individuals’ revealed or stated willingness to
trade-off other consumption for a marginal reduction in fatality risk (e.g., risk of on-the-job fatality in the
context of wage-hedonics). Suppose, for example, that an individual is willing to pay $40 for a policy that
results in a 1-in-100,000 reduction in the chance of dying. If we were to take 100,000 individuals
confronted with this choice, the policy would lead to one fewer death among them. Although none of those
individuals know which of them will be saved by the policy, their aggregate willingness to pay is 40 x
$100,000 = $4 million. This number is taken as the VSL. If asked for a willingness to pay to avoid his or
her own particular death, any one individual would not be able to give a credible answer to the willingness-
to-pay question.
2
  The estimation strategies described below also have applications in other empirical contexts – for
example, individuals migrating across cities, where utility is determined by both the wages and local
amenities.


                                                       1
to four times larger (and statistically significant) when we correct for “Roy sorting” than

the VSL estimated on the same data but with traditional techniques. We find this bias,

moreover, in age-specific VSLs that exhibit patterns similar to those found by previous

researchers.   Our estimates of VSLs for women are reasonable in magnitude and

statistically significant, unlike their counterparts based on traditional wage-hedonic

techniques.    These larger estimates of the VSL (which are also less sensitive to

specification) suggest a greater willingness among Americans to pay for reductions in

fatality risk through environmental, workplace, and product safety regulations than

previously believed.

       This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the Roy model and explains

why we should expect sorting based on idiosyncratic returns to yield biased estimates of

the VSL calculated with traditional wage-hedonic techniques. Section 3 discusses how

our estimators deal with (or fail to address) some other well-known problems with the

wage-hedonic approach. Section 4 describes the data we use to implement our estimators,

including information about individual workers from the CPS, data describing

occupational fatalities from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and data on other occupational

attributes from the Department of Labor’s Dictionary of Occupational Titles. Section 5

outlines our first estimation strategy, which semi-parametrically identifies workers’ risk

preferences in the presence of Roy sorting. Section 6 reports the results of our first

estimator alongside results derived from a traditional wage-hedonic procedure, and

discusses the results of a number of alternative model specifications. Section 7 describes

and implements our second estimation strategy, which makes use of stronger




                                            2
independence and distributional assumptions but requires less of the data. Section 8

discusses policy implications and concludes.



2. ROY SORTING BIAS IN THE WAGE-HEDONIC ESTIMATE OF THE VSL

       Rosen (1986) refers to the theory of equalizing differences as the “fundamental

(long-run) market equilibrium construct in labor economics.”           It explains how the

difference in wages between risky and safe jobs is determined – if some jobs are less safe

than others, the market equalizing difference (or “compensating differential”) is set so

that enough workers sort into the risky occupation to clear the market. This was the idea

behind Thaler and Rosen’s (1975) seminal research on using labor market outcomes to

value life – i.e., wage-hedonics.

       A second literature in labor economics has examined the implications of

idiosyncratic differences in the returns to workers’ abilities for their choice of occupation.

These implications were first demonstrated by Roy (1951), whose name has since been

associated with this class of sorting models. The idea behind the Roy model can be

illustrated in a simple example. In an economy with just two occupations, workers who

choose occupation #1 over occupation #2 receive greater pecuniary returns from this

choice than those workers who choose occupation #2 would have received had they

chosen occupation #1, ceteris paribus. The difference between the wages received by

workers in occupation #1 and occupation #2 will not, therefore, reflect the difference

between the wages that the average worker would have received in each sector. In the

simplest possible case, this type of sorting does not create a problem for measuring

compensating wage differentials. However, with only minor complications, it can have




                                              3
important implications for the ability of wage-hedonics to recover the value of any job

attributes (including fatality risk).                 We demonstrate why with a series of numerical

examples.3

           Suppose that the wage individual i would receive from working in each of two

occupations is determined by the following wage equation:



(1)        wi , j = βR j + ε i , j      j = 1, 2



where the idiosyncratic component of the wage is drawn from a bivariate normal

distribution.



            ε i ,1           0  1 0
                                               
(2)         ε  ~ i.i.d . N   0 ,  0 1  
            i,2                           



Let Rj measure the fatality risk in occupation j. Occupation #1 is assumed to be “safe”

(R1 = 0), whereas occupation #2 is “risky” (R2 = 1). For the sake of simplicity, we set the

coefficient on risk in the wage equation (β) to be 1. Figure 1 illustrates the unconditional

distribution of wages in each occupation. The compensating wage differential ($1) is

apparent in the difference between the means of these two distributions.

           The distributions portrayed in Figure 1 are not, however, the distributions of

wages once workers choose their preferred occupation (the conditional wage distribution).

Individuals sort across occupations to maximize utility, which is determined in this simple



3
    For a formal description of these features of the Roy model, see Heckman and Honoré (1990).


                                                           4
example by wages in combination with fatality risk. Individual i receives the following

utility from choosing to work in occupation j:



(3)     U i , j = wi , j − βR j




In the case described in equations (1) and (2), the average wage in occupation #2 will still

be higher than that in occupation #1 by $1 to compensate for its added risk, even after

individuals have optimally sorted. Figure 2 demonstrates this result. We construct Figure

2 by simulating a pair of wages for each of one million individuals and assigning that

individual to the occupation that gives her the highest utility.          We then plot the

conditional wage distribution for each occupation (i.e., conditional upon workers having

optimally sorted into that sector). Note that, consistent with the predictions of the Roy

model, the means of both distributions increase while their variances decrease.

Importantly, the difference in the means of the two conditional distributions (1.57-0.57 =

1.00) still reflects the true compensating wage differential from which we could derive an

unbiased measure of the value of a statistical life. This is because that difference is

deducted from utility before Roy sorting occurs and is therefore not distorted by the

sorting process.

       Now consider a minor modification of the sorting model in equations (1) and (2).

In particular, suppose the variance of the unconditional wage distribution in occupation

#1 (i.e., the “safe” occupation) is greater than that in occupation #2.




                                              5
        ε i ,1           0  2 0
                                           
(4)     ε  ~ i.i.d . N   0 ,  0 1  
        i,2                           



Figure 3 shows that the difference in the means of the unconditional wage distributions

still reveals the true compensating wage differential. However, when individuals sort,

occupation #1 offers greater opportunities for very high wage draws (large idiosyncratic

returns). Optimal sorting yields a bigger upward shift in the mean of the occupation #1

conditional wage distribution. Comparing the means of the two conditional distributions

in Figure 4 reveals a downward bias in the estimate of the compensating differential

(1.46-0.92 = 0.54), implying an understated VSL.

       This sorting-induced bias is compounded if individuals’ wage draws are positively

correlated across occupations. Consider an extreme case:



          ε i ,1           0   2 0.9  
                                               
(5)       ε  ~ i.i.d . N   0 ,  0.9 1  
          i,2                             



Now, the individuals receiving the highest draws in occupation #1 tend to be those

individuals who would have received a draw from the upper tail of the occupation #2

wage distribution. Those left in occupation #2 tend to be those individuals who receive

low draws in both occupations. Figure 5 illustrates that this further compresses the

difference in the means of the conditional wage distributions (i.e., down to 1.07-0.80 =

0.27), making the sorting-induced downward bias in the implied VSL even more severe.

The opposite is true if wage draws are negatively correlated across occupations:




                                                      6
          ε i ,1           0  2          − 0.9  
                                                  
(6)       ε  ~ i.i.d . N   0 ,  − 0.9   1  
          i,2              



although in this example, the negative correlation is not strong enough to offset the initial

sorting bias. Figure 6 illustrates this case, in which the compensating differential only

falls to 1.69-1.06 = 0.63.



2.1 Recovering the VSL in the Presence of Roy Sorting

        In these numerical examples, the direction and size of the bias induced by Roy

sorting depends upon the relative sizes of the variances of the unconditional wage

distributions in combination with the correlation of individuals’ wage draws across

occupations.4 Heckman and Honoré (1990), however, prove that these unconditional

distributions cannot be recovered without first assuming a value for the correlation in

individuals’ wage draws across occupations (e.g., independence).                        This leaves the

researcher in a difficult position with respect to the bias in the wage-hedonic estimate of

the VSL induced by Roy sorting – one needs to first assume a degree of correlation in

wage draws in order to recover the unconditional wage distributions, but the degree of

correlation itself affects the size of the bias induced by Roy sorting. In Section 5, we

demonstrate how one can avoid this problem and correct the sorting bias in the VSL (i)

without knowing the unconditional wage distributions and (ii) without assuming anything

about the correlation in individuals’ wage draws across occupations. This procedure




4
 In particular, by making the variance in occupation #2 larger than that in occupation #1, we could have
made the bias in the VSL go in the opposite direction.


                                                       7
yields an estimate of the VSL that is three times larger than that derived from the

traditional wage-hedonic technique.

       While straightforward, that estimator does require a lot from the data – in

particular, estimates of the minimum order statistics associated with each of a number of

conditional wage distributions.     While the quality of the wage data we use in our

empirical application is quite high, we concede that measurement error and outliers can

make it difficult to accurately estimate the minimum order statistic. We subsequently

offer a second estimation strategy in section 7 that requires far less of the data. Instead of

focusing on the minimum order statistic, it uses information from the entire conditional

wage distribution, but requires an assumption of independent wage draws across sectors.

That procedure recovers an estimate of the VSL that is more than four times the size of

that derived from the comparable wage-hedonic regression. We take the results of these

two models as convincing evidence that Roy sorting matters, and leave it to the reader to

determine which method is more appropriate for any particular application.



3. OTHER PROBLEMS WITH THE WAGE-HEDONIC ESTIMATE OF THE VSL

       The wage-hedonic technique has been used extensively (and has been rigorously

scrutinized) for decades.     We present only a brief overview of the resulting large

literature. Viscusi and Aldy (2003) provide a comprehensive discussion of the VSL,

paying particular attention to the wage-hedonic technique and the problems that can arise

in its implementation.      Consider, for example, the role of unobservable individual

heterogeneity. One particular form of such heterogeneity is worker productivity. Hwang

et al (1992) demonstrate that if workers can be classified as high or low productivity (i.e.,




                                              8
if there is positive correlation in wage draws across occupations) and if high productivity

workers choose to take some of their compensation in the form of lower fatality risk,

wages in low-risk occupations will look too high and the estimated fatality risk premium

will be too low.     This problem has been addressed in earlier work by the use of

longitudinal data, identifying individual fixed effects with either (i) workers who switch

jobs or (ii) time-varying fatality rates within a job. [See, for example, Brown (1980),

Black and Kneisner (2003), and Kniesner et al (2006)] The first estimation approach we

describe below will, conveniently, account for this source of bias in that (i) it assumes

workers take account of both wages and job attributes (including fatality risk) when

choosing an occupation, and (ii) it is robust to any form of correlation in workers’ wage

draws (i.e., workers can have differing productivities). Like the previous literature, our

second estimator requires longitudinal data to address this issue.

       A separate problem arises if there is unobservable heterogeneity in individuals’

ability to avoid risk. Shogren and Stamland (2002) note that estimates of the VSL will be

biased upward if there is heterogeneity in unobservable safety-related skills.         The

presence of safety-related skills means that not all workers face the same risk on the same

job – alternatively, some workers may simply be better at avoiding accidents than others.

The compensating differential is determined by the marginal worker, who will have the

least amount of safety-related skill among workers in the risky job and thus will face the

highest risk. If the average risk faced by workers in the risky job is instead used to

calculate the estimate of the VSL, that estimate will be biased upward. Our estimators, in

their current form, are unable to allow for idiosyncratic exposure to risk.




                                              9
         A third problem arises when individuals have heterogeneous preferences for risk.

In particular, workers who put less value on safety are more likely to sort into risky jobs,

biasing downward wage-hedonic estimates of the compensating risk premium. While

panel data and individual fixed effects provide one solution to this sort of preference-

based sorting, researchers have also used information about seatbelt use [Hersch and

Viscusi (1990), Hersch and Pickton (1995)] or smoking behavior [Viscusi and Hersch

(2001)] to control for risk preferences. While we do not employ data of this sort, our

estimation approaches do permit distaste for fatality risk to be controlled for with these

sorts of observable characteristics.5

         There are a number of other problems that may arise when using wage-hedonics to

measure the VSL. For example, wage-hedonic techniques often ignore quality of life

impacts, as well as the effects of life expectancy.6 They usually measure the disutility of

facing a particular kind of death that is neither slow nor protracted, and which does not

involve a significant latency period. These techniques may not, therefore, be good for

valuing avoided deaths from cancer. [Savage (1993), Revesz (1999)] Scotten and Taylor

(2007) demonstrate that one should not even treat different sources of on-the-job fatality

risk (e.g., accidental, transportation related, and death from violent assault) homogenously

in a wage-hedonic equation.            Because they focus on labor market outcomes, wage-

hedonic techniques are not useful for valuing the lives of children and the elderly. For

these and other problems, there are a variety of alternative techniques for calculating

5
  DeLeire and Levy (2004) provide empirical support for the notion that workers who, based on their
observable characteristics such as sex, marital status, and whether they have children, likely have a greater
distaste for dangerous work tend to choose safer occupations.
6
  Notable exceptions include Viscusi and Aldy (2006), who find that VSLs follow an inverted-U pattern in
age, and Alberini et al (2004), who find lower VSLs for those over the age of 70 using stated preference
techniques. Other researchers have also found that the VSL declines at higher ages – see Table 10 in
Viscusi and Aldy (2003) for a summary. In contrast, Smith et al (2004) find no evidence of lower VSLs for
older individuals.


                                                     10
VSLs including stated preference, human capital approaches, and quantifying the risk

tradeoffs agents make in non-labor market settings.7 Finally, it is unclear how well actual

on-the-job fatality risks proxy for the risks a worker perceives when he decides to accept

or reject a wage offer.

        Even with all these problems, wage-hedonics remains prevalent in policy making.

The EPA has recently reduced the VSL it uses for policy analysis to $7.22 million from

$8.04 million. This reduction will have important implications for which policies pass

EPA cost-benefit analysis. Both numbers are based on meta-analyses of a variety of VSL

studies, many of which used wage-hedonic techniques.



4. DATA

        We use data from three different sources for both of our estimation strategies.

First, we use data on hourly wage rates and occupations from the Outgoing Rotation

Groups of the Current Population Surveys (CPS). Second, we use data on fatal and non-

fatal risks associated with each occupation that we construct by merging Bureau of Labor

Statistics data on injuries and deaths with CPS data in a procedure described below.

Third, we use data on the occupational characteristics (besides injury risks) from the

Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT).




7
  Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004), for example, use states’ decisions to raise speed limits as evidence
that the median voter was willing to incur an increased risk of driver death in exchange for lower travel
times. Atkinson and Halvorsen (1990), Dreyfus and Viscusi (1995), and Li (2006) look at the willingness
of automobile buyers to trade-off risk of death with operating expenditures and purchase price. Blomquist
(1979) and Hakes and Viscusi (2007) use drivers’ decisions to employ seatbelts in order to recover
estimates of the VSL, and Carlin and Sandy (1991) do so with data on individuals’ decisions to use child
safety seats. Portney (1981) and Gayer, Hamilton, and Viscusi (2000) use tradeoffs between housing
expenditures and mortality from air pollution and cancer (caused by proximity to Superfund sites),
respectively.


                                                   11
         We record wages and occupations from the CPS Outgoing Rotation Groups

Surveys from 1983 through 2002. We restrict the data to these years because 1983 and

2002 are the first and last years that the 1980 occupational classification was used in the

CPS. In particular, to determine occupation we use responses to the question “What kind

of work was … doing [last week]?” Our sample includes all individuals who were

employed during the survey week. This yields data on 3,434,820 workers.

         We assign fatal and non-fatal injury risks to each occupation using data from the

BLS Survey of Occupational Injuries and Illnesses and the Census of Fatal Occupational

Injuries. These data provide counts of injuries and fatalities at the 3-digit occupation

level from 1992 to 1999; there is also information on the severity of non-fatal injuries,

including the median number of days missed from work per injury within an occupation.8

In some cases the data are aggregated across 3-digit occupations; we aggregate all data to

correspond to the 2-digit detailed occupation recodes in the CPS.9 We use monthly CPS

data to calculate hours worked over this period in each category to transform the counts

into risks (the number of injuries per 100 full-time workers).10                       We also calculate

“anticipated” days of work lost due to nonfatal injury by multiplying the risk of nonfatal

injury by the median days lost per injury within an occupation. We then average over the

period 1992-1999 in order to minimize the effects of year-to-year noise (as we

demonstrate below, we do not need time variation in fatality risk for identification, even

without assuming independence). Average annual risk of death on the job is 0.005 for all


8
  Note that simply being able to miss days from work after a non-fatal injury may be a positive amenity
associated with many jobs.
9
  The categories do not correspond perfectly to the Census detailed occupation recodes; we collapse codes
40, 41, and 42 into a single category since the fatality data are not available for these categories in a way
that can be disaggregated.
10
   A full-time worker is assumed to work 2,000 hours/year, so that the risks we calculate are per 200,000
hours worked.


                                                      12
men (or one for every 25,000 men) and 0.002 for all women (or one for every 50,000

women).

       We also use data on other job attributes from the Dictionary of Occupational

Titles. The DOT is a reference manual compiled by the U.S. Department of Labor that

provides information about occupations. It attempts both to define occupations in a

uniform way across industries and to assess the characteristics of occupations. While the

occupational characteristics in the DOT were not collected from a nationally

representative survey of firms and little detail on sampling or response rates is available,

they are the best data available on the characteristics of occupations. The analysis of

occupational characteristics was conducted through on-site observation and interviews

with employees. The DOT data were constructed by analysts assigning numerical codes

to 43 job traits. We create six aggregate variables from the underlying DOT variables to

describe occupational characteristics: substantive complexity, motor skills, physical

demands, working conditions, creative skills, and interactions with people. A detailed list

of the variables used to construct these data is provided in Table 1. Table 2 summarizes

the attributes of each occupation. The highest risk occupations (in order) are (1) forestry

and fishing, (2) motor vehicle operations, (3) other transportation occupations, (4) farm

workers, and (5) construction, freight, labor. All other occupations average fewer than

one death per 10,000 workers each year.

       The data used to construct hourly wage rates for our analyses come from the

Bureau of the Census, Current Population Survey, Outgoing Rotation Groups files from

1983 through 2002. Wages are inflated to 2005 dollars using the CPI-U-RS. Workers’

hourly wage rates are either (i) the reported hourly wage (for the 60 percent of workers




                                            13
paid on that basis) or (ii) weekly earnings divided by weekly hours (for the other 40

percent of workers).11 To avoid measurement error from using wages derived from salary

and “usual” hours data, we drop the latter group of workers for our primary analysis.12

The focus of our investigation is therefore on “hourly” workers. This group has received

much of the attention in previous VSL studies. [Viscusi and Aldy (2003)]

         Table 3 summarizes the data describing hourly workers. In particular, the table

reports means for attributes of men and women, broken down according to whether the

individual works in a high or low risk occupation.13 There are a few interesting points

that can be made simply by looking at these raw data. Men in high risk occupations earn

more on average than those in low risk occupations, even though the latter are more likely

to be college educated. This suggests the sort of variation in the data that would yield a

positive VSL. Men in high risk occupations are, however, also more likely to be older,

married, union members, fulltime workers, and white – all of which are factors that would

likely contribute to their being paid a higher wage. This highlights the importance of

controlling for individual heterogeneity when applying our estimators. We describe how

this is done in the following section.

         Unlike their male counterparts, women in high risk occupations tend to earn lower

wages. Like men, women with any college training are less likely to work in those jobs.

Across most other attributes, women are similar irrespective of whether they work in a




11
   Imputed data on wage rates were used to describe some hourly workers. In cases where individuals do
not provide complete responses to the Census Bureau interviewers, the Census Bureau imputes the missing
data using the information provided by a different respondent with some of the same characteristics, when
those characteristics were likely to be associated with the missing data.
12
   In Section 6.2, we do report a separate set of results for salaried workers.
13
   The individual is considered to be in a high risk occupation if that occupation has fatality risk above the
median risk across all 43 occupations (i.e., 1.571 deaths per 100,000 workers each year).


                                                     14
high or low risk occupation. Finally, note that 83% of men work in occupations classified

as high risk, while only 35% of women do so.



5. ESTIMATION STRATEGY 1: IDENTIFICATION

         We begin by describing our identification strategy with a simple model of sorting

by individuals into one of two occupations (j = 1, 2). We indicate the wage earned by

individual i should he choose to work in occupation #1 or #2 as ωi,1 and ωi,2, respectively.

In contrast to the classic Roy model, where sorting across occupations is driven entirely

by an individual’s pecuniary compensation, we model sorting as determined by his wage

draw in each occupation and by non-wage determinants of utility specific to each

particular occupation. We summarize the latter (for now) as “tastes”. The conventional

wisdom is that there is no additional information in conditional wage distributions with

which to identify these taste parameters. In the following model, we show how they are,

in fact, identified with the help of a simple assumption.

         We begin by modeling individual i’s utility from choosing occupation j as the sum

of wages (ωi,j) and tastes (τj):



(7)      U i, j = ωi, j + τ j



The first important restriction we impose on the model is that there is no idiosyncratic

component to the taste parameter (i.e., we estimate τj instead of τi,j).14                         After first


14
   By estimating this model separately for different types of individuals, it is possible to allow the taste to
vary with observable individual attributes. However, allowing tastes to vary with unobservable individual
attributes does not appear to be possible without relying on strict distributional assumptions. Our goal is to
demonstrate how identification can be achieved without resorting to such distributional assumptions.


                                                      15
explaining how to recover estimates of these taste parameters, we describe how they can

be used to recover the value workers place on particular non-pecuniary occupation

attributes (e.g., fatality risk).

        Without loss of generality, we normalize τ1 = 0.15 At this point, the goal of our

exercise is to recover an estimate of τ2.16 The difficulty in doing so arises from the fact

that we only see (i) wage distributions conditional upon optimal sorting behavior, and (ii)

an indicator of which occupation an individual chooses. In particular, for an individual i,

we only observe ωi,2 if:



(8)      ω i , 2 + τ 2 ≥ ω i ,1



Alternatively, we only observe ωi,1 if:



(9)      ω i , 2 + τ 2 < ω i ,1



Denote the smallest wage (i.e., the minimum order statistic, or extreme quantile) that we

observe from someone choosing occupation #1 or #2 by w1 and w 2 , respectively.

Assuming that the unconditional distributions of ω1 and ω2 have finite lower points of

supports (denoted by ω1* and ω 2* ), we know the smallest value of ω1 that we could ever

see, given that individuals maximize utility:


15
   As in all random-utility frameworks, utility is only identified up to an additive constant. This requires
some sort of a normalization, which we use to eliminate one of the τ’s from the two-occupation example. In
the more general N occupation case, we estimate (N-1) distinct τ’s.
16
   Bayer, Khan, and Timmins (2007) describe how non-parametric estimates of the unconditional wage
distributions can be recovered as well.


                                                    16
         w1 = ω1*           if      ω1* > ω 2* + τ 2
(10)
         w1 = ω 2* + τ 2   if      ω1* ≤ ω 2* + τ 2



Similarly, the smallest value of ω2 that we could ever observe would be:



         w 2 = ω 2*         if      ω1* ≤ ω 2* + τ 2
(11)
         w 2 = ω1* − τ 2   if      ω1* > ω 2* + τ 2



In order to make sense of (10) and (11), define the following two cases:



         A : ω1* > ω 2* + τ 2
(12)
         B : ω1* ≤ ω 2* + τ 2



We are not able to tell whether case A or B prevails in the data without first recovering an

estimate of τ2, which is the object of the estimation procedure. Conveniently, we are able

to recover an estimate of τ2 in either case.17 In particular:



(13)     τ 2 = w1 − w 2



Equation (13) therefore describes our minimum order statistic estimator for τ2 in the

simplest two-occupation case. Figures 7 and 8 illustrate the intuition underlying this

17
   By exploiting information contained in the extreme tails of the wage distribution, this approach has much
in common with the “identification at infinity” strategy for estimating treatment effects under selection
described in Heckman (1990).


                                                       17
estimator for cases A and B, respectively.                 The heavy dashed lines in each figure

correspond to the minimum order statistics that would be observed in the data (i.e.,

w1 = ω1* and w 2 = ω1* − τ 2 in case A, and w1 = ω 2* + τ 2 and w 2 = ω 2* in case B). In each

case, the difference between the heavy dashed lines identifies τ2.

       We reiterate at this point that, at no point in the preceding discussion were we

required to say anything about the relative sizes of the variances of wage draws across

occupations or the correlation in an individual’s wage draws across occupations.

Correlations that are positive, negative, or zero are all consistent with this model.

Identification relies only on differences in the supports of different conditional wage

distributions.

       The theory used to describe the simple two-occupation case scales-up naturally to

any number of potential occupations.                 With more than two potential occupations,

however, we require some additional notation. Consider the following three-occupation

system with wages for individual i denoted by ω1,i, ω2,i, and ω3,i. We denote the lower

supports of each occupation’s wage distribution by ω1* , ω 2* , and ω 3* . We therefore

normalize τ1 = 0. For individual i, we observe wi, where:



        wi   = ω1,i I [ω1,i > max (ω 2,i + τ 2 , ω 3,i + τ 3 )] +
(14)                  ω 2,i I [ω 2,i + τ 2 > max (ω1,i , ω 3,i + τ 3 )] +
                            ω 3,i I [ω 3,i + τ 3 > max (ω1,i , ω 2,i + τ 2 )]



We also observe an indicator corresponding to which occupation individual i has selected

– i.e., d1,i, d2,i, and d3,i. We note that, under convex supports for all random variables and




                                                     18
assuming finite lower support points ( ω1* , ω 2* , ω 3* ), we have the following conditional

minimum order statistics:



         w1 = min ( wi | d1,i = 1) = max (ω1* , ω 2* + τ 2 , ω 3* + τ 3 )

(15)     w 2 = min ( wi | d 2,i = 1) = max (ω1* , ω 2* + τ 2 , ω 3* + τ 3 ) − τ 2

         w 3 = min ( wi | d 3,i = 1) = max (ω1* , ω 2* + τ 2 , ω 3* + τ 3 ) − τ 3




Notice that τ3 is equal to ( w1 − w 3 ) , while τ2 is equal to ( w1 − w 2 ) .

         With estimates of τ for multiple occupations j = 1, 2, …, it becomes possible to

decompose the taste parameter into the utility effects of multiple non-pecuniary

occupation characteristics, X (including fatality risk), along with an unobserved

occupation attribute, εj, by way of regression analysis.18



(16)     τ j = X ′j β + ε j



6. ESTIMATION STRATEGY 1: RESULTS

         In this section, we describe the results of two sets of estimation procedures. The

first is based on the traditional wage-hedonic model for recovering marginal willingness-

to-pay for reductions in fatality risk. In particular, we estimate a regression of the form:

18
  This assumes, of course, that E[εX] = 0, which may be violated if there are important omitted job
characteristics. In our application, we deal with this concern directly by employing the best available data
describing occupation attributes. Alternatively, if one believed that correlated unobservable job attributes
were time invariant, and if one could exploit time variation in fatality risk, it would be possible to estimate
multiple taste parameters (i.e., a different vector for each time period), pool them over time, and include
occupation fixed effects in equation (16) to deal with the endogeneity. See, for example, the data used by
Costa and Kahn (2004) in their analysis of changes in the VSL from 1940-1980.


                                                       19
(17)     wi , j = α 0 + Z i′α 1 + α 2 FATAL j + X ′j α 3 + ε i , j



where i indexes workers and j indexes forty-three occupation categories.19 Z is a vector

of variables describing worker i including:


         HSDROP                                worker is a high-school dropout
         HSGRAD                                worker is a high-school graduate
         SOMECOLL                              worker has completed < 4 years of college
         COLLGRAD                              worker has a four year college degree
         AGE                                   age measured in years
         AGE2                                  age-squared
         MARRIED                               worker is married and lives with spouse
         UNION                                 worker is a union member
         MSA                                   worker lives in a metropolitan area
         FULLTIME                              fulltime worker (i.e., hours > 35 per week)
         PUBLIC                                worker is in the public sector
         BLACK                                 worker is African-American
         OTHER                                 worker is other race (non-white)
         HISPANIC                              worker is of Hispanic decent
         NEW ENGLAND                           worker lives in New England census region
         MID-ATLANTIC                          worker lives in Mid-Atlantic census region
         EAST NORTH CENTRAL                    worker lives in East North Central census region
         WEST NORTH CENTRAL                    worker lives in West North Central census region
         SOUTH ATLANTIC                        worker lives in South Atlantic census region
         EAST SOUTH CENTRAL                    worker lives in East South Central census region
         WEST SOUTH CENTRAL                    worker lives in West South Central census region
         MOUNTAIN                              worker lives in Mountain census region
         PACIFIC                               worker lives in Pacific census region


X is a vector of non-pecuniary occupation attributes other than fatality risk. These

include:




19
  We also estimated a set of traditional wage-hedonic specifications using the natural log of hourly wages
as the dependent variable. These specifications yield a statistically significant and positive relationship
between fatal risk and male wages and a statistically significant, but negative relationship between fatal risk
and female wages.


                                                        20
       NONFATAL “Anticipated” days of work lost due to nonfatal injury.

       SCMPLX              Substantive complexity, including complexity of function in
                           relation to data, general educational development, intelligence,
                           numerical aptitude, adaptability to performing repetitive work,
                           sensor or judgmental criteria, specific vocational preparation, and
                           verbal aptitude.

       MSKILL              Motor skills, including color discrimination, finger dexterity,
                           manual dexterity, motor coordination, and complexity in relation to
                           things.

       PHYDDS              Physical demands, including climbing and balancing, eye-hand-
                           foot coordination, dealing with hazardous conditions or outside
                           working conditions, stooping, kneeling, crouching, or crawling.

       WORCON              Working conditions, including extreme cold, extreme heat,
                           wetness, or humidity.

       CSKILL              Creative skills, including abstract and creative activities, feelings,
                           ideas, or facts.

       INTPEOPLE Worker interactions with people.


The main variable of interest is the fatality risk associated with occupation j, represented

by FATAL (the number of deaths per 100 full-time workers) which we defined above.

       Recognizing that the value placed on certain job attributes may differ with worker

attributes, we also estimate a regression of the form:



(18)    wi , j = α 0 + Z i′α 1 + α 2 FATAL j + X ′jα 3 + ( X j d coll )′α 4 + ( X j d AGE > 40 )′α 5 + ε i , j



where dcoll is a dummy variable indicating that SOMECOLL = 1 or COLLGRAD = 1, and

dAGE>40 is a dummy variable indicating that the individual is over 40 years of age. At this

stage of the analysis, we restrict our estimate of the compensating differential in wages

(and, hence, the VSL) to be constant across worker attributes.


                                                        21
        We then take the estimate of the marginal willingness-to-pay to avoid fatality risk,

α2, and scale this up by a typical number of hours worked in a year (2,000) and by the

number of workers over whom the annual fatality risk was measured (100). This provides

us with our estimated VSL.

        Table 4a describes the results of regression equations (17) and (18) for both men

and women where the dependent variable is the hourly wage. Table 4b describes the

corresponding results where the dependent variable is the log hourly wage. In each case,

we estimate two specifications – one in which we use worker-occupation attribute

interactions, and another in which we do not. All results reported in this section of the

paper are based on a trimmed sample that drops all individuals reporting wages lower

than the federally mandated minimum wage in the year of observation.20,                     21
                                                                                                 95 percent

confidence intervals, which were calculated allowing for clustering at the occupation

level, were computed using an M/N bootstrap method.



6.1. Minimum Order Statistic Estimator

        We carry-out a comparable set of specifications of our minimum order statistic

estimator. The practical difficulty in applying this estimator in the current context arises

in controlling for the rich set of worker attributes provided by the CPS. One alternative is

to divide the data up into very small groups and apply the estimator non-parametrically to

each group. An advantage of doing so would be that we would be able to estimate taste



20
   In many years, CPS wages are top-coded at a nominal value of $99.99. We drop all observations
nominally at or above this top-coded value in every year. Dropping observations with wages below the
federally mandated minimum wage reduces the influence of mismeasured wages, particularly in the lower
tail of the wage distribution. Results without lower trimming are reported in the sub-section 6.2.
21
   Keep in mind that, in the traditional wage-hedonic model, a disamenity enters the wage equation
positively, indicating a positive wage differential paid to compensate for the unattractive job attribute.


                                                    22
parameters that vary with observable individual attributes. The problem that arises,

however, is that for a particular group (e.g., black, non-Hispanic, married men aged 18-30

with a high-school education, living in an MSA in New England, who are fulltime

workers but not in the public sector), we may be unlikely to see many individuals in a

particular occupation (e.g., machine operators). The estimator becomes very sensitive to

the wages of the few individuals we do see, and fails if we see no workers in a group.

Alternatively, we could choose not to control for individual attributes at all, but then we

would be deriving our measure of the VSL from the wages and occupation choices of a

potentially unrepresentative group. We therefore adopt a two-stage estimation procedure

that introduces some parametric modeling.22 We first estimate a regression of the form:



(19)      wˆ i , j = β 0 + Z i′β 1 + u i , j




where wˆ i , j is individual i’s observed wage in occupation j, having differenced out the

mean of all wages earned by workers in occupation j. ξi,j measures worker i’s wage in

occupation j, purged of the effects of observable individual attributes Zi:23



(20)      ξ i , j = wi , j − β 0 − Z i′β 1




22
   This two-step approach is similar to that employed by Bajari and Kahn (2005), who face a similar
problem of needing to perform non-parametric estimation with an abundance of covariates.
23
   Note that we use wi,j, not wˆ i , j , in deriving ξi,j. ξi,j should be purged of the effects of observable individual
attributes, but not of the level-effects attributable to being in different occupations.


                                                          23
We then use ξi,j as our “wage” in implementing the lower bound estimator. This allows

us to compare different individuals without having to divide them into unreasonably small

sub-groups.24

         In particular, normalizing the taste parameter for a large occupation (i.e.,

occupation #34 – construction trades) to be zero, we recover estimates of the taste

parameters for the remaining sectors according to the formula:



(21)     τ j = ξ 34 − ξ j



and carry out the second-stage regression to recover the value of non-pecuniary job

attributes:



(22)     τ j = θ + β 2 FATAL j + X ′j β 3 + υ j



where θ accounts for the arbitrary choice of normalization in deriving the τ’s. In a final

specification, we also include interactions between Xj and dcoll and between Xj and dAGE>40

in the estimation of equation (19).

         We rely on M/N bootstrapping techniques to recover confidence intervals.25 In

particular, we conduct 1000 M/N bootstrap simulations of each specification, from which


24
   This assumption does impose the constraint that job attributes and worker characteristics enter additively
in determining a worker’s wage. This is restrictive, but not significantly different from the assumption
usually maintained in the VSL literature. We have also estimated specifications that relax this assumption
as well as specifications that allow the effect of worker characteristics to vary by occupation. These
specifications, available upon request, yield minimum order statistics that are very similar to those obtained
from the specification presented in this paper.
25
   Inference is complicated by the fact that the lower bound estimator does not have an asymptotically
normal distribution. The traditional bootstrap algorithm, moreover, is invalid when the estimate is not


                                                     24
we derive symmetric 95% confidence intervals.26                         Results are consistent with

expectations – workers exhibit a strong and statistically significant disutility from

increased fatality risk.27

         One might reasonably be concerned with the effect of measurement error and

outliers on the performance of this estimator. Put simply, if the differences between

minimum order statistics are driven by outliers or mismeasured data, this will filter

through the model and drive our point estimate of the marginal utility associated with

each job attribute. We take comfort, however, from the fact that our estimates are nearly

always statistically significant. If our estimates were, in fact, being driven by outliers or

many forms of measurement error, we would expect this to be reflected in large standard

errors calculated by our bootstrap procedure.28

         Tables 5 and 6 report the results of our minimum-order-statistic estimator, for both

men and women. The first and third columns refer to the specification that does not

include worker-occupation attribute interactions; the second and fourth columns include

these interactions. Tables 5a and 5b report results where the dependent variable was the

hourly wage while Tables 6a and 6b report results where the dependent variable was the

log hourly wage. Tables 5a and 6a reports results for equation (19), while Tables 5b and

asymptotically normal. This problem is overcome by the use of the M/N bootstrap, a variant on sub-
sampling (here, we use bootstrapped sub-samples that are ¼ the size of the full data set). While yielding
inefficient (i.e., overly large) estimates of the confidence interval, the M/N bootstrap does produce
confidence interval estimates that are consistent.
26
   Specifically, a bootstrap simulation consists of taking a random ¼ sub-sample (drawn with replacement)
from the population of ξi,j’s. We then determine the values of τj, j = 1, 2,…, 43, and regress these values on
the vector of occupation attributes. We record the resulting estimates and repeat the entire process 1000
times. The bootstrapped confidence interval is then found by taking the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the
distribution of bootstrapped parameter estimates.
27
   In contrast to the traditional wage-hedonic model, we are here estimating structural utility function
parameters. Disutility is therefore indicated by a negative parameter value. Recall, moreover, that these
parameter estimates are already normalized by the marginal utility of wages, so that they can be interpreted
as marginal willingnesses-to-pay, and are comparable across sub-populations.
28
   That is, any particular M/N sample would be unlikely to contain the problematic observation, producing a
very different point estimate.


                                                     25
6b reports the results of equation (22). Also reported are 95% confidence intervals

derived from the M/N bootstrap.

       Table 7a summarizes the VSL estimates from both the traditional wage hedonic

and minimum order statistic estimation techniques for each of the specifications described

above when the dependent variable wage the hourly wage.            Looking only at point

estimates for men, the minimum order statistic estimator produces VSL estimates that are

2.7 and 4.3 times greater than those produced by the traditional wage hedonic procedure.

The minimum order statistic estimates are, moreover, statistically significant with a 95%

confidence interval ranging from approximately $5 million to almost $16 million.

       For women, the difference between the two models is even starker. The minimum

order statistic estimator yields results that are similar to those for men – $7.95 or $11.76

million, depending upon whether worker-occupation attribute interactions are included in

the first-stage estimation.   Moreover, these results are statistically significant.     By

contrast, the wage-hedonic procedure yields negative VSL point estimates for women. In

all cases, we can reject the hypothesis that the VSLs estimated by traditional wage-

hedonic methods are equal to those estimated from minimum order statistics.

       The log-wage hedonic specification (see Table 7b) yields estimates of the VSL for

men that are even lower (approximately $1.02 to $1.75 million) and yields estimates of

the VSL for women that are also negative (approximately -$8.59 million). The minimum

order statistic estimates of the VSL are larger for men (between $9 and $10 million) and

positive for women (between $3.7 and $7.5 million). Again, we can reject the hypothesis

that the VSLs estimated by traditional wage-hedonic methods are equal to those estimated

from minimum order statistics.




                                            26
6.2 Alternative Specifications

       Because our estimator is based on the minimum order statistic, it is possible that

our results may be sensitive to the particular choice of model specification (including the

criteria used to draw a data sample). In this sub-section, we explore that sensitivity with a

variety of alternative specifications. Tables 8a and 8b report the VSL estimates arising

from twelve alternatives. We note at the outset that in these subsamples, the traditional

wage-hedonic procedure typically does not produce a statistically significant estimate,

and for women, most of the point-estimates have the wrong sign. Table 8a reports the

results from the hourly wage specifications while Table 8b reports the results from the log

hourly wage specifications. The first row of Table 8a reports estimates based on the

sample of salaried workers. Minimum order statistic estimates remain significant, but fall

relative to their values for wage workers (more so for men than for women). Wage-

hedonic estimates, on the other hand, rise dramatically but have large confidence

intervals. The second row reports results based on a sample of hourly workers that does

not drop those reporting wages below the federally mandated minimum. These low

wages may be real observations, but might also simply reflect measurement error.

Including these low wages has the effect of collapsing across-occupation variation at the

bottom of the wage distribution, with the effect of reducing the VSL estimate based on

the minimum order statistic. Even with this reduction, however, the estimate is still

statistically significant and larger than that based on the traditional wage hedonic

technique.




                                             27
         The next four rows describe results based on samples drawn to include only

individuals in a certain age range.29,30 In particular, we perform the exact same estimation

procedure described in the previous sub-section (including estimating parameters on AGE

and AGE2), but do so only on a sub-set of workers (e.g., aged 20 to 29). It is reassuring

that the same inverted-U pattern found in previous work is apparent in our results. The

inverted-U is, moreover, shifted upward for the minimum order statistic estimates relative

to the wage-hedonic estimates.

         The next two rows describe how the VSL varies with marital status. Using the

minimum order statistic estimator, we find that married men have a higher VSL. This

difference goes away when considering women, and is not present for men or women

when using the traditional wage-hedonic estimator.

         The next two rows describe how the VSL estimates vary with the time period of

analysis. If we restrict our data to the 1983 to 1992 period, we obtain larger estimates for

men of the VSL based on minimum order statistics while if we restrict the data to the

1993 to 2002 period, we get smaller estimates for men. For women, the estimates of the

VSL based on minimum order statistics are, by contrast, larger in the latter period.

         The final two rows of Tables 8a and 8b illustrate two cases in which our model

may not perform well. In the first, we restrict ourselves to using a limited set of worker

attributes (AGE, AGE2, HSDROP, SOMECOLL, COLLGRAD). This has the effect of

reducing the variability across occupations in the lower bound of our wage distributions.31



29
   In these results (and in the remainder of the results in this section), we use the trimmed sample of hourly
workers as a starting point.
30
   Besides age, researchers have also calculated VSLs that differ with respect to race [Viscusi (2003)],
income, and union status [summarized in Viscusi and Aldy (2003)].
31
   Consider an extreme example. When we trim all observations below the federally mandated minimum
wage and use no covariates, it will likely be the case that there is no variation at all across sectors in the


                                                      28
The result is to provide a sort of lower bound on the VSL estimate. While the minimum

order statistic estimate falls below that found with the wage-hedonic model, it does

remain statistically significant. This result highlights the importance of explaining as

much of the variation in wages as possible with observable worker attributes.

        The final row illustrates the effects of having little cross-occupation variation in

fatality risk. In particular, we eliminate the relatively risky occupation categories #41 -

#43 (i.e., farm managers, farm workers, and forestry & fishing). The result is to increase

the confidence intervals for the estimates derived from both techniques (particularly for

the minimum order statistic estimator). The change has little effect on the point estimate

for men based on the wage-hedonic technique, but the point estimate based on the

minimum order statistic jumps dramatically.



7. ESTIMATION STRATEGY 2

        While the CPS provides high-quality data on wages, one might generally be

concerned about the potential for measurement error or outliers to prevent us from

accurately measuring the true minimum order statistic. A similar concern might arise in

settings where one has a relatively small sample to work with. In this section, we employ

an alternative estimation strategy that instead uses data from the entire conditional wage

distribution and makes no assumption about the distributions’ supports. [Bayer, Khan,

and Timmins (2007)] Instead, it relies upon two alternative identifying assumptions: (i)




lower point of support. The VSL recovered with our minimum order statistic estimator would therefore be
$0.


                                                  29
the unconditional distribution of log-wage in occupation j is normal with mean µ j and

variance σ 2j , and (ii) wage draws for individual i are independent across occupations.32

        To explain this estimator, we return to the simple model of individuals sorting

over two occupations, indexed by #1 and #2. Without loss of generality, we again

normalize the taste for occupation #1 to zero (τ1 = 0). We define a variable di, which

functions as an indicator that individual i chose occupation #1:



(23)     d i = I [ω1,i > ω 2,i + τ 2 ]



Using this indicator, we can write down an expression for individual i’s observed wage:



(24)     wi = d i ω1,i + (1 − d i )ω 2,i



i.e., the individual receives his draw from occupation #1 if it was utility maximizing to

choose that occupation. Next, define the following joint probability distributions, both of

which are easily observed in the data:



(25)     Ψ1 (t ) = P (d i = 1, wi ≤ t )          Ψ2 (t ) = P (d i = 0, wi ≤ t )



We will also work with the derivatives of these expressions, denoted by:


32
  This same assumption underlies the traditional wage-hedonic model estimated with cross-sectional data
(with panel data, individual fixed effects have been used to control for unobserved worker productivity).
With panel data, we could relax the independence assumption in our model as well, as we could include
individual fixed effects amongst the individual characteristics in the estimation of equation (19).


                                                    30
                     ∂                                                              ∂
(26)    ψ 1 (t ) =      P (d i = 1, wi ≤ t )                          ψ 2 (t ) =       P (d i = 0, wi ≤ t )
                     ∂t                                                             ∂t



Focusing on the expression for Ψ1(t), we exploit the assumption that wage draws

(conditional on observable individual attributes) are independent across sectors to re-write

it as follows:



        Ψ1 (t ) = P (d i = 1, wi ≤ t )


(27)             = P (ω1,i > ω 2,i + τ 2 , ω1,i ≤ t ) =                      P (ω1,i − τ 2 > ω 2,i , ω1,i ≤ t )

                      t                       ω1 −τ 2                           t
                 =   ∫
                     −∞
                          f1 (ω1 )dω1           ∫
                                               −∞
                                                    f 2 (ω 2 ) dω 2      =      ∫ f (ω ) F (ω
                                                                               −∞
                                                                                     1   1    2    1   − τ 2 ) dω1




This means that we can define ψ1(t) as:



                               t
                   ∂
(28)    ψ 1 (t ) =
                   ∂t          ∫ f (ω ) F (ω
                               −∞
                                    1     1     2       1   − τ 2 ) dω1 = f 1 (t ) F2 (t − τ 2 )




An analogous argument defines ψ2(t):



                                t
                          ∂
(29)    ψ 2 (t ) =
                          ∂t   ∫f
                               −∞
                                    2   (ω 2 ) F1 (ω 2 + τ 2 ) dω 2 = f 2 (t ) F1 (t + τ 2 )




                                                                      31
Going back to the final integral in equation (27) and carrying out integration-by-parts

yields:



                       t                                                               t
(30)      Ψ1 (t ) =   ∫ f (ω ) F (ω
                      −∞
                           1   1   2      1   − τ 2 )dω1 = F1 (t ) F2 (t − τ 2 ) −     ∫ F (s) f
                                                                                       −∞
                                                                                            1      2   ( s − τ 2 )ds




Performing a change of variables u = s − τ 2 , equation (30) becomes:



                                                   t −τ 2

(31)      Ψ1 (t ) = F1 (t ) F2 (t − τ 2 ) −
                                                    −∞
                                                       ∫ F (u + τ
                                                            1       2   ) f 2 (u )du




Next, we use the expressions for ψ1(t) and ψ2(t) defined in (28) and (29) to re-write

equation (31) as follows:



                                          t −τ 2
                      F1 (t )ψ 1 (t )
(32)      Ψ1 (t ) =
                          f 1 (t )
                                      −     ∫ψ
                                           −∞
                                                   2   (u )du




Noting that the integral term in (32) is simply Ψ2 (t − τ 2 ) , we can solve for the

distribution of ω1 as a function of τ2:



                      f 1 (t )        ψ 1 (t )
(33)      λ1 (t ) =            =
                      F1 (t ) Ψ1 (t ) + Ψ2 (t − τ 2 )




                                                                    32
where λ1(t) is a function of the unconditional wage distribution in location #1. (33) is a

single equation in two unknowns (λ1(t) and τ2) when evaluated at a particular value of t,

and it is therefore not surprising that we cannot identify both of these values without

making an additional assumption. Bayer, Khan, and Timmins (2007) show how the

equation can be estimated without parametric assumptions in a model of spatial sorting by

assuming that workers living in the same location receive a wage draw from the same

distribution irrespective of where they migrated from. That source of variation is not

available in the data used to recover the VSL. Instead, we make a parametric assumption

about F1(t). Assuming F1(t) is the cumulative normal distribution with mean µ1 and

variance σ12 would reduce equation (33) to three parameters. The number of parameters

does not increase, moreover, as we consider the expression evaluated at different values

of t. By forcing the equation to hold for many values of t, we therefore have more

equations than unknowns and can easily identify the model’s parameters.

            The preceding arguments scale-up to any number of occupations (although the

denominator in the right-hand-side expression of (33) becomes more complicated). We

can, therefore, estimate the model in our occupational sorting context by forming a

minimum-distance criterion function based on equation (33).                               In our application,

minimizing this objective function requires us to search over a high-dimensional

parameter space (i.e., forty-three means, forty-three variances, and forty-two taste

parameters, which could then be regressed on job attributes as in equation (16)).33 We

make one further simplifying assumption in order to facilitate estimation – that the taste

parameter can be written as a function of observable occupation attributes: τ j = X ′j β .



33
     In this unrestricted specification, one of the taste parameters must still be normalized to zero.


                                                         33
We therefore need to only estimate eight β parameters instead of a separate τj for each

occupation.

         Table 9 describes the outcome of this estimation procedure applied to the sample

of male hourly workers earning more than the federal minimum wage.34 We evaluate a

minimum distance criterion function based on (33) at 200 values of log-wages evenly

spaced between 0.25 and 4.25.35 Standard errors are bootstrapped from 800 re-samples.

Because we are modeling log-wages, the coefficient on fatality risk needs to be multiplied

by the wage rate before being converted into a VSL. We use the average wage rate in the

sample ($13.16). The result is a statistically significant VSL estimate of $8.05 million,

which is smaller than that recovered by our first estimator, but more than four times larger

than the comparable estimate from the wage-hedonic model in Table 7b (i.e., $1.756

million).

         Although the assumptions and methodology used to arrive at this estimate differ

dramatically from those in the previous section, the result is remarkably similar.

Controlling for Roy sorting, we recover a VSL that is three to four times greater than that

derived from traditional wage-hedonics.              Taken together, the results of these two

methodological approaches lead us to conclude that the VSL based on traditional wage-

hedonic techniques is indeed biased downward by Roy sorting.




34
   Specifically, we apply the procedure to the “purged” wage data that were created by removing the
variation in wages explained by observable worker attributes (i.e., ξi,j from equation (20)).
35
   Bayer, Khan, and Timmins (2007) describe the details of this procedure. For example, we use normal
density kernels and a Silverman’s rule of thumb to approximate ψ j (t ) . Ψ j (t ) is measured non-
parametrically as a step-function.


                                                   34
8. CONCLUSIONS

       The effect of individual unobservable heterogeneity (i.e., productivity) on

estimates of the value of a statistical life has been addressed in previous work, but

occupational (Roy) sorting based on idiosyncratic returns is absent from the literature on

VSL. We demonstrate that this type of sorting has the potential to bias wage-hedonic

estimates of the VSL.     Recovering the size and direction of that bias is a difficult

empirical problem that depends partly upon the relative variances of the unconditional

sector-specific wage distributions.

       We first demonstrate a way to deal with Roy sorting bias without recovering the

unconditional wage distributions and without relying upon distributional assumptions.

Doing so requires the relatively innocuous assumption that wage distributions have finite

lower bounds. In addition to controlling for the biases induced by Roy sorting, this non-

parametric estimator also corrects for biases resulting from unobserved productivity, of

the sort described by Hwang et al (1992). It is, moreover, easy to use – everything

(except standard errors) can be calculated with a spreadsheet. Finally, it can be expanded

to use better data sets (e.g., a finer gradation of occupation/sector, like those used by

Kniesner et al (2006) or Scotten and Taylor (2007). In so doing, however, it does also

require the strong practical assumption that we can accurately measure the minimum

order statistic associated with conditional wage distribution. For some (small, noisy) data

sets, this will clearly not be the case. In response to this concern, we offer a second

estimation strategy that does not impose strict data requirements but that does require an

independence assumption on wage draws when using cross-sectional data.                 The

conclusions of both models are that traditional wage-hedonic techniques yield




                                            35
significantly downwardly biased estimates of the VSL.          That bias is big enough,

moreover, to matter for policy. Estimates for men rise by a factor of three or more while

estimates for women become positive and of similar magnitude as those for men. These

estimates suggest that substantially larger valuations should be used in cost-benefit

analyses of environmental, workplace, and job safety regulations than is current practice.




REFERENCES

Alberini, A., M. Cropper, A. Krupnick, and N. Simon (2004). “Does the value of a
statistical life vary with age and health status? Evidence from the US and Canada.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 48:869-792.

Ashenfelter, O. and M. Greenstone (2004). “Using Mandated Speed Limits to Measure
the Value of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Political Economy. 112:S226-S267.

Atkinson, S.E. and R. Halvorsen (1990). “The Valuation of Risks to Life: Evidence from
the Market for Automobiles.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 72(1):133-136.

Bayer, P., S. Khan, and C. Timmins (2007). “Nonparametric Identification and
Estimation in a Generalized Roy Model.” Mimeo, Duke University Department of
Economics.

Bajari, P. and M.E. Kahn (2005). “Estimating Housing Demand With an Application to
Explaining Racial Segregation in Cities.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.
23(1):20-33.

Black, D.A. and T.J. Kniesner (2003). “On the Measurement of Job Risk in Hedonic
Wage Models.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 27(3):205-220.

Blomquist, G. (1979). “Value of Life Saving: Implications from Consumption Activity.”
Journal of Political Economy. 87(3):540-58.

Brown, C. (1980). “Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 94(1):113-34.

Carlin, P. and R. Sandy (1991). “Estimating the Implicit Value of a Young Child’s Life.”
Southern Economic Journal. 58(1): 186-202.




                                            36
Costa, D. and M. Kahn (2004). “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940-1980.” The Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty. 29(2):159-180.

DeLeire, T. and H. Levy (2004). “Worker Sorting and the Risk of Death on the Job.”
Journal of Labor Economics. 22(4): 925-954.

Dreyfus, M.K. and W.K. Viscusi (1995). “Rates of Time Preference and Consumer
Valuations of Automobile Safety and Fuel Efficiency.” Journal of Law and Economics.
38(1):79-105.

Gayer, T., J.T. Hamilton, and W.K. Viscusi (2000). “Private Values of Risk Tradeoffs at
Superfund Sites: Housing Market Evidence on Learning About Risk.” Review of
Economics and Statistics. 82(3):439-451.

Gill, R.D. (1980). Censoring and Stochastic Integrals. Mathematical Centre Tracts, 124.
Mathematical Centrum, Amsterdam.

Hakes, J. and W.K. Viscusi (2007). “Automobile Seatbelt Usage and the Value of
Statistical Life.” Southern Economic Journal. 73(3):659-676.

Heckman, J.J. (1990).   “Varieties of Selection Bias.”   American Economic Review.
80(2):313-18.

Heckman, J.J. and B. Honore (1990). “The Empirical Content of the Roy Model.”
Econometrica. 58:1121-1149.

Hersch, J. and T.S. Pickton (1995). “Risk-Taking Activities and Heterogeneity in Job-
Risk Tradeoffs.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 11(3):205-217.

Hersch, J. and W.K. Viscusi (1990). “Cigarette Smoking, Seatbelt Use, and Differences
in Wage-Risk Tradeoffs.” Journal of Human Resources. 25(2):202-227.

Hwang, H., W.R. Reed, and C. Hubbard (1992). “Compensating Wage Differentials and
Unobserved Productivity.” Journal of Political Economy. 100(4): 835-858.

Kniesner, .J., W.K. Viscusi, C. Woock, and J.P. Ziliak (2006). “Pinning Down the Value
of Statistical Life.” Center for Policy Research Working Paper 85, Maxwell School,
Syracuse University.

Li, S. (2006). “The Social Costs of the “Arms Race” on American Roads: Evidence from
Automobile Demand.” Mimeo, Duke University Department of Economics.

Portney, P.R. (1981). “Housing Prices, Health Effects, and Valuing Reductions in Risk
of Death.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management. 8:72-78.




                                          37
Revesz, R. (1999). “Environmental Regulation, Cost-Benefit Analysis, and the
Discounting of Human Lives.” Columbia Law Review. 99:941-1017.

Rosen, S. (1986). “The Theory of Equalizing Differences.” In Handbook of Labor
Economics, Vol. 1. ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, pp.641-92.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Roy, A.D. (1951). “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic
Papers. 3:135-146.

Savage, I. (1993). “An Empirical Investigation into the Effect of Psychological
Perception on the Willingness to Pay to Reduce Risk.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty.
6:75-90.

Scotten, C. and L. Taylor (2007). “Of Cab Drivers and Coal Miners: Accounting for Risk
Heterogeneity in Value of Statistical Life Estimates.” Mimeo.

Shogren, J.F. and T. Stamland (2002). “Skill and the Value of Life.” Journal of Political
Economy. 110(5):1168-1197.

Smith, V.K., M. Evans, H. Kim, and D. Taylor (2004). “Do the Near-Elderly Value
Mortality Risks Differently?” Review of Economics and Statistics. 86(1):423-429.

Thaler, R. and S. Rosen (1975). “The Value of Saving a Life: Evidence from the Labor
Markets.” In N.E. Terleckyj (ed.), Household Production and Consumption. New York:
Columbia University Press. pp.265-300.

Viscusi, W.K. (1992). Fatal Tradeoffs: Public and Private Responsibilities for Risk.
New York: Oxford University Press.

________. (2003). “Racial Differences in Labor Market Values of a Statistical Life.”
Journal or Risk and Uncertainty. 27:3:239-256.

Viscusi,, W.K. and J. Aldy (2003). “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of
Market Estimates Throughout the World.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty. 27(1):5-76.

________. “Adjusting the Value of a Statistical Life for Age and Cohort Effects.” RFF
Discussion Paper 06-19.

Viscusi, W.K. and J. Hersch (2001). “Cigarette Smokers as Job Risk Takers.” Review of
Economics and Statistics. 83(2):269-280.




                                           38
                                   Table 1
            Determinants of Job Characteristics Based on DOT Data



Factor 1 SUBSTANTIVECOMPLEXITY
         DATAL (complexity of function in relation to data)
         GED (general educational development)
         INTELL (intelligence)
         NUMERCL (numerical aptitude)
         REPCON (Adaptability to performing repetitive work)
         SJC (sensor or judgmental criteria)
         SVP (specific vocational preparation)
         VERBAL (verbal aptitude)

Factor 2 MOTOR SKILLS
         CLRDISC (color discrimination)
         FNGRDXT (finger dexterity)
         MNLDXTY (manual dexterity)
         MTRCRD (motor coordination)
         THINGS (complexity in relation to things)

Factor 3 PHYSICAL DEMANDS
         CLIMB (climbing, balancing)
         EYHNFTC (eye-hand-foot coordination)
         HAZARDS (hazardous conditions)
         OUT (outside working conditions)
         STOOP (stooping, kneeling, crouching, crawling)

Factor 4 WORKING CONDITION
         COLD (extreme cold)
         HEAT (extreme heat)
         WET (wet, humid)

Factor 5 CREATIVE SKILLS
         ABSCREAT (abstract & creative activities)
         FIF (feelings, ideas or facts)

Factor 6 INTPEOPLE
         PEOPLE (interaction with people)




                                      39
                                                            Table 2 (a)
                                                        Occupation Attributes

Occupation                                FATAL    NONFATAL   SCMPLX      MSKILL    PHYDDS     WORCON     CSKILL    INTPEOPLE
3-6: Pub. Admin.                          0.0018     0.0000     0.6879     1.1353    -0.2425     0.6505   -0.1907     -0.2694
7-22: Other Exec.                         0.0020     1.4982     0.6143     1.1082    -0.4853    -0.3941   -0.1763     -0.3935
23-37: Management                         0.0009     1.3879     0.9138     1.1947    -0.7276    -0.4849   -0.1829     -0.2586
44-59: Engineers                          0.0023     1.0150     1.3207    -0.9070    -0.4879    -0.4232    0.4608     -1.3702
64-68: Mathematical and Comp Sci          0.0004     0.6365     1.1708     1.3192    -0.6439    -0.5881   -0.0977     -0.2871
69-83: Natural scientists                 0.0023     0.8725     1.3793    -0.9374    -0.3347     0.3333    0.0038     -1.3461
84-89: Health diagnosers                  0.0011     1.8691     1.8017    -3.1622    -0.5097    -0.5521   -0.4203     -3.1264
95-106: Health assess & treat             0.0007     5.1230     0.6012    -0.9513    -0.4469    -0.5923   -0.3494     -0.4050
113-154: Professors                       0.0005     0.2670     1.6046     1.4303    -0.8375    -0.5982   -0.1342     -0.8641
155-159: Teachers (exc. coll.)            0.0005     1.2979     0.9016     0.3525    -0.3597    -0.5881    0.9809     -1.0559
178-179: Lawyers & judges                 0.0012     0.3306     2.0665     1.7181    -0.9118    -0.6018    4.1324     -1.6702
43,63,163-177,183-199: Oth. prof. spec.   0.0011     2.2276     1.1812     0.1353    -0.5487    -0.0945    4.1225     -1.2298
203-208: Health tech.                     0.0009     8.6382     0.0277    -1.0334    -0.3174    -0.4868   -0.3592     -0.1885
213-225: Eng/sci tech.                    0.0020     4.2027     0.5435    -1.4970    -0.4499    -0.4413   -0.0645     -0.7843
226-235: Tech, not eng/sci                0.0096     5.5567     0.7081     0.4057    -0.5408    -0.5718   -0.0134     -0.5043
243: Sales supervisors                    0.0033     3.5027     0.4089     1.0263    -0.2950    -0.3658   -0.0998     -0.2668
253-257: Sales reps and business          0.0012     1.5427     0.6899     1.2582    -0.8207    -0.5888   -0.3644      0.2252
258-259: Sales reps, non-retail comm.     0.0016     2.0476     0.2529     1.0859    -0.8616    -0.5615   -0.3929      0.3773
263-278: Sales work, retail & svc.        0.0020     5.3078    -0.4732    -0.2793    -0.7061    -0.5062   -0.3788      0.4036
283-285: Sales-related occupations        0.0000     5.8560    -0.0287    -0.0613    -0.8066    -0.5784    0.7758      0.2225
                                                          Table 2 (b)
                                                      Occupation Attributes

Occupation                              FATAL    NONFATAL   SCMPLX     MSKILL    PHYDDS     WORCON     CSKILL    INTPEOPLE
303-307: Admin. Supervisors             0.0004     2.6672     0.1349    0.3182    -0.6802    -0.4804   -0.3788     -0.1069
308-309: Computer operators             0.0000     1.7641    -0.0650   -0.4041    -0.5568    -0.6022   -0.4023     -0.4457
313-315: Secretaries                    0.0003     2.0029     0.3957   -1.9561    -0.9030    -0.5939   -0.4176     -0.4713
337-344: Fin. record process            0.0002     2.1631    -0.1916   -0.4688    -0.8965    -0.5598   -0.4209      0.1085
354-357: Mail/msg dist.                 0.0025    11.5449    -1.1516    0.5619    -0.6374    -0.4628   -0.4289      1.1268
316-336,345-353,359-389: other admin.   0.0005     6.3292    -0.3962    0.5455    -0.7559    -0.4331   -0.3810      0.3642
403-407: Pvt. hh service                0.0007     0.0000    -1.3641    0.7072     0.2214    -0.5826   -0.4251      1.4478
413-427: Protective svc.                0.0086     7.7154    -0.6374    0.6563     0.7423     1.0386   -0.4224      0.7100
433-444: Food service                   0.0009     8.8127    -0.8628    0.4484    -0.3909     2.1472   -0.1096      0.6795
445-447: Health service                 0.0008    24.1017    -0.8532   -0.2811     0.6658    -0.3933   -0.3731      0.9321
448-455: Cleaning/bldg svc.             0.0020    13.8845    -1.5140    0.3170     1.1338    -0.2767   -0.4196      1.4232
456-469: Personal svc.                  0.0014     9.1429    -0.4508   -0.5895    -0.2467    -0.4406    1.3130      0.3487
503-549: Mechanics & repairers          0.0053    15.2240    -0.0444   -1.3110     0.7587     0.3971   -0.4063     -0.6087
553-599: Construction trades            0.0068    22.5577    -0.0188   -0.9502     2.2933    -0.1960   -0.3797     -0.2826
613-699: Other precision production     0.0029    13.6475    -0.5258   -1.0338     0.0501     1.6055   -0.3601      0.2105
703-779: Machine operators              0.0024    22.6953    -1.2204   -0.3437    -0.1057     0.8997   -0.3738      0.9643
783-799: Fabricators, inspectors        0.0028    17.8286    -1.2994   -0.4417    -0.0571     0.6781   -0.3785      1.2154
803-814: Motor vehicle operators        0.0176    35.6393    -1.3383   -0.3606     0.7426    -0.4457   -0.4160      0.7532
823-859: Other transportation           0.0166    29.2157    -1.1876   -0.0819     1.1613     0.4532   -0.4187      1.1319
864-889: Construction, freight, labor   0.0110    34.9962    -1.6291    0.4910     1.0768     3.8833   -0.4244      1.7816
473-476: Farm managers                  0.0094     0.3968     0.4685    0.2723     2.3756    -0.4168   -0.4280     -1.0789
477-489: Farm workers                   0.0117    11.4986    -1.3619    0.3021     2.6532    -0.1571   -0.3915      1.5059
494-499: Forestry & fishing             0.0872    35.0779    -1.2595    0.2617     2.6898     2.9723   -0.4088      1.0820




                                                               41
                                                                Table 3: Worker Attributes36

                                                                         Men                                        Women
                                                           Low Risk              High Risk              Low Risk                High Risk
                     Sample Size                            107,140               519,970                412,307                 281,131
                     Wage                                    13.12                 13.17                  12.14                   9.81
                     AGE                                     31.82                 34.03                  35.77                   35.38
                     MARRIED                                  0.39                  0.54                   0.56                    0.51
                     UNION                                    1.97                  1.96                   1.97                    1.98
                     MSA                                      0.81                  0.70                   0.74                    0.70
                     FULLTIME                                 0.71                  0.85                   0.63                    0.66
                     WHITE                                    0.82                  0.86                   0.85                    0.82
                     HSDROP                                   0.13                  0.22                   0.08                    0.20
                     HSGRAD                                   0.27                  0.45                   0.38                    0.46
                     SOMECOLL                                 0.36                  0.26                   0.38                    0.25
                     COLLGRAD                                 0.24                  0.07                   0.17                    0.08
                     NEW ENGLAND                              0.08                  0.08                   0.09                    0.09
                     MID ATLANTIC                             0.12                  0.11                   0.13                    0.11
                     E. N. CENTRAL                            0.14                  0.14                   0.16                    0.15
                     W. N. CENTRAL                            0.10                  0.10                   0.12                    0.10
                     SOUTH ATLANTIC                           0.16                  0.19                   0.16                    0.19
                     E. S. CENTRAL                            0.04                  0.06                   0.05                    0.07
                     W. S. CENTRAL                            0.08                  0.10                   0.08                    0.09
                     MOUNTAIN                                 0.12                  0.10                   0.09                    0.09
                     PACIFIC                                  0.16                  0.12                   0.12                    0.11




36
     This table describes the sample of hourly wage workers, excluding all those who earn less than the federal minimum wage.




                                                                                42
                                     Table 4a
                           Wage-Hedonic Model Estimates
                              Dependent variable: wage
                         (1)              (2)             (3)                     (4)
Sample                  Men              Men            Women                   Women
                      Age 18-60       Age 18-60        Age 18-60               Age 18-60
Worker Attributes
HSDROP                   -1.450             -1.492             -0.794             -1.017
                    (-1.521, -1.378)   (-1.562, -1.419)   (-0.860, -0.723)   (-1.081, -0.947)
SOMECOLL                  0.320              0.692             1.076               1.199
                     (0.240, 0.392)     (0.548, 0.830)     (1.016, 1.145)     (1.040, 1.342)
COLLGRAD                  3.013              2.856             4.423               4.156
                     (2.828, 3.218)     (2.648, 3.079)     (4.292, 4.558)     (3.963, 4.344)
AGE                       0.574              0.644             0.433               0.452
                     (0.553, 0.595)     (0.622, 0.644)     (0.417, 0.450)     (0.435, 0.470)
AGE2                     -0.006             -0.006             -0.005             -0.005
                    (-0.006, -0.005)   (-0.006, -0.005)   (-0.005, -0.004)   (-0.005, -0.004)
BLACK                    -1.335             -1.303             -0.503             -0.516
                    (-1.444, -1.231)   (-1.417, -1.199)   (-0.577, -0.415)   (-0.593, -0.433)
OTHER                    -0.990             -0.896             -0.204             -0.199
                    (-1.190, -0.782)   (-1.084, -0.691)   (-0.378, -0.048)   (-0.362, -0.048)
HISPANIC                 -1.367             -1.416             -0.548             -0.584
                    (-1.464, -1.272)   (-1.509, -1.322)   (-0.638, -0.459)   (-0.673, -0.497)
MARRIED                   1.242              1.183             0.206               0.187
                     (1.164, 1.323)     (1.106, 1.262)     (0.145, 0.267)     (0.130, 0.245)
PUBLIC                    1.157              1.040             0.499               0.448
                     (1.011, 1.304)     (0.897, 1.190)     (0.392, 0.607)     (0.344, 0.553)
UNION                    -2.489             -2.486             -1.877             -1.834
                    (-2.689, -2.300)   (-2.684, -2.296)   (-2.096, -1.658)   (-2.050, -1.625)
MSA                       0.966              0.974             1.022               1.049
                     (0.894, 1.036)     (0.902, 1.045)     (0.964, 1.085)     (0.993, 1.111)
FULLTIME                  1.112              1.084             0.651               0.715
                     (1.010, 1.206)     (0.980, 1.172)     (0.591, 0.711)     (0.657, 0.775)
                                                                   Table 4a (continued)
                                                              Wage-Hedonic Model Estimates37
                                                                 Dependent variable: wage

       Occupation Attributes                            (1)                                   (2)               (3)                  (4)
       FATAL                                          24.531                                14.128           -46.452              -24.612
                                                (16.930 , 32.667)                     (6.495 , 22.219) (-58.770 , -33.982) (-37.084 , -12.707)
       NONFATAL                                        0.098                                -0.009            0.100                0.022
                                                  (0.093 , 0.104)                      (-0.025 , 0.006)  (0.094 , 0.106)      (0.005 , 0.039)
       SCMPLX                                          5.679                                -1.362            4.274                -1.200
                                                  (5.443 , 5.908)                     (-2.098 , -0.642)  (4.088 , 4.457)     (-1.824 , -0.593)
       MSKILL                                         -1.447                                -1.080            -0.388               -0.111
                                                 (-1.541 , -1.354)                    (-1.372 , -0.784) (-0.435 , -0.340)     (-0.270 , 0.048)
       PHYDDS                                         -0.413                                 0.655            0.734                -0.744
                                                 (-0.456 , -0.373)                     (0.535 , 0.767)   (0.668 , 0.814)     (-0.988 , -0.534)
       WORCON                                          0.125                                0.011             0.153                -0.087
                                                  (0.096 , 0.153)                      (-0.075 , 0.098)  (0.124 , 0.182)     (-0.177 , -0.002)
       CSKILL                                         -0.346                                -0.328            -0.805               -0.248
                                                 (-0.437 , -0.248)                    (-0.650 , -0.007) (-0.864 , -0.744)    (-0.441 , -0.034)
       INTPEOPLE                                       2.738                                0.228             0.852                -0.228
                                                  (2.497 , 2.962)                      (-0.465 , 0.919)  (0.610 , 1.069)      (-1.046 , 0.529)
       Constant                                        4.728                                2.524             4.934                3.803
                                                  (4.192 , 5.328)                      (1.997 , 3.148)   (4.391 , 5.477)      (3.224 , 4.375)
       Worker-Occupation Attribute Interactions         No                                    Yes               No                  Yes
       Regional                                         Yes                                   Yes              Yes                  Yes
       Indicators
       R2                                             0.3283                               0.3502                   0.3293                    0.3513
       N                                              627110                               627110                   693438                    693438



37
  Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals (in brackets) are clustered to reflect the fact that occupation attributes are the same for all workers in a particular
occupation.
                                     Table 4b
                           Wage-Hedonic Model Estimates
                            Dependent variable: log wage

                         (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
Sample                  Men                Men               Women              Women
                      Age 18-60          Age 18-60          Age 18-60          Age 18-60
Worker Attributes
HSDROP                   -0.118             -0.119             -0.089             -0.102
                    (-0.124, -0.113)   (-0.124, -0.114)   (-0.094, -0.083)   (-0.108, -0.097)
SOMECOLL                 0.019              0.048              0.083              0.089
                     (0.014, 0.024)     (0.038, 0.057)     (0.079, 0.087)     (0.079, 0.100)
COLLGRAD                 0.128              0.134              0.274              0.257
                     (0.120, 0.138)     (0.123, 0.146)     (0.267, 0.281)     (0.245, 0.269)
AGE                      0.048              0.051              0.037              0.038
                     (0.047, 0.049)     (0.049, 0.052)     (0.036, 0.038)     (0.037, 0.039)
AGE2                     -0.001             -0.001             0.000              0.000
                    (-0.001, 0.000)    (-0.001, -0.001)    (0.000, 0.000)     (0.000, 0.000)
BLACK                    -0.103             -0.100             -0.043             -0.044
                    (-0.110, -0.096)   (-0.108, -0.093)   (-0.049, -0.038)   (-0.049, -0.038)
OTHER                    -0.071             -0.067             -0.021             -0.021
                    (-0.083, -0.060)   (-0.078, -0.056)   (-0.032, -0.012)   (-0.031, -0.012)
HISPANIC                 -0.105             -0.106             -0.046             -0.047
                    (-0.111, -0.098)   (-0.112, -0.099)   (-0.052, -0.040)   (-0.054, -0.042)
MARRIED                  0.096              0.093              0.021              0.019
                     (0.091, 0.101)     (0.088, 0.098)     (0.017, 0.025)     (0.016, 0.023)
PUBLIC                   0.084              0.079              0.047              0.044
                     (0.077, 0.092)     (0.071, 0.087)     (0.040, 0.054)     (0.038, 0.051)
UNION                    -0.173             -0.172             -0.145             -0.142
                    (-0.184, -0.162)   (-0.184, -0.161)   (-0.158, -0.131)   (-0.155, -0.129)
MSA                      0.068              0.069              0.090              0.091
                     (0.064, 0.073)     (0.064, 0.073)     (0.085, 0.094)     (0.087, 0.095)
FULLTIME                 0.114              0.112              0.087              0.089
                     (0.109, 0.120)     (0.106, 0.118)     (0.083, 0.090)     (0.085, 0.093)
                                                                   Table 4b (continued)
                                                              Wage-Hedonic Model Estimates38
                                                               Dependent variable: log wage

           Occupation Attributes                           (1)                                 (2)                     (3)                    (4)
           FATAL                                          0.667                              0.388                   -2.280                 -1.123
                                                    (0.190 , 1.194)                     (-0.098 , 0.893)        (-3.103 , -1.486)      (-1.984 , -0.345)
           NONFATAL                                       0.008                               0.004                   0.009                  0.006
                                                    (0.008 , 0.009)                     (0.003 , 0.005)         (0.008 , 0.009)        (0.004 , 0.007)
           SCMPLX                                         0.372                               0.166                   0.312                  0.064
                                                    (0.359 , 0.383)                     (0.129 , 0.205)         (0.302 , 0.323)        (0.030 , 0.098)
           MSKILL                                        -0.110                              -0.110                  -0.029                 -0.012
                                                    (-0.115 , -0.104)                   (-0.127 , -0.093)       (-0.032 , -0.026)      (-0.022 , -0.001)
           PHYDDS                                        -0.027                               0.030                   0.041                 -0.025
                                                    (-0.029 , -0.024)                   (0.022 , 0.038)         (0.036 , 0.045)        (-0.040 , -0.010)
           WORCON                                         0.003                              -0.007                   0.004                 -0.007
                                                    (0.001 , 0.005)                     (-0.013 , -0.001)       (0.002 , 0.006)        (-0.014 , 0.000)
           CSKILL                                        -0.027                              -0.038                  -0.066                 -0.047
                                                    (-0.031 , -0.022)                   (-0.055 , -0.022)       (-0.070 , -0.063)      (-0.059 , -0.035)
           INTPEOPLE                                      0.176                               0.148                   0.049                  0.005
                                                    (0.163 , 0.189)                     (0.112 , 0.186)         (0.036 , 0.061)        (-0.040 , 0.049)
           Constant                                       1.724                               1.630                   1.743                  1.688
                                                    (1.692 , 1.760)                     (1.595 , 1.669)         (1.709 , 1.776)        (1.652 , 1.725)
           Worker-Occupation Attribute Interactions        No                                  Yes                     No                     Yes
           Regional                                        Yes                                 Yes                     Yes                    Yes
           Indicators
           R2                                            0.3944                               0.4046                 0.3977                 0.4106
           N                                             627110                               627110                 693438                 693438




38
  Bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals (in brackets) are clustered to reflect the fact that occupation attributes are the same for all workers in a particular
occupation.
                                            Table 5a
                Minimum Order Statistic Estimator, First Stage (Worker Attributes)
                                  Dependent variable: wage

                                 (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)
Sample                          Men               Men               Women               Women
                              Age 18-60         Age 18-60          Age 18-60           Age 18-60
Worker-Occupation                No               Yes                 No                 Yes
Attribute Interactions
Constant                        -5.624             -6.006             -3.708              -4.144
                           (-5.737, -5.508)   (-6.121, -5.887)   (-3.802, -3.610)    (-4.240, -4.050)
HSDROP                          -1.203             -1.254             -0.553              -0.706
                           (-1.268, -1.140)   (-1.321, -1.191)   (-0.605, -0.496)    (-0.760, -0.649)
SOMECOLL                        0.058              0.203              0.181               0.388
                           (-0.004, 0.117)     (0.090, 0.309)     (0.131, 0.231)      (0.275, 0.486)
COLLGRAD                        1.312              1.873              2.075               2.529
                            (1.202, 1.437)     (1.724, 2.037)     (1.993, 2.160)      (2.403, 2.651)
AGE                             0.449              0.458              0.299               0.308
                            (0.430, 0.468)     (0.439, 0.478)     (0.289, 0.312)      (0.295, 0.321)
AGE2                            -0.004             -0.005             -0.003              -0.003
                           (-0.005, -0.004)   (-0.005, -0.004)   (-0.003, -0.003)    (-0.003, -0.003)
BLACK                           -1.007             -1.129             -0.194              -0.278
                           (-1.100, -0.921)   (-1.220, -1.041)   (-0.255, -0.127)    (-0.341, -0.207)
OTHER                           -0.760             -0.814             -0.088              -0.189
                           (-0.899, -0.603)   (-0.955, -0.659)   (-0.212, 0.024)     (-0.317, -0.074)
HISPANIC                        -1.184             -1.275             -0.456              -0.532
                           (-1.268, -1.100)   (-1.357, -1.190)   (-0.526, -0.381)    (-0.603, -0.457)
MARRIED                         0.884              0.958              0.039               0.097
                            (0.821, 0.949)     (0.892, 1.021)    (-0.006, 0.088)      (0.052, 0.145)
PUBLIC                          0.344              0.395              0.162               0.290
                            (0.231, 0.445)     (0.282, 0.505)     (0.086, 0.233)      (0.213, 0.362)
UNION                           -2.483             -2.461             -1.564              -1.549
                           (-2.651, -2.307)   (-2.628, -2.288)   (-1.741, -1.390)    (-1.731, -1.375)
MSA                             0.762              0.826              0.869               0.928
                            (0.698, 0.823)     (0.762, 0.887)     (0.824, 0.915)      (0.884, 0.974)
FULLTIME                        0.847              0.904              0.492               0.562
                            (0.766, 0.925)     (0.820, 0.984)     (0.448, 0.537)      (0.517, 0.607)
Regional                         Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
Indicators
R2                             0.1463             0.1530             0.0964              0.1037
N                              627110             627110             693438              693438




                                               47
                                                                     Table 5b
                                      Minimum Order Statistic Estimator, Second Stage (Occupation Attributes)39
                                                             Dependent variable: wage

                                               (1)                               (2)                                (3)                                (4)
Sample                                        Men                               Men                              Women                              Women
                                          Age 18-60                         Age 18-60                          Age 18-60                          Age 18-60
Constant                                     -2.203                            -1.628                              2.225                              2.218
                                       (-3.500, 0.374)                   ( -3.042, 0.740)                    (1.187, 2.764)                     (1.213, 3.219)
FATAL                                       -67.145                           -59.978                            -39.747                            -58.782
                                     (-82.070, -27.816)                (-81.406, -22.040)                 (-65.413, -21.154)                 (-71.257, -36.302)
NONFATAL                                      0.073                             0.033                              0.008                              0.002
                                        (0.006, 0.093)                   (-0.029, 0.063)                     (-0.048, 0.034)                    (-0.054, 0.026)
SCMPLX                                       -0.794                            -1.986                             -0.839                             -2.149
                                       (-1.280, 0.860)                   ( -2.281, 0.041)                    (-1.214, 0.561)                   (-2.448, -0.593)
MSKILL                                        0.395                             0.636                              0.243                              0.408
                                       (-0.199, 0.602)                   (-0.143, 0.763)                    ( -0.438, 0.344)                    (-0.304, 0.477)
PHYDDS                                        0.109                             0.336                             -0.446                             -0.408
                                       ( -0.298, 0.469)                  (-0.144, 0.725)                    (-0.650, -0.059)                   (-0.639, -0.036)
WORCON                                        0.285                             0.556                              0.107                              0.105
                                       (-0.121, 0.614)                    (0.175, 0.896)                    ( -0.157, 0.368)                    (-0.203, 0.353)
CSKILL                                       -0.059                             0.243                              0.174                              0.219
                                       (-0.322, 0.294)                   (-0.005, 0.670)                     (-0.002, 0.536)                    (0.050, 0.583)
INTPEOPLE                                    -0.617                            -1.247                             -0.322                             -0.942
                                       ( -0.918, 1.376)                  (-1.366, 1.145)                     (-0.468, 1.327)                    (-0.952, 0.920)




39
     Confidence intervals (in brackets) are based on the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the distribution of bootstrapped parameter estimates.




                                                                                    48
                                            Table 6a
                Minimum Order Statistic Estimator, First Stage (Worker Attributes)
                                Dependent variable: log wage
                                 (1)               (2)                (3)                 (4)
Sample                          Men               Men               Women               Women
                              Age 18-60         Age 18-60          Age 18-60           Age 18-60
Worker-Occupation                No               Yes                 No                 Yes
Attribute Interactions
Constant                        -0.530             -0.564             -0.344              -0.382
                           (-0.540, -0.521)   (-0.571, -0.556)   (-0.351, -0.337)    (-3.899, -3.874)
HSDROP                          -0.097             -0.103             -0.061              -0.075
                           (-0.101, -0.092)   (-0.107, -0.098)   (-0.065, -0.057)    (-0.080, -0.071)
SOMECOLL                        0.003              0.026              0.017               0.035
                           (-0.001, 0.007)     (0.018, 0.033)     (0.013, 0.020)      (0.026, 0.042)
COLLGRAD                        0.048              0.100              0.121               0.160
                            (0.042, 0.054)     (0.091, 0.109)     (0.116, 0.126)      (0.151, 0.168)
AGE                             0.038              0.039              0.026               0.027
                            (0.037, 0.040)     (0.038, 0.040)     (0.026, 0.027)      (0.026, 0.028)
AGE2                            -0.000             -0.000             -0.000              -0.000
                           (-0.000, -0.000)   (-0.000, -0.000)   (-0.000, -0.000)    (-0.000, -0.000)
BLACK                           -0.076             -0.088             -0.019              -0.027
                           (-0.082, -0.070)   (-0.094, -0.081)   (-0.024, -0.014)    (-0.031, -0.022)
OTHER                           -0.049             -0.054             -0.007              -0.016
                           (-0.057, -0.040)   (-0.063, -0.046)   (-0.015, 0.000)     (-0.024, -0.009)
HISPANIC                        -0.087             -0.095             -0.040              -0.047
                           (-0.092, -0.081)   (-0.100, -0.090)   (-0.046, -0.035)    (-0.053, -0.042)
MARRIED                         0.068              0.075              0.008               0.013
                            (0.064, 0.072)     (0.071, 0.079)     (0.005, 0.011)      (0.010, 0.016)
PUBLIC                          0.030              0.032              0.020               0.031
                            (0.024, 0.036)     (0.026, 0.039)     (0.015, 0.025)      (0.026, 0.035)
UNION                           -0.168             -0.167             -0.126              -0.125
                           (-0.177, -0.158)   (-0.176, -0.157)   (-0.137, -0.114)    (-0.135, -0.113)
MSA                             0.060              0.065              0.077               0.082
                            (0.056, 0.064)     (0.061, 0.069)     (0.074, 0.080)      (0.079, 0.085)
FULLTIME                        0.096              0.101              0.065               0.072
                            (0.091, 0.101)     (0.096, 0.106)     (0.062, 0.068)      (0.069, 0.075)
Regional                         Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes
Indicators
R2                             0.2018             0.2126             0.1385              0.1507
N                              627110             627110             693438              693438




                                               49
                                                                     Table 6b
                                      Minimum Order Statistic Estimator, Second Stage (Occupation Attributes)40

                                             (1)                               (2)                                (3)                                 (4)
Sample                                      Men                               Men                               Women                               Women
                                          Age 18-60                         Age 18-60                          Age 18-60                           Age 18-60
Worker-Occupation                            No                               Yes                                 No                                 Yes
Attribute Interactions
Constant                                    -0.170                             -0.130                              0.166                                0.162
                                      ( -0.277, 0.006)                    (-0.237, 0.050)                    (0.072, 0.236)                       (0.068, 0.290)
FATAL                                       -3.980                             -3.526                             -1.649                               -3.343
                                      (-6.649, -1.637)                   ( -6.858, -1.117)                  (-6.751, -0.701)                     ( -6.964, -1.627)
NONFATAL                                     0.004                              0.002                           3.434E-04                           -2.099E-04
                                       (0.001, 0.008)                     (-0.002, 0.005)                   ( -0.004, 0.004)                      (-0.005, 0.002)
SCMPLX                                      -0.047                             -0.129                             -0.082                               -0.183
                                      ( -0.124, 0.063)                   (-0.192, -0.003)                    (-0.127, 0.032)                     (-0.225, -0.050)
MSKILL                                       0.006                              0.023                              0.012                                0.026
                                      ( -0.020, 0.049)                    (-0.013, 0.062)                    ( -.035, 0.035)                      (-0.028, 0.045)
PHYDDS                                       0.016                              0.026                             -0.037                               -0.029
                                       (-.0178, 0.045)                    (-0.006, 0.058)                   (-0.056, -0.010)                     (-0.062, -0.004)
WORCON                                       0.017                              0.036                             -0.005                               -0.008
                                       (-0.010, 0.041)                    ( 0.011, 0.062)                    (-0.019, 0.026)                      (-0.025, 0.026)
CSKILL                                      -0.015                              0.021                              0.027                                0.033
                                       (-0.022, 0.014)                   ( -0.002, 0.048)                    (-0.003, 0.054)                      (0.007, 0.064)
INTPEOPLE                                   -0.008                             -0.037                             -0.024                               -0.065
                                      ( -0.081, 0.119)                    (-0.098, 0.105)                    (-0.055, 0.111)                      (-0.082, 0.095)




40
     Confidence intervals (in brackets) are based on the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the distribution of bootstrapped parameter estimates.
                                                      Table 7a: Value of a Statistical Life ($ millions)
                                                                95% Confidence Interval41
                                                                Dependent variable: wage


Sample                                                            Men                    Men                    Women                  Women
                                                                Age 18-60              Age 18-60               Age 18-60              Age 18-60
Worker-Occupation Attribute Interactions                           No                     Yes                      No                   Yes
Wage-Hedonic Model                                                4.906                  2.826                   -9.290                -4.922
                                                             (3.386 , 6.533)        (1.299 , 4.444)        (-11.754 , -6.796)     (-7.417 , -2.541)
Minimum Order Statistic Estimator                                13.429                 11.996                    7.949                11.756
                                                             (5.563, 16.414)        (4.408, 16.281)         (4.231, 13.083)        (7.260, 14.251)
Difference between Wage-Hedonic and
Minimum Order VSL estimates                                       -8.523                 -9.170                  -17.239               -16.678
                                                            (-11.224 , -0.324)     (-13.628 , -1.318)      (-23.003 , -12.522)   (-19.474 , -11.020)




41
     Bootstrapped confidence intervals in brackets.
                                                      Table 7b: Value of a Statistical Life ($ millions)
                                                                95% Confidence Interval42
                                                               Dependent variable: log wage


Sample                                                             Men                    Men                   Women                Women
                                                                Age 18-60              Age 18-60               Age 18-60            Age 18-60
Worker-Occupation Attribute Interactions                            No                    Yes                     No                   Yes
Wage-Hedonic Model                                                1.756                  1.021                  -5.105               -2.515
                                                             (0.500 , 3.138)        (-0.258 , 2.345)       (-6.950 , -3.321)    (-4.441 , -0.771)
Minimum Order Statistic Estimator                                10.476                  9.282                   3.692                7.486
                                                             (4.314, 17.524)        (2.942, 18.069)         (1.570, 15.062)      (3.644, 15.586)
Difference between Wage-Hedonic and
Minimum Order VSL estimates                                       -8.720                 -8.261                  -8.797              -10.001
                                                            (-15.669 , -2.482)     (-16.998 , -2.001)      (-19.815 , -6.231)   (-18.029 , -5.733)




42
     Bootstrapped confidence intervals in brackets.
                           Table 8a: Sensitivity Analysis, Value of a Statistical Life ($ millions)
                                         95% Confidence Interval in Parentheses
                                                 Dependent variable: wage

Specification                                           Men                                       Women
                                       Minimum Order          Wage-Hedonic         Minimum Order        Wage-Hedonic
                                      Statistic Estimator         Model           Statistic Estimator        Model
Salaried Workers                              4.617               7.983                  0.047               42.746
                                       (14.436, 0.473)       (-7.593, 23.559)      (21.902, -6.354)    (-5.071, 90.564)
Un-trimmed Sample                           16.401                5.488                  7.321               -3.404
                                       (23.745, 9.979)      (-7.571, 18.547)        (14.962, 4.598)   (-47.803, 40.995)
Age [20,30)                                  7.173                3.013                  7.614               -8.427
                                       (10.511, 2.928)       (-6.082, 12.108)       (18.218, 3.820)   (-41.768, 24.915)
Age [30, 40)                                 9.080                6.422                  8.873               -4.719
                                       (15.283, 5.079)      ( -6.181, 19.025)       (17.144, 5.468)   (-49.989, 40.551)
Age [40, 50)                                13.218                6.952                  9.999              -11.040
                                       (19.892, 4.999)       (-9.422, 23.326)       (28.204, 5.510)   (-61.749, 39.669)
Age [50, 60)                                 7.328                2.660                  3.713              -14.241
                                       (18.251, 2.429)     ( -15.920, 21.241)      (35.953, -0.875)   (-68.023, 39.540)
Married                                     13.633                4.871                  7.165              -14.453
                                       (18.658, 5.573)      ( -7.671, 17.413)       (15.690, 3.843)   (-61.768, 32.861)
Unmarried                                    7.182                4.899                  8.494               -2.680
                                       (11.227, 2.751)      ( -6.584, 16.383)       (14.856, 4.683)    (-36.09, 30.738)
1983-1992                                   13.544                2.040                  5.992               -9.306
                                       (19.107, 5.760)       (-8.189, 12.269)       (12.055, 2.607)   (-49.188, 30.575)
1993-2002                                    4.824                7.821                  9.745               -9.157
                                       (13.242, 2.100)      ( -6.539, 22.180)       (18.852, 5.628)   (-50.489, 32.175)
Limited Individual Attributes                2.061                6.288                  4.840               -7.083
                                        (8.439, 1.119)       (-6.906, 19.481)       (11.454, 2.551)   (-49.021, 34.856)
No Ag, Forestry, Fishing                    19.669                1.670                  3.279               -7.281
                                      (29.477, -13.157)     (-25.815, 29.155)      (29.505, -6.436)   (-53.776, 39.213)
                           Table 8b: Sensitivity Analysis, Value of a Statistical Life ($ millions)
                                         95% Confidence Interval in Parentheses
                                               Dependent variable: log wage

Specification                                           Men                                       Women
                                       Minimum Order          Wage-Hedonic         Minimum Order       Wage-Hedonic
                                      Statistic Estimator         Model           Statistic Estimator       Model
Salaried Workers                             3.501                 5.452                 9.207             47.685
                                       (20.990, -0.824)     (-12.157, 23.060)     (33.464, -13.112)    (6.198, 89.173)
Un-trimmed Sample                           30.039                 2.612                25.477               7.736
                                       (76.427, 24.211)     (-9.027, 14.251)       (42.099, 12.077)   (-36.581, 52.052)
Age [20,30)                                  6.770                 1.607                 6.631              -5.771
                                        (10.950, 3.214)      (-6.933, 10.147)       (20.805, 2.890)   (-35.248, 23.705)
Age [30, 40)                                12.957                 3.410                 9.767               0.229
                                        (19.599, 8.819)     ( -7.872, 14.692)       (22.001, 5.689)   (-41.364, 41.822)
Age [40, 50)                                16.510                 1.577                 8.363              -4.757
                                       (25.318 , 8.939)     (-12.296, 15.450)       (31.725, 4.185)   (-51.146, 41.631)
Age [50, 60)                                19.629                -2.966                 0.692              -8.018
                                       (25.353, 11.480)    (-19.314 , 13.381)      (37.066, -4.099)   (-56.734, 40.699)
Married                                     11.935                 0.923                 3.079              -9.337
                                        (21.250, 5.677)     (-10.523, 12.369)       (19.239, 0.577)   (-52.308, 33.634)
Unmarried                                    8.873                 2.416                 8.197              -0.224
                                        (12.141, 5.058)     ( -7.035, 11.866)       (15.371, 4.827)   (-29.594, 29.147)
1983-1992                                   13.219                -0.428                 3.074              -5.735
                                        (19.484, 5.922)      (-10.365, 9.508)       (14.057, 0.428)   (-41.116, 29.646)
1993-2002                                    8.994                 4.074                 8.033              -4.719
                                        (15.246, 4.568)     ( -7.492, 15.640)       (22.354, 5.418)   (-41.972, 32.533)
Limited Individual Attributes                3.622                 3.093                 4.020              -3.259
                                        (10.707, 2.212)      (-8.581, 14.766)       (13.051, 1.143)   (-41.794, 35.277)
No Ag, Forestry, Fishing                    16.638                -0.745                 7.451              -3.484
                                      (30.035, -15.094)    ( -28.710, 27.219)     (24.714, -10.541) ( -45.438, 38.470)
  Table 9: Parameter Estimates Based on Normality and Independence Assumptions

Param    Est     S.E.    Param     Est       S.E.       Param        Est     S.E.
  µ1     0.04    0.01      σ1      3.52      1.12    FATAL          -3.06    0.85
  µ2     2.14    0.61      σ2      3.17      1.02    NONFATAL       -0.31    0.02
  µ3    -2.78    0.81      σ3      2.92      0.81    SCMPLX         -3.05    0.30
  µ4    -2.34    0.62      σ4      2.97      0.83    MSKILL         -0.73    0.08
  µ5     1.22    0.35      σ5      2.72      0.80    PHYDDS          2.94    0.21
  µ6     0.43    0.14      σ6      2.39      0.64    WORCON          0.18    0.05
  µ7     1.29    0.60      σ7      3.29      0.91    CSKILL          0.61    0.04
  µ8    -0.57    0.16      σ8      2.19      0.54    INTPEOPLE       2.05    0.22
  µ9     3.37    1.19      σ9      3.93      0.91
 µ10    -2.24    0.67     σ10      1.93      0.50
 µ11     0.49    0.14     σ11      2.38      0.61
 µ12     1.62    0.44     σ12      3.20      1.01
 µ13     0.99    0.30     σ13      2.88      0.77
 µ14    -2.91    0.81     σ14      3.51      0.99
 µ15     2.86    0.77     σ15      2.76      0.93
 µ16    -2.07    0.55     σ16      2.75      0.70
 µ17    -1.35    0.44     σ17      1.35      0.43
 µ18    -2.60    0.68     σ18      2.88      0.89
 µ19    -1.94    0.53     σ19      1.72      0.50
 µ20    -0.64    0.18     σ20      1.23      0.36
 µ21     0.99    0.29     σ21      3.62      1.02
 µ22     1.21    0.34     σ22      3.37      0.94
 µ23     0.58    0.15     σ23      2.34      0.66
 µ24    -1.60    0.45     σ24      2.05      0.62
 µ25     0.43    0.12     σ25      2.17      0.71
 µ26    -2.89    0.74     σ26      2.54      0.80
 µ27    -0.80    0.24     σ27      3.21      0.84
 µ28    -0.32    0.08     σ28      2.11      0.62
 µ29     2.20    0.58     σ29      2.18      0.60
 µ30     1.09    0.37     σ30      3.43      1.03
 µ31    -0.26    0.08     σ31      2.84      0.74
 µ32     0.83    0.24     σ32      1.47      0.35
 µ33     1.89    0.53     σ33      2.55      0.58
 µ34    -0.07    0.02     σ34      1.56      0.41
 µ35     0.44    0.14     σ35      4.10      1.18
 µ36    -0.23    0.07     σ36      0.81      0.26
 µ37     0.80    0.21     σ37      1.52      0.35
 µ38     3.42    0.96     σ38      3.58      0.87
 µ39    -1.05    0.33     σ39      1.97      0.61
 µ40    -1.01    0.30     σ40      2.58      0.66
 µ41    -1.59    0.42     σ41      2.18      0.49
 µ42    -3.43    1.05     σ42      3.69      1.12
 µ43    -0.03    0.01     σ43      1.83      0.51
                Figure 1 – Unconditional Wage Distributions
             Equal Variances Across Occupations, No Correlation


0.06



0.05
                                             0.00    1.00
0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



  0
  -4 -3.5    -3 -2.5   -2 -1.5   -1 -0.5     0 0.5    1 1.5    2 2.5   3 3.5   4 4.5   5 5.5


                                           Occupation #1       Occupation #2




                 Figure 2 – Conditional Wage Distributions
             Equal Variances Across Occupations, No Correlation


0.06
                                                 0.57       1.57
0.05



0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



  0
   -4 -3.5   -3 -2.5   -2 -1.5   -1 -0.5     0 0.5    1 1.5    2 2.5   3 3.5   4 4.5   5 5.5


                                           Occupation #1       Occupation #2
                 Figure 3 – Unconditional Wage Distributions
             Unequal Variances Across Occupations, No Correlation


0.06



0.05
                                             0.00    1.00

0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



   0
   -4 -3.5   -3 -2.5   -2 -1.5   -1 -0.5     0 0.5    1 1.5      2 2.5   3 3.5   4 4.5   5 5.5


                                           Occupation #1         Occupation #2




                  Figure 4 – Conditional Wage Distributions
             Unequal Variances Across Occupations, No Correlation


0.06

                                                     0.92 1.46
0.05



0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



  0
   -4 -3.5   -3 -2.5   -2 -1.5   -1 -0.5     0 0.5    1 1.5      2 2.5   3 3.5   4 4.5   5 5.5


                                           Occupation #1         Occupation #2
                    Figure 5 – Conditional Wage Distributions
            Unequal Variances Across Occupations, Positive Correlation


 0.06
                                                              1.07
 0.05                                                   0.80

 0.04


 0.03


 0.02


 0.01


       0
           -4 -3.5 -3 -2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0            0.5    1     1.5    2   2.5   3    3.5   4   4.5   5   5.5

                                              Occupation #1                Occupation #2




                   Figure 6 – Conditional Wage Distributions
           Unequal Variances Across Occupations, Negative Correlation

0.06

                                                         1.06 1.69
0.05



0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



  0
  -4 -3.5       -3 -2.5   -2 -1.5   -1 -0.5     0 0.5     1 1.5        2 2.5      3 3.5      4 4.5     5 5.5


                                              Occupation #1            Occupation #2
                         Figure 7
               CASE A: ω1* > ω2* + τ2




                                        f1(ω1)


      ω1*-τ2              ω1*           f2(ω2)




                τ2

ω2*             ω2*+τ2    ω1*
         τ2
