                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE IMPACT OF PIPED WATER PROVISION ON INFANT MORTALITY IN BRAZIL:
                   A QUANTILE PANEL DATA APPROACH

                                     Shanti Gamper-Rabindran
                                          Shakeeb Khan
                                       Christopher Timmins

                                        Working Paper 14365
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14365


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We thank colleagues at IPEA, John Briscoe, Maureen Cropper, Sandy Caincross, Daniel Kammen,
Margaret Kosek, Grant Miller, Anita Millman, Kara Nelson, Narayan Sastry, Werner Troesken, Tara
Watson, seminar participants at University of Pittsburgh, Yale School of Forestry and Environmental
Studies, AERE Health and Environment summer workshop, the Population Association of America
and the Allied Social Science annual meetings. Errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Shanti Gamper-Rabindran, Shakeeb Khan, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Piped Water Provision on Infant Mortality in Brazil: A Quantile Panel Data
Approach
Shanti Gamper-Rabindran, Shakeeb Khan, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 14365
September 2008
JEL No. H41,I18,Q53,Q56,Q58

                                               ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of piped water on the under-1 infant mortality rate (IMR) in Brazil using a
novel econometric procedure for the estimation of quantile treatment effects with panel data. The
provision of piped water in Brazil is highly correlated with other observable and unobservable determinants
of IMR -- the latter leading to an important source of bias. Instruments for piped water provision are
not readily available, and fixed effects to control for time invariant correlated unobservables are invalid
in the simple quantile regression framework. Using the quantile panel data procedure in Chen and
Khan (2007), our estimates indicate that the provision of piped water reduces infant mortality by significantly
more at the higher conditional quantiles of the IMR distribution than at the lower conditional quantiles
(except for cases of extreme underdevelopment). These results imply that targeting piped water intervention
toward areas in the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR distribution, when accompanied by other
basic public health inputs, can achieve significantly greater reductions in infant mortality.


Shanti Gamper-Rabindran                                Christopher Timmins
University of Pittsburgh                               Department of Economics
shanti@gspia.pitt.edu                                  Duke University
                                                       209 Social Sciences Building
Shakeeb Khan                                           P.O. Box 90097
Department of Economics                                Durham, NC 27708-0097
Duke University                                        and NBER
213 Social Sciences                                    christopher.timmins@duke.edu
Durham, NC 27708
shakeeb.khan@duke.edu
1 Introduction
        The Millennium Development Goals aim to reduce by two-thirds the under-
five child mortality rate by 2015 from the base year 1990 (United Nations, 2005).
In 2000, diarrhea caused approximately 22% of these deaths worldwide (Black et
al, 2003). 1 About 1.5 million child deaths (or 88% of those from diarrhea) are
caused by ingestion of unsafe water, inadequate availability of water for hygiene,
and lack of access to sanitation (Black et al, 2003). A proposed strategy to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals of reducing child mortality is to
improve access to safe drinking water. Indeed, the Brazilian government has
announced its goal to achieve universal coverage for piped water (World Bank,
2003). These proposals raise an important policy question – can provision from
piped water from the network, hereafter “piped water”, reduce the infant mortality
rate (IMR). 2    For those populations at greatest risk (i.e. in areas that suffer
severe infant mortality rates) can this provision reduce infant mortality rates, or is
the provision of piped water effective only when accompanied by complementary
income-related inputs at the household or community level?
        In situations involving extreme inequality, it is possible for simple
conditional mean estimates to mask the answers to these questions. Quantile
estimation, which recovers the marginal impact of piped water on various
quantiles of the conditional distribution of the IMR, can address this problem.
Quantile regression is, however, not easily adaptable to dealing with problems of
endogenous regressors. This presents a difficulty for most policy analyses, since
policies are seldom applied randomly. When valid instruments are available,
endogeneity can be addressed with instrumental variable quantile techniques
(Abadie et al., 2002; Arias et al., 2001; Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005, Khan

1
  These figures are for the 42 countries with 90% of the worldwide under-5 deaths in 2000 (Black
et al., 2003).
2
  Our study is limited to the following measure: percentage of households that receive piped water
from a network. We do not have data on the quality of that piped water. We also do not have
data on the type of connection from the network to the home (i.e., whether through plumbing
internal to the house or through standpipes external to the house). Furthermore, we do not
evaluate the effectiveness of piped water interventions relative to other water-related
interventions. Mintz et al. (2001) argue that “decentralized approaches to making drinking water
safe, including point-of-use chemical and solar disinfection, safe water storage, and behavioral
change merit far greater priority for rapid implementation.”


                                                2
and Tamer, 2008). The practical problem is that there are often no good
instruments for many policies. The usual statistical approach in mean regression
is to exploit panel variation and estimate fixed effects to control for time invariant
sources of correlated errors. However, this approach is not applicable using
standard quantile techniques. 3
        Using a new approach to quantile regression with panel data developed
by Chen and Khan (2007), we examine the impact of provision of piped water on
the under-1 infant mortality rate at various quantiles of the conditional IMR
distribution using panel data for 3568 census units in all Brazil. We describe the
effect of the treatment on various quantiles of the outcome distribution, making
no assumption about the joint distribution of the treated and untreated
distributions. Our interpretation follows that of Abrevaya (2001) and Bitler et al.,
(2005).
          We find that an increase of one percentage point in the number of
households receiving piped water in the group of counties with poor development
indicators in the period 1980-1991 causes a decline of 1.25 deaths per 1,000 live
births at the 90th percentile of the conditional IMR, but a decline of only 0.54
deaths at the 10th percentile. 4 The marginal effect at the mean (i.e., 0.72 deaths
per 1,000 live births) turns out to provide a poor indication of the effect of water
on much of the IMR distribution. The most important implication of this result is
that the impact of a piped water provision policy is determined in large part by
how those piped water connections are distributed. There is tremendous payoff
to targeting water provision to the areas with the highest IMR (both conditional
and unconditional). In practice, however, piped water interventions have tended
to be in places with good indicators of development and which are low in the
conditional IMR distribution.
        Our paper makes two methodological contributions to the program
evaluation literature in developing countries.               First, by using novel quantile


3
  Differenced regression cannot be applied in the quantile regression context, and simple fixed
effects estimation suffers from incidental parameters bias unless the panel is very long in the time
dimension.
4
  These indicators are described in Section 4 and Section 5.2.


                                                 3
techniques, we examine whether the provision of piped water can reduce infant
mortality in the upper tail of the conditional IMR distribution. A priori, it is unclear
whether the provision of piped water, without sufficient complementary health
inputs, will yield a reduction in IMR at these quantiles. Previous studies' focus on
the impact at the mean of the conditional distribution may obscure this policy-
relevant heterogeneity.
        Second, by applying panel data techniques to quantile estimation, we can
estimate the impact of piped water on IMR while controlling for potential time
invariant confounders. Areas with fewer piped water connections are also high
IMR areas. These areas may suffer from systematic underreporting of infant
deaths (Victora and Barros, 2001). At the same time, areas with more piped
water connections are likely to benefit from other superior health inputs (these
inputs are unobservables in our study, such as access to medical care, nutritional
supplements, and public health infrastructure.) (Jalan and Ravallion, 2003;
Weinreb, 2001). Our estimates will not suffer from the downward bias arising
from the systematic underreporting of deaths or the upward bias arising from
these time invariant inputs. 5 At present, only a few, albeit important papers, have
applied quantile regression to program evaluation in developing countries
(Djebbari and Smith, 2005) and fewer still have applied strategies to address
time invariant confounders within the context of quantile regressions.
        While instrumental variables may not always be available, the proliferation
of quality panel data means that our methodological approach can be widely
applied to the evaluation of other programs that provide health inputs or other
public goods in developing countries. Our task of evaluating the impact of piped
water on IMR shares two key characteristics with the evaluation of programs that
provide health inputs in developing countries, such as the provision of nutritional
supplements or medical assistance to populations at risk. First, from the policy
perspective, it is important to understand the impact of these programs on the
subpopulations that are most at risk; if unobservables are important determinants


5
 The quantile panel data technique we employ, like other fixed effect models, cannot correct the
bias arising from time varying unobservables (Ahn, Lee, and Schmidt, 2001).


                                                4
of the outcome variable, these subpopulations will tend to occupy the tails of the
conditional outcome distribution. Mean impacts will fail to capture heterogeneous
impacts across the conditional distribution.    Second, the evaluation of these
programs is complicated by their systematic placement in areas that receive
superior health inputs. If these inputs are unobserved by the econometrician,
they will cause an upward bias in the measurement of positive program impacts.
At the same time, the systematic underreporting of outcome variables (e.g.,
mortality in higher mortality areas) (Victora and Barros, 2001), may attenuate the
relationship between health inputs and mortality.




2 Piped water and infant mortality in Brazil
2.1   Infant mortality
       Piped water supply reduces infant mortality directly by reducing the
incidence of diarrhea that arises from the ingestion of contaminated water and
food, and indirectly when caregivers are able to devote more time to childcare
instead of water collection activities. Brazil serves as a case study for the impact
of piped water on infant mortality for three reasons. First, diarrheal diseases are
an important cause of infant mortality, accounting for 8% of infant death in Brazil
in 1995-7 (Victora, 2001). In Northeast Brazil, the poorest area in the country,
diarrhea accounted for 15% of infant mortality (Victora, 2001). Second, under-1
infants in Brazil are susceptible to water-borne diseases due to the relatively
short duration of breastfeeding (Sastry and Burgard, 2005). Diarrhea is likely to
increase when the infant is first exposed to supplemental liquids or solids, usually
at ages below 1 year old (Sastry and Burgard, 2005).           The 1989 Brazilian
National Health and Nutrition Survey indicates that only 29.5% of infants aged 0-
5 months were exclusively breastfed and 36.3% of those aged 0-23 months were
breastfed (Senauer and Kassouf, 2000). In 1996, the Brazil-wide estimate of the
duration for breastfeeding (both exclusive and supplemental) was 8.2 months




                                         5
(Sastry and Burgard, 2005). 6 Third, our results from Brazil, particularly the
Northeast, are potentially transferable to other developing countries.


2.2 Piped water provision: institutions and policies
        During our study period, Brazil experienced three distinct regimes in piped
water provision – the pre-1971, the 1971-1991, and the post-1991 periods. Prior
to 1971, the responsibility for piped water provision rested with municipalities or
counties. 7   In 1971, the federal government launched the National Sanitation
Plan (PLANASA) with the goal of achieving universal supply of piped water in all
urban areas. The state governments created state water companies (CESBs)
and state water and sanitation funds (FAEs). Most municipalities signed 20-30
year concession contracts with the CESBs, transferring responsibilities for the
extraction, treatment and distribution of piped water to latter. Under PLANASA,
only municipalities with such contracts could gain access to federal funding
(ERM, 2003).
        During PLANASA’s operation between 1971 and 1991, investments in
water and sanitation amounted to US$13.6 billion. The Employment Guarantee
Fund (FGTS) financed 60% of the total investments, the FAEs and CESBs
financed 29% and the federal budget and other sources funded the rest. The
National Housing Bank (BNH), which managed PLANASA’s operations, and the
CESBs borrowed from international development banks (ERM, 2003). 8                           The
CESBs charged tariffs to users, allowing cross-subsidies between high- and low-
income users (McNallen, 2006).              PLANASA prioritized water services over
sewerage and targeted larger and fast growing cities and metropolitan regions. 9
Rural areas received little service as most contracts between municipalities and
the CESBs were restricted to urban areas, while rural villages remained under



6
  The average duration of breastfeeding did not differ dramatically between the Northeast and the
rest of Brazil (Sastry and Burgard, 2005).
7
  We use the terms municipality or county, interchangeably, to correspond to the Brazilian-term
“municipios”
8
  The FTGS is financed by taxes on employers (ERM, 2005).
9
  PLANASA invested 68% of funds into water and only 32% into sanitation.


                                                6
municipal responsibility. Many municipalities, however, lacked the resources to
provide piped water supply (ERM, 2003).
       Brazil’s economic upheavals in the 1980s contributed to PLANASA’s
demise in 1991.         The CESBs, FTGS, FAEs and BNH all faced financial
problems. PLANASA’s operational functions were transferred to another federal
bank, the National Economic Bank (CEF) (ERM, 2003).                     With the expiry of
contracts signed under PLANASA, many municipalities are seeking to regain
control of the water services (ERM, 2003). Several states and municipalities are
locked in dispute over the asset ownership, regulatory authority, and
concessionary powers (World Bank, 2003).               The disputes have discouraged
private investments (World Bank, 2003).              Several of the more prosperous
municipalities have opted to sign concessions with providers other than the
CESBs. These municipalities have ended cross-subsidization, contributing to
service deterioration in the poorest municipalities (ERM, 2005).
       The Brazilian government has not implemented a consistent piped water
program to replace PLANASA. 10 The debate at the federal level on proposed
2001 legislation for a comprehensive approach to water management ended in a
stalemate (ERM, 2003).           Today, the relative roles of the various federal
institutions in the water sector remain poorly defined and uncoordinated 11 (World
Bank, 2003).
       Brazil’s funding criteria for water investments have not consistently
prioritized the poor (World Bank, 2003). PROSANEAR is one of the few projects
that target water and sanitation services to the urban poor. 12                That project
extended the existing public water network into poor urban neighborhoods.
Between 1992-7, PROSANEAR I provided piped water to 0.9 million people and
sewage facilities to 1 million people in 17 cities.               Water agencies cross-

10
   PRONURB (the Sanitation Program for Urban Settlements) and PROSANITATION operated
between 1990-4 and 1995-8, respectively (Garrido, 2006).
11
   The federal institutions include the Special Secretariat for Urban Development (SEDU), The
Federal Economic Bank (CEF), the National Bank for Economic and Social Development
(BNDES), the National Water Agency (ANA), the Ministry of Planning and Budget, the Ministry of
Finance, and the National Health Foundation (FUNASA) (World Bank, 2003).
12
   The PROSANEAR I projects were financed by a World Bank loan, local water companies, state
or municipal governments, and the CEF.


                                              7
subsidized the low PROSANEAR tariff with revenues from their other customers
and received through direct subsidies from the local governments. Two
subsequent projects, PROSANEAR II and PASS/Comunidade Solidária, also
target low income communities (Katakura and Bakalian, 1998). In addition, the
Ministry of Health manages Program Alvorado, a social program with water
supply and sanitation components (World Bank, 2003).
       In the year 2000, out of the 5507 municipalities, about 3706 municipalities
received piped water supply from state water companies and about 1676
municipalities received their supply from a mix of municipal water providers,
private concessionaires, private and social organizations. In the remaining 2% of
municipalities, water was supplied through standpipes and water tankers (in the
small rural villages of the semi-arid area of the Northeast Region) and, through
the use of private wells and individual extraction from surface water in the rest of
the country” (ERM, 2003).


2.3 Patterns of piped water provision (1970-2000)
       The provision of piped water by regions is tabulated in Table 1A.
Specifically for this table, we classify counties as urban in a given year if 50% or
more of their population live in urban areas. As evident from Table 1A, Brazil’s
policies have resulted in superior piped water coverage in urban counties
situated in the more prosperous regions i.e., the Southeast and the South, but
poor coverage in other less prosperous regions, i.e., the Northeast and the North.
Coverage lags in rural counties across all regions, but is especially scant in the
North and Northeast. In the 1970s, piped water coverage in the urban counties
was low in the Southeast (51%), extremely low in the South (27%) and sparse
the Center-West, North and Northeast (15-20%). Between 1970 and 1991, piped
water coverage in urban areas grew to moderate levels in the Southeast and
South (62-66%), to low levels in the Center-West and Northeast (39-44%), but
remained extremely low in the North (27%). By 2000, coverage has grown to
high levels in the South and Southeast (74-77%) and to moderate levels in the
Center-West and Northeast (62-69%), while coverage lagged in the North (50%).



                                         8
Piped water coverage in rural counties has lagged behind that in urban counties.
In rural counties in the Southeast, South, and Center-West, piped water
coverage grew from scant levels in 1971 (4-20%) to moderate levels (44-48%) by
2000. In contrast, the coverage in the rural counties in the North and Northeast,
which has been sparse even as late as 1991 (13% and 19%), remains low in
2000 (31% and 42%).




3 Econometric issues in estimating the impact of piped water on IMR
3.1 Marginal effects of piped water – mean versus quantiles
       We use quantile techniques to recover the marginal impact of piped water
on various parts of the conditional IMR distribution. In contrast, previous studies
of piped water have focused on the conditional mean of that distribution (Sastry,
1996; Merrick, 1985; Jalan and Ravallion, 2003). Only under the assumption that
the marginal effect of piped water is a simple "common effect" or "location shift"
will the impact at the mean be the same as the impact for the entire distribution
(Heckman et al., 1997; Abadie et al., 2002). In other words, under the “common
effect” assumption, the piped water intervention has the same impact on
everyone with the same observed characteristics (Heckman et al., 1997).
       Papers on health inputs have shown that estimates at the mean may
obscure heterogeneous impacts at the various quantiles of the conditional
distribution. Moreover, the heterogeneity in the conditional distribution of the
outcome variable is relevant for public policy. For example, Abrevaya (2001)
finds that prenatal care in the US has a significantly higher impact at lower
quantiles of the conditional distribution of infant birthweight than at the higher
quantiles. Moreover, he finds that the black-white differential in birthweight is
larger at the lower conditional quantiles of birthweight.
       Heterogeneity in the impact of piped water is relevant for policy decisions
regarding piped water placement. On the one hand, targeting piped water to
vulnerable households may improve their welfare significantly. Households or
communities with low income typically have the fewest public resources for



                                          9
children’s health. 13 In such cases, we would expect piped water to have greater
protective effect among households or communities with lower incomes. On the
other hand, targeting piped water to vulnerable households may be necessary
but not sufficient to improve their welfare. In particular, their limited income or
education may constrain their ability to exploit the benefits from piped water
supply. In that case, water supply placement would need to be accompanied by
other interventions (Jalan and Ravallion, 2003).
          In exploring the impact of piped water on IMR, our study explores two
types of heterogeneity that call for distinct policy responses: (1) heterogeneity
along observable dimensions such as income and (2) heterogeneity due to
unobserved factors. The policy response for the first type of heterogeneity is to
target along observables such as income and education. The policy response to
the second type of heterogeneity is more challenging. It would not be sufficient
to simply consider income, education, and sewage in defining “vulnerable
populations”. Instead, in their task of allocating water, policy-makers need to
look for other factors (i.e., unobserved factors in our analysis) that make IMR
high. In this paper, we seek to also determine the return to targeting these
unobservables in the placement of piped water, and we describe how such
targeting might be accomplished.
          The first type of heterogeneity can be explored by standard techniques in
the literature i.e., by allowing the marginal impact of water to vary by the income
variable. However, a mean regression with interaction terms would not address
the second type of heterogeneity. In contrast, quantile techniques allow us to
explore the second type of heterogeneity. A priori, it is unclear whether the
marginal effect of water is greater in higher or lower income communities.
Similarly, a priori, it is unclear whether, controlling for observables such as
income, education and sewage network, the marginal effect of water is greater at
higher or lower percentiles of the conditional distribution of the IMR.




13
     Thomas and Strauss (1992) make this argument for maternal education.


                                               10
        Previous studies suggest a complex relationship between health status,
water supply and socio-economic status. 14 Shuval et al. (1981) propose a four-
stage threshold-saturation model to explain the relationship between health
status, water supply and socioeconomic levels reported in several empirical
studies with seemingly contradictory results. 15 Shuval et al. (1981) propose that
at the first stage, i.e., below a threshold of socioeconomic development, the
provision of water does little to improve the health status of the community.
Individuals have low disease resistance due to their extremely poor nutrition and
personal hygiene and their exposure to multiple and simultaneous routes of
disease transmissions. The provision of water alone, which addresses only one
route of disease transmission, does not have a strong impact on health. Shuval
et al.’s (1981) argument echoes that of Briscoe (1984a) – i.e., the improvements
in drinking water supply in Matlab, Bangladesh did not cause major reductions in
cholera incidence because complementary interventions were not undertaken to
eliminate other important, albeit secondary, routes of cholera transmission (e.g.,
the ingestion of polluted water during bathing). Similarly, Esrey et al. (1992) find
that water supply had a significant health impact only when accompanied by the
presence of latrines in their study of infants in Lesotho. 16
        At the second stage, above that threshold but below the saturation point,
socioeconomic development improves the standard of living and reduces the
exposure to infection (Shuval et al., 1981). At this level of socioeconomic

14
   Consider, for example, hygiene behavior, which our study does not explicitly include but which
can influence whether the provision of water supply translates to health benefits. It is likely that
the provision of water supply encourages the adoption of hygienic behaviors. Cairncross (1990)
argues that the provision of water leads to health impacts only when accompanied by the
adoption of hygienic behavior. Citing Esrey et al. (1985), Cairncross (2003) argues that
handwashing thus turns out to have an even greater impact on diarrheal disease than water
supply or sanitation. Nevertheless, as noted by Cairncross (2003), “a convenient water supply
makes handwashing easier to practice and hence more likely. Indeed, it has been confirmed by
observation in developing countries that mothers of young children are more likely to wash their
hands at critical moments if they have a piped water supply (Curtis et al., 1995).”
15
   Shuval et al. (1981) use country-level data for 65 developing countries from 1962. Life
expectancy at birth measures health status, adult literacy rate measures socioeconomic status,
and the proportion of the urban population having access to water supply by either household tap
or standpipe measures the sanitation level. Shuval et al. (1981) reports that these data, though
imperfect, are consistent with their model.
16
   Esrey et al. (1992) examine 119 infants who lived in 20 villages in Lesotho from a 6 month
period in 1984-1985.


                                                 11
development, communities have a strong health response to investments in
water supply. At the third stage, as communities develop further, they move
towards a saturation point, whereby improvements in water supply have only a
small impact on health.          At the fourth stage, beyond the saturation point,
communities have reached high levels of socioeconomic development.
Improvements to water supply would not cause further improvements in health
status (Shuval et al., 1981). The practical problem in testing this theory is that it
is not clear what are all the variables that should be used to define
“socioeconomic development”. Our quantile approach allows us to measure the
sensitivity of IMR to determinants of development not explicitly included in the
analysis.
        Previous studies show diverging results on the interaction between piped
water and income. Whether piped water serves as a complement or substitute to
household and community inputs may be specific to the level of income and
education and overall institutional environment. In their study of 33,000 rural
households in India in 1993-1994, Jalan and Ravallion (2003) find that while
piped water did cause an overall reduction in diarrheal incidence, households in
the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution did not experience significant
health gains. 17 In their study of Brazil in 1974-5, Thomas and Strauss (1992) find
that children in high income urban households benefit more from the availability
of sewerage services and electricity. In contrast, several studies report that
households’ input and public infrastructure serve as substitutes. Thomas et al.
(1991) find that children of uneducated mothers gained most from sewage
networks in Northeast Brazil.            Barrera (1990a) finds that children of less
educated mothers in the Bicol region of the Phillipines benefit more from water
connections and the absence of excreta in the environment. 18


17
  Jalan and Ravallion (2003) argue that “policymakers trying to reach children of poor families –
who are typically the most prone to disease – will need to do more than making facility placement
pro-poor. The incidence of health gains need not favor children from poor families even when the
placement favors the poor.”




                                               12
3.2 Selective placement of piped water
        Studies relating water supply to health that fail to control for the selective
placement of water supply would likely overstate the protective effect of water
(Zwane and Kremer, 2007). Piped water is likely to be placed in areas that enjoy
superior medical care provision, and where higher incomes are used to purchase
other health-related inputs (Jalan and Ravallion, 2003; Weinreb, 2001). Both
represent factors that contribute to low IMR (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1986).
Our data indicate that piped water in Brazil is systematically placed in areas with
superior observables. The correlation between the water and income variables is
0.71, 0.73, 0.78, and 0.61 and that between the water and education variables is
0.60, 0.63, 0.71, and 0.58, in 1970, 1980, 1991 and 2000, respectively. 19 It is
therefore likely that the placement of piped water is also correlated with
unobservable determinants of infant health.
        To overcome the estimation problem of selective program placement,
studies from developed countries have exploited the exogenous timing of water-
related interventions to identify their impact.                 Troesken (2001) finds that
municipal water provision in American cities around the early 20th century
reduced typhoid rates in blacks. Cutler and Miller (2005) report that chlorination
interventions in 19 US cities reduced infant mortality. Watson (2006) finds that a
ten percentage point increase in the fraction of homes in American Indian
reservations with sanitation improvements reduced infant mortality by 0.51
deaths per 1000 births.
        However, few studies from developing countries (even those that focus on
mean results) have been able to correct for non-random program placement. In
their study of Bangladeshi and Filipino villages, Lee et al. (1997) correct for the
selection bias stemming from conditioning on surviving children, but take the
placement of piped water as given. In their Brazilian studies, Sastry (1996) and
Merrick (1985) report positive association between piped water supply and infant


18
   In the same study, Barrera (1990a) finds that children of more educated mothers derive greater
benefits from health care facilities and toilet connections. Thomas et al. (1991) find that children
of uneducated mothers gained least from health care facilities.
19
   These variables are defined in section 5.1.


                                                 13
mortality, but are not able to address the issue of program placement. 20 The
study by Jalan and Ravallion (2003) uses propensity score matching techniques
as a strategy to correct for the selective placement of piped water among rural
Indian households in 1991. Comparing households with and without piped water,
but which are similar on observable dimensions (and, by assumption, on
unobservable dimensions), they find that the incidence of diarrheal diseases is
higher in households without piped water. In contrast, studies testing the impact
of point-of-use water treatment have been able to implement randomized trials.
Clasen et al. (2004), Conroy et al. (1996), and Crump et al. (2005) find positive
health impacts from the use ceramic filters, solar disinfection and chemical
disinfectants, respectively.        Kremer et al. (2007), using randomized trials to
evaluate the impact of protecting naturally occurring spring water, find that spring
protection improves source water quality and that reported child diarrhea
incidence falls by one quarter.


3.3 Measurement error in IMR
        Measurement error in the IMR poses a second problem in studies that
investigate the relationship between health inputs and infant mortality, albeit the
direction of bias is opposite to that discussed above for program placement. In
particular, places that suffer from high infant mortality rates (and exhibit low rates
of piped water provision) may suffer more severe under-reporting of those infant
mortality rates. Even if there were an underlying negative relationship between
the presence of piped water and infant mortality, the underreporting bias may
conceal such a relationship. In the case of Brazil, Victora and Barros (2001),
citing Simões (1999), note that under-reporting of infant deaths in the Northeast




20
   Merrick (1985) uses 1976 cross-sectional in Brazil data to estimate a structural model relating
infant mortality to factors such as household-level access to piped water, state-level piped water
supply, maternal and paternal education, and income. Merrick (1985) obtained piped water
supply data from the 1970 Census that divided Brazil into 117 geographical units. In order to
match the data to the Pesquisa Nacional Amostra de Domicilios (PNAD) household data, he was
forced to aggregate the variable up to 25 observations corresponding to 25 states.


                                                14
(where provision of piped water is low) is about 66.7%, while the under-reporting
in the Southeast (where provision of piped water is high) is only 6.5%. 21


3.4    Strategies      to    address       non-random         program        placement        and
measurement error
        To overcome the issue of non-random program placement, quantile
studies from developed countries have been able to rely on experimental design
such as in the evaluation of welfare reform or job training programs (Bitler et al.,
2005 and 2006) or instrumental variables such as in evaluating the impact of
childbearing on income 22 (Abadie et al., 2002), the returns to education (Arias et
al., 2001), returns to job training programs (Chernozhukov and Hansen, 2005).
In contrast, only a few quantile studies from developing countries have been able
to rely on experimental design or instrumental variables. Djebbari and Smith
(2005) use random assignment experimental data to examine the distributional
impact of Mexico’s program of education, health and nutrition (PROGRESA).
They find that the program had a smaller impact on wealth and nutrition for
households in the lower tail of the wealth and nutrition distribution.
        A few studies, looking only at developed countries, have begun to explore
the use of panel data in the context of quantile regressions.                     For example,
Abrevaya and Dahl (2006) examine the impact of prenatal care and smoking on
infant birthweight using panel data on maternally-linked births. They assume a
correlated random effects model as is done here and in Chen and Khan (2007),
but also impose the additional restriction of a linear structure on the individual
specific effect. In this and other important policy contexts, randomized
placements and instrumental variables are not readily available.                        In these
situations, the use of panel techniques has the potential to correct the estimation
bias from selective placement and systematic measurement error.

21
   The under-registration of infant deaths is estimated to be 52.2% in the North, 13.6% in the
South, 23.9% in the Center-West, and 43.7% nationally. Most deaths that are not registered
occur in the rural areas of the North and Northeast where rates of infectious diseases are higher.
(Victora and Barros, 2001 citing Simões, 1999)
22
   “Childbearing reduces the lower tail of the income distribution considerably more than other
parts of the income distribution.” (Abadie et al., 2002).


                                                15
3.5 Why means mask quantile results?
        In this section, we illustrate why estimating mean effects can be
significantly different from estimating quantile effects. To keep the discussion
simple, we focus on the cross-sectional case. In particular, consider the linearly
heteroskedastic model: yi = β0 + xiβ1 + xiΨεi, where yi measures the infant
mortality rate in county i and xi measures the percentage of households there
with access to piped water. We assume for this discussion that εi is independent
of xi (although relaxing this assumption with panel data is a major focus of the
rest of the paper). Let με denote the mean of εi (i.e., zero) and let ρθ denote the
θth quantile of the εi distribution. The variance of εi is one.
        The marginal effect associated with the conditional mean function (which
would be estimated were we to use simple OLS) is of the form (β1+Ψμε = β1),
whereas the marginal effect associated with the θth quantile is (β1+Ψρθ). The
differences between these two measures will generally depend upon the
skewness of the distribution of εi.        For example, if Ψ is positive and the
distribution of εi is skewed toward the right, then the marginal effect of xi
associated with the mean will exceed that associated with the median and the
lower quantiles. On the other hand, if the distribution is skewed toward the left,
the reverse will be true – marginal effects associated with the median and higher
quantiles will exceed the marginal effect attained from OLS.




4 Data
        We use newly available census data published by the Brazilian Institute
for Economic Analysis (IPEA). These data are reported at the level of minimally
comparable areas (MCA’s) for the years 1970, 1980, 1991 and 2000. Previously,
census data were available at the municipio or county level, which is the smallest
political division in Brazil (Alves and Beluzzo, 2004). Changes in county
boundaries between the decades had limited the comparability of the census
data.   To overcome this limitation, IPEA created the MCA dataset, in which



                                           16
geographical units share common boundaries across the decades. The MCA
boundaries correspond to county boundaries for those counties whose borders
did not change between 1970 and 2000. For those counties that changed their
borders between 1970 and 2000, neighboring counties were dissolved into one
larger MCA. Data from households were then aggregated up to the MCA level
for 1970, 1980, 1991 and 2000.
        The MCA dataset divides Brazil into 3568 MCAs, a number which
compares favorably with the 4500 counties in Brazil in 1998 (Mobarak et al.,
2004) and 5560 in 2000 (Alves and Beluzzo, 2004). 23 While the MCA dataset is
imperfect in that it sometimes aggregates several counties which may differ in
their policy and institutional context, we believe that this dataset represents the
best demographic panel dataset currently available for Brazil.                          The finer
resolution of the MCA data relative to other available Brazilian panel census data
lessens the degree of within unit heterogeneity. 24
        Table 1B presents summary statistics. The mean infant mortality rate
declined from 125 deaths per 1000 live births in 1970, to 87 deaths in 1980, to 49
deaths in 1991 and to 34 deaths in 2000.                        At the same time, we see
improvements in other development indicators. The percentage of households
with piped water has increased fourfold from a mere 15% in 1970 to 62% by
2000. The percentage of households connected to the sewage network, starting
from a lower baseline of 5% in 1970, has increased six-fold to 29% by 2000.
Total fertility rate has more than halved from 5.9 births in 1970 to 2.8 births by
2000. Both the income-related Human Development Index and the education-
related Human Development index show improvement between 1970 and 2000.




23
   In the 1980s, Brazil had 4088 municipalities, with an average population of 29,800 and an
average area of 2118 km2 (Sastry, 1996). We drop one observation in our analysis because of
missing values.
24
   Potter et al. (2002) use the previous version of decennial data (terminating in 1991) that divides
Brazil into 518 microregions. Another data source, the PNAD, suffers from municipio boundaries
that are not consistent from one survey to another.


                                                 17
5 Method
5.1 Estimation
        Our dependent variable is the number of deaths of infants under one year
of age per thousand live births. Reviews of active surveillance of developing
areas and of studies published between 1990 and 2000 indicate that the under-1
age-group experience the highest diarrhea specific mortality rates (Kosek et al,
2003). Our analysis focuses on all-cause infant mortality. Brazilian vital statistics
data (except when the information is specifically collected by researchers) are
notoriously unreliable on cause-specific deaths, and the unreliability is worse in
high mortality areas (Sastry and Burgard, 2002). By focusing on infant mortality,
we avoid the potential bias inherent in studies that examine child health. Studies
that use child health (e.g., height-for-weight scores) need to correct for the
selection on surviving children in order to avoid underestimating the overall
impact of piped water on child health (Lee et al., 1997). 25                       We interpret the
coefficient on piped water to capture the impact of piped water on infant mortality,
typically through reduced risk of death from diarrheal diseases.
        Our study is limited to the analysis of one aspect of the quantity of piped
water. The definition for the water variable is the percentage of households with
piped water from the general network. 26 As in Sastry (1996) we focus on
households’ source of water, i.e. from the network, and not on the type of
connection. Our focus on this variable has two limitations. First, we are not able
to provide separate estimates for piped water delivered to the household through
external plumbing (e.g. communal standpipes) and for piped water delivered to
the household through internal plumbing. 27 Second, we do not study the quality
of piped water. 28

25
   Child health data from the PNAD, 1996 Demographic and Health Survey and 1989 the
Brazilian Health and Nutrition fail to provide municipal-level information. Cause-specific vital
statistics data are not publicly available for all of Brazil.
26
   The IPEA definition is “numero domicilios com água canalizada de rede geral”. We divide this
figure by the total number of households in that MCA.
27
   Data on water quality and the type of connection is unavailable at the MCA-level. Our study
therefore cannot overcome an important limitation in current studies. As noted in Fewtrell et al.
(2005). “there are currently too few data to disentangle satisfactorily the role of service level (i.e.,
community versus household connection) and the health effect of water supply interventions.”
The type of connection may influence the health effects of piped water provision. Victora et al.


                                                   18
        In addition to piped water, we include several covariates to account for
other time-varying factors that influence the IMR. Income-based Human
Development Index (which we refer to simply as “income”) is added as a
covariate as higher income levels are associated with improved chances for child
survival 29 (Sastry, 1996 citing Merrick 1985, Thomas et al., 1990 and Victora et
al., 1986).
        Our regression model should control for improved sanitation, 30 as the
latter influences infant mortality rates (Habicht et al., 1988). We explicitly include
in our model one type of improved sanitation – i.e., the percentage of households
with network sewage. 31 This type of sanitation is considered the only adequate
kind in urban areas (UNICEF, 1997). Network sewage is the predominant


(1988) find in their study in the metropolitan area of Southern Brazil that “compared to those with
water piped to their house, those with piped water to their plot but not to their house are 1.5 times
more likely to suffer infant death from diarrhea (95% confidence interval 0.8 to 3.0) and those
without easy access to piped water had 4.8 times greater risk (95% confidence interval 1.7 to
13.8). Esrey and Habicht (1986) note that “in the studies reporting health benefits, the water was
piped into or near the home, whereas in those studies reporting no benefit, the improved water
supplies were protected wells, tube wells or standpipes.” While the absence of data on the type of
connection is a limitation to our study, it is useful to note that Sastry (1996), in his study of Brazil,
reports that infant mortality levels in his data are more strongly correlated with the source of water
(water from the general network versus other sources) than the type of water connection (internal
or external plumbing). Sastry then confines his study the analysis of piped water from the
network, regardless of the type of connection.
28
   While several point of use studies, such as Kremer et al. (2007), have been able to collect data
on water quality and water quantity, others have not been able to separate the two impacts. For
example, Esrey (1996) reports that although health benefits from optimal water service (piped
water) were found, it was not known whether these benefits were due to improvement in the
quality of water, usage of more copious quantities of water, both factors, or some other
mechanism. The few studies that have been able to separate the influence of the quality and
quantity of water find that water quantity has a greater impact than water quality on health and
mortality (Sastry, 1996; citing Bourne, 1984, Esrey and Habicht, 1988, and Victora et al, 1988). In
another study, Esrey et al (1991) note that “interventions to improve excreta disposal and water
quantity, which are associated with better hygiene practices, produce greater impacts than
improvements in water quality, …particularly so, in highly contaminated environments where
diarrhea rates are high.” However, more recent studies, such as Fewtrell et al (2005) and Clasen
et al (2008), argue that water quality interventions at the household level are as effective as
improvements in sanitation and water supply in reducing the incidence of diarrhea.
29
   The definition for HDI_income = ln (observed value of RFPC) – ln (lower limit of RFPC) / [ln
(upper limit of RFPC)-ln(lower limit of RFPC) where RFPC is the family per capita income.
30
   Improved sanitation is defined by the World Health Organization as connection to a public
sewer, connection to a septic system, a pour-flush latrine, a simple pit latrine or a ventilated
improved pit latrine (UN Millennium Project, 2005)
31
   The IPEA definition is “numero domicilios instalações sanitárias de rede geral”. We divide this
figure by the total number of households in that MCA. Victora et al. (1986) and Victora et al.
(1988), both cited in Sastry (1996), find that household toilet facilities are related very weakly to
child mortality risks. instalaciones


                                                   19
method of improved sanitation in urban areas (WHO/UNICEF, 2000). We rely on
the panel method of our analysis to control for cross-sectional variation in other
types of improved sanitation in Brazil. Nevertheless, the panel method can
adequately control for the cross-section variation in improved sanitation other
than network sewage only to the extent that that variation is fairly constant over
the decade. In rural areas, an estimated one-fifth to one-half of households use
basic latrines (WHO/UNICEF, 2000). Use of pit latrines, while not as effective as
the sewage network, is correlated with some declines in morbidity (Esrey et al,
1991). To address the shortcoming in sanitation data for rural areas, we repeat
our regression analysis with the urban only sample.
        Maternal education, by improving mother’s access to health-related
information and her ability to make better use of health inputs, influences the
reduction in the infant mortality rate. (Sastry, 1996 citing Barrera (1990a),
Rosensweig and Schultz (1982), and Thomas et al. (1991)) In the absence of
women-specific education or literacy data, we use the education-based Human
Development Index (which we refer to simply as “education”) variable.                         The
education variable has been constructed by IPEA from a 2:1 weighting of the
index for literacy rate and the index for school attendance rate. 32 As seen in
Table 1C, while men’s and women’s literacy rates are positively correlated, one
limitation in using the non-gender specific education variable proxy variable is the
presence of some regional variation in the gap between men’s and women’s
literacy rates.
        The total fertility rate is used a co-variate in order to control for the
association between fertility and IMR (Barnum, 1988). 33 The total fertility rate is a
measure that summarizes the rate of childbearing in a year. It is derived by
summing the age-specific birth rates for a population of women in a given period.


32
   The HDI_education variable includes current schooling, which captures MCA-level investment
in education of children. The index of literacy rate or the index of school attendance rate =
(observed rate – minimum rate) / (maximum rate – minimum rate).
33
   We use this variable to control for the association between higher fertility and higher IMR. We
do not aim to explain the relationship between them. The association could be due to high fertility
households having fewer inputs per child or due to households choosing to have more children
when faced with higher infant mortality rates.


                                                20
That variable is available at the county-level for 1991 and 2000 only and at the
region level for 1980 and 1970.
        Finally, our panel data procedure controls for county-specific time-
invariant unobservables. One such time-invariant characteristic that influences
infant mortality is the climate – greater seasonality in temperature and
precipitation is associated with greater infant mortality from infectious diseases
(Sastry, 1996). 34 Some variables that vary in the cross-section and that we aim
to control for using the panel procedure (e.g., access to healthcare and
breastfeeding behavior), are not strictly speaking time-invariant.                      There are,
however, no county-level data maintained on breastfeeding behavior.                           While
there are data available that describe the number of doctors, nurses, and
hospitals at the county level, we found that these variables had no explanatory
power after controlling for the county effect, αi.
        The basic panel data model to be estimated is of the form:


(1)      y i ,t = α i + xi′,t β + ε i ,t   t = 1, 2


where yi,t denotes the under-1 infant mortality rate in county i and year t, defined
as the number of deaths for every 1000 live births before the end of the first year.
xi,t includes the percentage of households with piped water from the network, the
percentage of households with sewerage connection, the income variable, the
education variable, and the interaction between income and the water supply
variable. 35
        α i denotes the (unobserved) county effect, which controls for time-
invariant sources of unobserved heterogeneity. Without this control, we would
expect piped water to be correlated with the error in (1), leading to biased

34
  Victora et al. (1996) report than ORT played a larger role than income, education, and access to
water in the sharp decline in infant deaths due to diarrhea in the 1980s. Nevertheless, Sastry and
Burgard (2005) raise questions about this conclusion. “There is considerable uncertainty
regarding trends in mortality by cause, because death registration is not complete and information
on death certificates that are filed is often missing or inaccurate” (Sastry and Burgard, 2005).
35
   Colinearity in these covariates makes it difficult to estimate their distinct effects when they are
included within the same regression model.


                                                      21
estimates. Indeed, we show this to be the case with a series of cross-sectional
regressions below. If unobserved determinants of IMR do not vary in a county
over the course of a decade, the county effect will control for them non-
parametrically.         Similarly, measurement error in infant mortality may vary by
county. As long as the rate of measurement error is stable over the course of a
decade, α i will control for its impact on the reported IMR.

       With a constant coefficient vector β and a mean zero restriction on the
error term, the typical approach to identifying β with panel data is to estimate the
first-differenced model:


(2)    y i , 2 − y i ,1 = ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′β + (ε i , 2 − ε i ,1 )


by simply regressing the differenced dependent variable on the differenced
covariates. Unfortunately, such an approach will not be valid in the quantile
regression setting. To see why, we return to the basic model introduced by
Koenker and Bassett (1978) and Koenker and Hallock (2001), which allowed
marginal effects to vary by quantile. They considered a (cross-sectional) linearly
heteroskedastic model of the form:


(3)    y i = α i + xi′β + ( xi′ψ )ε i


which implies that the θth conditional quantile of the dependent variable has the
following form:


       qθ = α i + xi′β + xi′ψρ θ
(4)       = α i + xi′ ( β + ψρ θ )
           = α i + xi′β θ


where ρθ denotes the θth quantile of the distribution of εi. We now demonstrate
that this model cannot carry through to the panel data model by first-differencing.
In the linear heteroskedastic framework, differencing equation (3) yields:


                                                                 22
(5)         y i , 2 − y i ,1 = ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′β + ( xi′, 2ψε i , 2 − xi′,1ψε i ,1 )


Taking conditional quantiles of both sides of equation (5) yields:


(6)        qθ ( y i , 2 − y i ,1 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) = ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′β + qθ ( xi′, 2ψε i , 2 − xi′,1ψε i ,1 )


Since the quantile and difference operators cannot typically be interchanged
(unlike the mean and difference operators), the last term in the above expression
is not equal to ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′ψρ θ . 36

           We therefore apply the approach described in Chen and Khan (2007). In
particular, we impose non-parametric structure on the county effect:
(7)        α i = φ ( xi ,1 , xi , 2 )


Where φ (⋅) is an unknown function that allows for arbitrary dependence on the
covariates. 37 In particular, φ (⋅) expresses α i as a function of i’s covariates in

both years t = 1, 2.                        This structure generalizes the typical random effects
approach, which does not permit α i to depend upon covariates. It also

generalizes approaches which impose parametric specification on α i , such as




36
     We also note that if we did not allow for the heteroskedastic component, x i ,tψ , then the
quantile difference function would be a linear function of β plus an additive constant that varied
with the quantile. In this restricted setting, marginal effects would not be allowed to vary across
quantiles.
37
  In practice, data limitations (in particular, a high degree of correlation between many of our
regressors) will restrict us to using a second-order polynomial in this stage of the estimation.
Depending upon the specifics of the application, this could be expanded to a higher-order
polynomial or even a non-parametric bin estimator.




                                                                     23
Chamberlain (1982), and Abrevaya and Dahl (2006). 38 Consequently, we have
the following functional form for the conditional quantile functions: 39




(8)      qθ ( y i ,t | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) = φ ( xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) + xi′,t β + xi′,tψρ θ


This implies that the first differences in the conditional quantile functions are of
the form:


         qθ ( y i , 2 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) − qθ ( y i ,1 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) =
(9)
                                   φ ( xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) − φ ( xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) + ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′β + ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 )′ψρ θ


which, with some simplification, yields:


         qθ ( y i , 2 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) − qθ ( y i ,1 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) = ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 ) ′( β + ψρ θ )
(10)
                                                                        = ( xi , 2 − x i ,1 ) ′β θ


This implies an ability to estimate quantile-varying marginal effects. Of course,
the above equations do not translate directly into a feasible estimation procedure
since the conditional quantile functions, qθ ( y i ,1 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) and qθ ( y i , 2 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) , are

unknown. The approach can be implemented, however, by following a simple

38
   Chen and Khan (2007) show that, despite this generalization, there is no curse-of-
dimensionality associated with estimating β.
39
   We can also allow for an additive unobserved term in our structure if we impose certain
conditions such as independence of the regressors for both this term and ε i,t as well as
stationarity on     ε i,t on this term. Specifically, we can define α i
        α i = φ ( xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) + η i + ε i ,t
if we assume the “composite" error term, η i + ε i ,t is distributed independently of the regressors
and identically across individuals, as well as strongly stationary. In this way, the quantiles of the
composite error are constants that vary across quantiles but do not depend on i nor t. Equation
(8) would then be of the form
         qθ ( y i ,t | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) = φ ( xi , 2 , xi ,1 )′ + cθ + xi′,t β + xi′,tψρ θ
where   cθ is a constant that gets differenced out, maintaining the form of equation (9).



                                                                        24
two-step procedure. First, non-parametrically estimate the conditional quantile
functions in (8), qθ ( y i ,t | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) for t = 1, 2. It is important that the function φ (⋅) ,

which controls non-parametrically for the county fixed effect α i , include data from

both time periods. When estimating qθ ( y i ,t | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) , the equation also includes

observables from period t in linear form. Denote these fitted values from each of
these quantile regressions as q̂θ ( y i ,t | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) . In the second step, we regress

the differenced fitted values, q̂θ ( y i , 2 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) − qˆθ ( yi ,1 | xi ,1 , xi , 2 ) on the differenced

regressors, ( xi , 2 − xi ,1 ) . As seen in equations (9) and (10), the proxies for the

county effects difference out, yielding an estimate of β θ – i.e., the marginal effect

for the θth quantile. As discussed in Chen and Khan (2007), this procedure is
very simple to implement, requiring little more than STATA or comparable
statistical software. 40
         We implement this panel data procedure separately for three time periods:
1970-1980, 1980-1991, and 1991-2000.                           For the weighted regressions, we
weight the observations by the average county-level population over the two
years.       We also estimate unweighted regressions in order to check the
robustness of our results. Finally, we use 2,000 bootstrap simulations to recover
standard errors for our estimates.


5.2 Interpreting the coefficients from the quantile regression
         The marginal impact of piped water (resulting from a one percentage point
increase in the number of households receiving piped water in each county) at
the θth      quantile is given by the following expression, as estimated by the
regression at that quantile: βθ,water + ( β θ,water                 x income   x INCOME ) + ( β θ,water          x




40
  Since this approach attains identification off of variation in the regressors without varying the
individual specific effect, it cannot be applied to estimate coefficients of time invariant regressors.
This is also the case with standard fixed effect estimation. Nonetheless, the change in coefficients
on time invariant variables (e.g., climate) can be estimated using our procedure by interacting
them with time dummies.



                                                        25
sewage   x SEWAGE ), where INCOME and SEWAGE denotes the mean intra-group
value of each variable.
         Importantly, the comparison of the impact of piped water across quantiles
of the conditional IMR distribution must be made within conditionally similar
groups of counties. To understand this concept, imagine that counties have only
two characteristics and that each characteristic is binomial. The two
characteristics are high or low water supply, and high or low income. Therefore,
counties can be grouped into four groups i.e. (1) low water supply and low
income; (2) low water supply and high income; (3) high water supply and low
income; and (4) high water supply and high income. In evaluating the variation, if
any, of the impact of water across quantiles of the distribution, we focus our
attention on one group of counties, for example, Group 1 with high water supply
and high income. Using the intra-group mean value of income for Group 1, we
examine the value of the expression above for the 10th through the 90th quantile
of the conditional distribution. If the value of the expression were negative and
smallest in magnitude at the 10th quantile, and negative and largest in magnitude
at the 90th quantile, we would conclude that within the group of counties with low
water supply and low income, piped water has the strongest impact in reducing
infant mortality rate at the higher quantiles of the conditional infant mortality rate.
We use the analogous method to examine the impact of water across the
conditional IMR distribution for counties in Group 2, Group 3 and Group 4.
         Next, consider our actual estimation model with four covariates. 41 In order
to generate a group of counties that are conditionally similar, we categorize
counties into groups sharing the same covariates or development indicators. We
have four covariates – piped water, piped sewage, income and education. A
county can measure either high or low on each covariate, with the cutoff for
high/low at the median of these variables. 42 Consequently, we have 16 groups of

41
  We limit the number of covariates in part because of the need to create group of counties that
are similar in their covariates. With four covariates, we generate 16 groups of counties.
42
  In 1970 and 1980, we use the cutoff of sewage coverage at the 55th and 65th percentile of
observations. In those years, a substantial number of counties did not have any households
connected to the sewage network.


                                               26
counties, arising from 24 combination of covariates. In order to capture the local
characteristic of each group of counties, we calculate the intra-group mean of
each characteristic for each of these groups of counties.
       Finally, to uncover the marginal impact of water across quantiles of the
conditional IMR distribution, within conditionally similar groups of counties, we do
the following. For Group 1, i.e. counties that score low in all four covariates, we
calculate the expression for the θth quantile using estimates from the appropriate
quantile regression. Next, for Group 1, we present the estimates from the 10th to
the 90th quantile in Figure 1. We repeat this exercise for other groups of counties
which share similar covariates. The marginal impact of a 0.01 increase in income
is calculated using an analogous method.


5.3    Simulation – Marginal effects of piped water and averted infant
deaths
       After conducting the estimations described above, we simulate the
policymaker’s expectation of averted infant deaths resulting from the additional
provision of piped water. We make this calculation using the estimates from both
the mean and quantile regression specifications. We apply these estimates to a
simulated change of one percentage point in the number of households receiving
piped water in each county.
       Recall that counties are grouped as being high or low in each of these four
covariates or development indicators: piped water, piped sewage, income and
education. We therefore have 16 groups of counties corresponding to 16
possible combinations of high or low values for the four indicators. We calculate
for each group of counties their intra-group mean income. Next, for each group
of counties, we calculate the intra-group distribution of the infant mortality rate. A
county will therefore occupy the θth percentile of the conditional infant mortality
rate distribution (i.e., within a group of counties that are similar in their four
development indicators).




                                         27
        For each county in a given group, we calculate the marginal effect of piped
water on its infant mortality rate (measured as deaths per 1000 live births) using
estimates from the appropriate quantile regression and accounting for local
conditions as captured by income. We then simulate the effect of an increase of
one percentage point in the number of households with piped water. 43
6 Regression results
        Table 2 reports the results from the regressions weighted by county-level
population. 44 Results from the mean regression are in column 1, while those from
the quantile regressions are in columns 2 to 10. Panels A, B and C present
results from the regressions for 1970-1980, 1980-1991, and 1991-2000,
respectively. To calculate the marginal impact of piped water, we use the
coefficients from the weighted quantile panel data regressions for 1970-1980,
1980-1991 and 1991-2000 and intra-group means from 1970, 1980, and 1991,
respectively. 45


6.1 Marginal impact of piped water
        We report the impact of a one percentage point increase in the number of
households with piped water supply. 46 As seen in Table 2, the coefficients for
water and the interaction term between water and income for the years 1970-
1980 and 1980-1991 are generally statistically significant at or below the 10%
level. For the estimates in 1991-2000, these coefficients are statistically
significant only in the regressions at the upper quantiles.



43
  For counties whose intra-group IMR is below the 10th percentile, we use the estimates from the
10th quantile regression. For counties whose intra-group IMR is between the 10th and 20th
percentile, we use the estimates from the 20th percentile regression, and so on. We use the
estimates from the 90th percentile for counties whose intra-group IMR is between the 80th and 90th
percentiles, as well as for counties whose intra-group IMR is above the 90th percentile.
44
   The results from the un-weighted regressions are similar to those from the weighted
regressions and are available on request from the authors.
45
   Results using the intra-group mean from 1980, 1991, and 2000 are qualitatively similar.
46
   We describe reductions in infant mortality resulting from a one percentage point increase in
households with piped water. In practice, the mean increase in households with piped water is 8.9
percentage points between 1970 and 1980, 18.2 percentage points between 1980 and 1991, and
20.2 percentage points between 1991 and 2000.


                                               28
        We find four main results for piped water. 47                   First, our results are
consistent with Shuval et al.’s (1981) theory. Piped water has a sizable impact in
reducing IMR after counties exceed a minimal threshold of socioeconomic
development, but it has little impact after counties cross a saturation threshold.
Consider Figure 1 which plots these impacts in counties that measure low in all
their development indicators. In 1970-1980, the increased piped water supply
reduced IMR by 0.61 to 0.82 deaths per 1000 live births. By 1980-1991, the
counties at the upper tail of the conditional IMR distribution have exceeded the
threshold of development, and we see piped water having a very strong impact.
At the 80th to the 90th conditional quantiles of the IMR distribution, piped water
reduced IMR by 1.25 to 1.28 deaths per 1000 live births. These reductions are
sizable when compared to the mean of 86.8 and 49.2 deaths per 1000 live births
in 1980 and 1991, respectively. In that same time period, we see some evidence
of counties in the lower tails of the conditional IMR distribution moving towards
the saturation point for the impact of water. At the 10th and 20th quantiles of the
conditional IMR distribution, increased piped water reduced IMR by 0.54 to 0.55
deaths per 1000 live births. Finally, corresponding to the saturation threshold, by
1991-2000 we see that piped water has very little impact at any point across the
conditional IMR distribution. By this point, increased by piped water reduced IMR
by only 0.03 to 0.21 deaths per 1000 live births.
        Second, we find that piped water has a larger impact in reducing IMR in
counties that rank low in their development indicators than in counties that rank
high, particularly in 1980-1991. Consider Figures 1 and 2, which plot these
impacts in counties that measure low in all of their development indicators and
high in at least two of their indicators, respectively. In the first set of counties, a
one percentage point increase in piped water reduces IMR by 0.54 to 1.28
deaths per 1000 live births. In contrast, in the second set of counties, the
increase in piped water reduces IMR by only 0.36 to 0.72 deaths per 1000 live


47
  As discussed above, each year we separate counties into sixteen groups that rank similarly in
their development indicators. For brevity, we present two graphs only, the first, from the group of
counties that rank low in their development indicators and the second, from the group of counties
that rank high in at least two of their development indicators.


                                                29
births. This pattern of piped water having a stronger protective effect in counties
that measure low in observable development indicators than in those that
measure high hold for most of the other group of counties as well. 48
          Third, we find evidence that the impact of piped water varies across the
conditional IMR distribution. In particular, in the group of counties that measure
similarly low or similarly high in their development indicators, piped water exerts
a stronger protective effect at the upper tail of the conditional IMR distribution
(particularly in 1980-1991). Consider counties that measure low in all of their
development indicators. As seen in Figure 1, additional piped water reduces IMR
by 1.25 deaths per 1000 at the 90th percentile but by only by 0.55 deaths per
1000 live births at the 10th percentile of the conditional IMR. This pattern of a
stronger protective impact of water in the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR
distribution in 1980-1991 is also evident in the group of counties that measure
high in their development indicators. As seen in Figure 2, the additional piped
water reduces IMR by 0.68 deaths per 1000 at the 90th percentile, but by 0.36
deaths per 1000 live births at the 10th percentile of the conditional IMR.
          Fourth, we find that (particularly in 1981-1990) the estimates from the
mean panel regression model severely understate the protective impact of piped
water for the populations occupying the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR
distribution. The mean estimates suggest that a one percentage point increase in
the number of households with piped water reduces IMR by 0.72 deaths per
1000 live births. In contrast, for the group of counties that measure low in their
development indicators, the quantile panel model finds that an increase in piped
water reduces IMR by 1.25 deaths per 1000 live births at the 90th conditional
quantile of the IMR.


6.2 Other variables: Income
          The marginal impact of income is given by the following expression:
βθ,income + βθ,water x income x WATER + βθ,sewage x income X SEWAGE, where WATER
and SEWAGE represent the intra-group mean percentage of households with

48
     Figures for these other groups of counties are available on request from the authors.


                                                  30
piped water supply and networked sewage, respectively. As seen in Table 2, the
coefficients for income and the interaction term between income and water for
the years 1970-1980 and 1980-1991 are generally statistically significant at or
below the 10% level. For the estimates in 1991-2000, these coefficients are
statistically significant only in some of the quantile regressions. We report the
impact of a 0.01 increase in income. 49
       Our results for income closely track the four patterns that emerged for
piped water. First, income has a sizable impact in reducing IMR after counties
exceed a minimal socioeconomic development threshold, but that impact dies off
after counties cross a saturation threshold. Consider Figure 3, which plots these
impacts in counties that measure low in all of their development indicators. In
1970-1980, increased income reduced IMR by 0.43 to 0.74 deaths per 1000 live
births. By 1980-1991, the counties at the upper tail of the conditional IMR
distribution exceeded the threshold of development, and we see income having a
very strong impact. At the 80th to the 90th conditional quantiles of the IMR,
income reduced IMR by 1.17 to 1.35 deaths per 1000 live births. In that same
time period, however, we see some evidence that counties in the lower tails of
the conditional IMR distribution were moving towards the saturation point for the
impact of income. At the 10th and 20th conditional quantiles of the IMR
distribution, increased income reduced IMR by only 0.26 and 0.36 deaths per
1000 live births, respectively. Finally, corresponding to the saturation threshold,
we see that income has very little impact across the conditional IMR distribution
by 1991-2000 when a 0.01 increase reduced IMR by only 0.24 deaths and 0.21
deaths at the 10th and 90th percentiles, respectively.
       Second, we find that income has a larger impact in reducing IMR in
counties that measure low in their development indicators than in counties that
measure high. Consider Figures 3 and 4, which plot these impacts for these two
groups of counties, respectively. In the first set of counties, a 0.01 increase in
piped water reduces IMR by 0.26 to 1.34 deaths per 1000 live births at the 10th

49
  In practice, the mean increase in income (measured by the HDI_income variable) between
1970 and 1980 is about 0.32. Income increased by 0.02 between 1980 and 1991, and it
increased by 0.05 between 1991 and 2000.


                                             31
and 90th percentiles. In contrast, in the second set of counties, the increase in
income reduces IMR by only 0.08 to 0.97 deaths per 1000 live births at the same
percentiles. This pattern of income having a stronger protective effect in counties
that measure low in development indicators than in those that measure high also
holds for most of the other county groups.
       Third, we find evidence that the impact of income varies across the
conditional IMR distribution. In particular, in the group of counties that measure
similarly low or similarly high in their development indicators, income exerts a
stronger protective effect in the upper tail of the conditional IMR distribution
(particularly in 1980-1991). Consider counties that measure low in their
development indicators. As seen in Figure 3, additional income reduces IMR by
1.34 deaths per 1000 at the 90th percentile but by only by 0.26 deaths per 1000
live births at the 10th percentile of the conditional IMR. This pattern of stronger
protective impact of income in the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR in 1980-
1991 is also evident in the group of counties that measure high in their
development indicators. As seen in Figure 4, additional income reduces IMR by
0.97 deaths per 1000 live births at the 90th percentile but by only 0.08 deaths per
1000 at the 10th percentile.
       Fourth, we find that, particularly in 1980-1991, the estimates from the
mean panel regression model severely understate the protective impact of
income for the populations occupying the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR
distribution. The mean estimates suggest that a 0.01 increase in income reduces
IMR by 0.41 deaths per 1000 live births. In contrast, for the group of counties that
measure low in their development indicators, the quantile panel model finds that
the increase in income reduces IMR by 1.34 deaths per 1000 live births at the
90th conditional quantile of the IMR.
       The total fertility rate may be associated with IMR. As this variable is
available only for 1991 and 2000, we compare 1991-2000 panel regressions with
and without it. Results are tabulated in Panel C1 and Panel C2 in Table 2. A
calculation of the marginal impact of water using the coefficients from Panel C1




                                         32
and Panel C2 indicate that the regression results are robust to the inclusion of
the total fertility rate variable.


6.3 Other variables: Interaction of piped water and income
        The interaction effects between piped water and income at the θth
quantile is given by Bθ      water x income.   This coefficient appears to be statistically
significant for all quantiles in 1970-1980, 1980-1991, and for the upper-quantiles
in 1991-2000. For a given panel model, the size of the estimates are larger at the
upper-quantiles relative to the lower quantiles, and this gap in size appears
largest in 1980-1991.
        To recall, our results on water indicate that, holding income constant,
piped water appears most effective at the upper-quantiles of the conditional IMR
distribution, where unobserved determinants are worse. The positive interaction
effect between piped water and income suggest that these two inputs into infant
health are substitutes. In other words, income reduces the effectiveness of piped
water, suggesting that households are able to translate income into purchases
that can substitute for piped water as an input into producing better health
outcomes. The larger size of the coefficients at the upper quantiles suggests that
income can be more effectively used as a substitute for water at those upper-
quantiles. Plausibly, in counties occupying the upper-quantiles of the conditional
IMR distribution, which suffer numerous unobserved poor circumstances, income
can be used to address the ‘simpler’ pathways that lead to infant mortality. In the
lower-quantiles, fewer unobserved circumstances remain that can be addressed
with income, and ultimately, the provision piped water is necessary to attain the
desired IMR reduction.


6.4 Other variables: Sewage
        The marginal impact of sewage at the θth quantile is given by βθ,sewage
+βθ,water   x sewage   X WATER + βθ,water       x income   X INCOME, where WATER and
INCOME represent the intra-group mean percentage of households with piped
water supply and the intragroup mean income. Table 2 indicates that this impact



                                                33
is not statistically significant. These results stand in contrast with our earlier
results on piped water.
          Our results are consistent with Victora et al (1988), in a population-based
study in Porto Alegro and Pelotas, Brazil, which finds that piped water supply is
associated with reduced infant mortality, but no association is detected for
measures of sanitation facilities (flush toilets or pit latrine). In contrast, Barreto et
al. (2007) find that a city-wide sanitation program in Salvador, Brazil, reduced
diarrheal prevalence by 22% on average and by 43% in the poorest
neighborhoods. 50    51


          Nevertheless, our results should be treated with caution in light of two
limitations in our study. First, as our variable measures networked sewage (i.e.,
only one type of sanitation facilities), our study provides limited information on the
potential impact of sanitation facilities on IMR. Second, we have little cross-
sectional variation in our explanatory variable (sewage t2-sewage t1), so we have
limited ability to discern related variation in our dependent variable, (IMR t2 – IMR
t1).   Thus, the corresponding estimated coefficient has a large standard error.


6.5 Other variables: Education 52
          Our results indicate that education is more effective at reducing IMR
where the overall circumstances are worse. The marginal impact of education is
indeed larger in 1970-1980 and 1980-1991 and its asymmetry is more
pronounced in these years than in the latter years. In 1970-1980, a 0.01
increase in education reduces infant mortality by 1.8 deaths in the 10th percentile
and by almost one-and-a-half times that amount (i.e. 2.8 deaths) at the 90th
percentile. In 1980-1991, the gap is larger with 0.74 avoided deaths at the 10th
percentile and 2.0 deaths at the 90th percentile. In 1991-2000, the gap declines to

50
   The sanitation program aimed to increase the number of households with an adequate sewer
system from 26% to 80%. The program focused on sewage connection, but included some
improvements in water supply (Barreto et al, 2007).
51
   The contrasting results between diarrheal prevalence and mortality may be caused by care-
seeking behavior, case management and nutritional status (Caincross, pers. comm. May 21
2008).




                                              34
0.77 avoided deaths at the 10th percentile and 1.2 deaths at the 90th percentile. In
all three decades, the mean estimate falls between the estimates from the 10th
and 90th quantile regressions.


6.6 Other models: Urban counties only
       As described earlier, our basic model includes only one type of sanitation
(i.e., network sewage), which is considered the only adequate sanitation method
for the urban areas. Our model therefore omits other types of sanitation, such as
pit latrines, that are considered to be adequate in rural areas. To address this
limitation, we re-run our analysis restricting our sample to only urban counties.
We define urban counties to be those with 50% or more of their households living
in urban areas. 53
       Table 3 tabulates the results from the urban only sample. Our results
(particularly from 1980-1991) indicate that additional piped water supply has a
sizable impact in reducing the infant mortality rate. Figures 5 and 6 show a
comparison of the marginal impact of water estimated using the full sample and
that estimated using the urban only sample. As seen from these figures, the
marginal impact of water remains sizable for the urban sample, though it is
smaller in magnitude than in the full sample. It may well be that, in our earlier
estimates, the failure to control adequately for latrines in rural areas led us to
attribute too much of the impact in reduction of IMR to piped water supply.
Nevertheless, our results from the restricted urban only sample continue to show
the four patterns observed earlier. First, the marginal impact of water follows the
pattern suggested by Shuval et al. (1981). Second, comparing Figure 5 and 6,
we see that piped water has a stronger effect in the set of counties that measure
low in their development indicators. Third, piped water has a stronger protective
effect in the upper tails of the conditional IMR distribution. Fourth, we find that the

52
   Gender-specific education information are not available at the MCA-level. Therefore, we are
not able to examine the question of the interaction between maternal education and piped water
(Barrera, 1990a).
53
   Urbanized counties in the 1970-80, 1980-1991 and 1991-2000 panels are defined based on
1970, 1980 and 1991 values. Results (available from the authors upon request) are similar using
a 70% urbanization cutoff.


                                              35
mean panel regression model underestimates the protective impact of income for
the populations occupying the upper quantiles of the conditional IMR distribution.
While the mean estimate suggests that a one percentage point increase in the
number of households with piped water reduces IMR by 0.63 deaths, the quantile
estimates at the 90th percentile suggest a reduction of 0.87 deaths per 1000 live
births.


6.7 Other models: Under-5 child mortality rate
          We extend our analysis to the under-5 child mortality rate. 54 Our analysis
is limited to one panel model (i.e., 1991-2000) because the under-5 child
mortality rates at the MCA level are available only for those two census years.
Our results, presented in Table 4, indicate that piped water did not have a
statistically significant impact on under-5 child mortality. Recall that piped water
has a strong protective impact on under-1 mortality in 1980-1991 but its effects
are attenuated by 1991-2000.
          Our results showing that piped water has a stronger protective impact on
infants than on children under the age of five are consistent with those in the
previous literature. Several studies document a negative association between
the presence of piped water and infant mortality, but no statistically significant
association between that presence and child mortality (Rutstein, 2000; Abou-Ali,
2003; Woldemicael, 2000). 55 Butz el al. (1984) suggests the following
explanation for this age pattern. “As infants mature (i.e., their immunity systems
mature), they become less susceptible to enteric pathogens. Infant maturation

54
   A large number of studies reviewed in Fewtrell et al. (2005) examine infant and children aged
0-60 months.
55
   Rutstein (2000), in her meta-analysis of the 89 DHS surveys between 1986 and 1998, finds
that a statistically significant negative association between piped water and the mortality of
children aged 1, but no statistically significant association between piped water and the mortality
of children aged 1-4. Abou-Ali (2003), examining the 1995-6 Egyptian Demographic and Health
Survey (DHS), finds a statistically significant negative association between presence of piped
water (whether in residence or in the neighborhood) and post-neonatal mortality (2-12 months)
but no statistical significant association between piped water and child mortality (12-60 months).
Woldemicael (2000) finds, in the 1995 Eritrean DHS, a statistically significant negative
association between good household environment (neither piped water nor flush toilet or only one
of the two) and neonatal mortality (1-13 months) but no statistically significant association
between piped water and child mortality (14-60 months).



                                                36
explains why, in spite of increasing exposure with age to the environment and its
pathogens, improved water and sanitation prevent fewer deaths in the later
months.”


6.8 Averted deaths
       Section 1 of Table 5 shows the number of averted deaths as a result of an
increase of one percentage point in the number of households with piped water
in each county. Section 2 shows the number of averted deaths as a result of an
increase of 0.01 in income. Calculations using the quantile panel data procedure
are tabulated in column (1) while those using the mean fixed effect regressions
are tabulated in column (2). The difference between the two columns reflects the
asymmetry of the distribution of marginal effects in each decade. There is a
strong right-skew pulling up the mean marginal effect of both water and income
estimated in the 1980-1991 regression. In contrast, the opposite skew pulls
down the mean effect for water estimated in the 1970-1980 regression. By the
period 1991-2000, aggregate effects (particularly for water) are very similar under
both measures. These results emphasize the fact that it is difficult to predict
which direction asymmetric marginal effects will pull mean estimates, highlighting
the role played by quantile estimation in recovering the full distribution of effects.


6.9 Cross-section results
       We examine the naïve cross-sectional estimates as seen in Table 6. The
association between a one percentage point increase in the number of
households with piped water and the infant mortality rate at the θth quantile is
plotted in Figure 7. The cross sectional estimates, particularly in 1970 and 1980,
indicate that greater provision of piped water is correlated with larger infant
mortality rates. We see a particularly strong correlation between water supply
and increased mortality at the higher conditional quantiles of the IMR, although
the size of the bias diminishes in the latter years of the analysis. This
counterintuitive result is likely to be an artifact from the systematic underreporting




                                          37
of infant mortality rates in areas on the upper tails of the IMR distribution that
tend to receive less water.




7 Discussion and Policy Implication
      For those populations at greatest risk, can the provision of piped water
reduce the infant mortality rate or are complementary inputs such as income and
other public health infrastructure required?     Our results are consistent with
Shuval et al.’s (1981) threshold-saturation hypothesis, in which the relationship
between water supply and IMR varies with changing socioeconomic levels.
Assuming that our differencing procedure can adequately control for correlated
unobservables and measurement error, we find that water has a small effect in
the most undeveloped places (i.e., when we look at the high conditional quantiles
in 1970-80). As counties start to develop (i.e., the higher quantiles in 1980-91),
the protective effect of water on IMR starts to rise rapidly. As counties become
more developed (i.e., low quantiles in 1980-91) the protective effect of water
declines. Finally, when very developed (i.e., low quantiles in 1991-00), the effect
of water on IMR is very small.
      In 1980-1991, the marginal impact of piped water is greatest in those
counties with poorest performance in their observable development indicators.
For counties with poor development indicators – averted deaths at the 90th
percentile is 1.25 per 1000 live births, while for counties with good development
indicators only 0.68 are averted. In addition, among those counties that share
common development indicators, particularly in 1980-1991, we find that piped
water exerts a stronger protective effect in those counties that occupy higher
positions in the conditional IMR distribution (i.e., counties that are worse in
unobservable development indicators).
       Our results therefore show that (1) piped water provision can cause a
significant reduction in the IMR (when accompanied by a basic level of other
public health inputs); and (2) the impact of a piped water provision policy is
determined in large part by how those piped water connections are distributed.



                                        38
Ignoring costs of provision, our results suggest that, from the perspective of
health outcomes, new piped water resources should be targeted to the most
disadvantaged communities. 56,57,58
          What can policy-makers learn from our study? In addition to recognizing
the role of particular observed characteristics that influence the effectiveness of
piped water in reducing IMR, policymakers also need to take into account the
role of unobserved characteristics – i.e., characteristics that cannot be easily
summarized with available data. In practice, policymakers can control for these
unobservables by implementing the following strategy, which allows one to
recover their distribution up to a scale and location normalization. Reconsider
equation (10), from which we know that the estimated value of β θ is equal

to β + ψρ θ .   Making the location normalization that the median of ε i,t is zero

(i.e., ρ 50 = 0 ), we immediately identify β (i.e., β = β 50 ). Next, making a scale

normalization (e.g., ρ 75 = 1 ) we can further identify ψ (i.e., ψ = β 75 − β ). With

estimates of β and ψ , we can then recover the distribution of ε i ,t (i.e., different

values of ρθ ) from equation (9) simply by observing the conditional quantiles of

y i,t .   The resulting ranking of residuals can then be used to help determine

where to target piped water interventions. Our results suggest that there will be

56
   We do not have detailed data to allow a comprehensive cost-effectiveness or cost-benefit
analysis on the impact of piped water. Program-specific costs of piped water provision will
depend on numerous location conditions such as the geography and the existing piped water
network. Dr. Marcos Thadeu Abicalil, Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist in The World Bank’s
Brasilia’s Office, reports the following estimates for the per capita costs for the provision of piped
water supply and sewage networks: BRL 428; and BRL 797 (pers. comm., 2008). Abiko (2007)
provides some estimates on the costs of provision of piped water based on slum upgrading
programs. Haller et al. (2007) and Hutton et al. (2007) provide a comprehensive study on the cost
effectiveness and the costs-benefit analyses of various child health and water and sanitation
improvements, respectively. Both Haller et al. (2007) and Hutton et al. (2007) add qualifications to
their study, citing Briscoe’s (1984b) and Okun’s (1988) earlier critique of such analyses.
57
  Policymakers may consider other factors in piped water placement such as population density.
We acknowledge that the provision of piped water may be cheaper in areas with good
development indicators and/or low conditional IMR. These locations may already have a minimal
level of existing infrastructure. New outlays of pipelines may have to be undertaken in
disadvantaged areas.
58
   “It has been suggested that piped water disproportionately benefits the better-off people of a
village” (Mohan, 2005). Further interventions would have to be undertaken to overcome social
constraints and connection costs that prevent the vulnerable households from accessing the
network.


                                                 39
statistically and economically significant, policy-relevant differences in the
effectiveness of piped water over these indicators of unobservable determinants,
with the biggest effects coming high in their distribution.
       Methodologically, these results highlight the importance of applying the
quantile regression framework to recover the marginal effects of water at various
parts of the conditional distribution of the IMR. The marginal effects at various
parts of the conditional IMR distribution differ substantially from those at the
mean of the distribution. Indeed, focusing on the mean of the distribution can
lead to an underestimate of the potential impact of piped water intervention in
higher percentiles of the conditional IMR distribution. Our results for piped water
intervention correspond with the growing literature on the heterogeneity of
program impacts across the quantiles of the conditional distribution of the
outcome variable and the insufficiency of mean estimates to represent this
policy-relevant heterogeneity.
       Quantile estimation for the evaluation of policy is, however, quite difficult.
Policies are not often allocated randomly, and good instruments may not be
available. Traditional quantile regression is not generally feasible in the panel
data context. In contrast, our quantile panel data approach can be widely applied
to the evaluation of other programs that provide health inputs or public goods in
developing countries. This method allows policymakers to understand the impact
of these programs on the subpopulations that are most at risk, and these
subpopulations tend to occupy the tails in the conditional distribution. Amidst the
scarcity of random assignment and viable instruments, but with the growing
availability of panel data in developing countries, the panel data approach
provides a promising strategy to address the issue of bias arising from
unobservables (albeit only time invariant ones) within the context of quantile
regressions.




                                          40
Bibliography

Abadie A, Angrist J, Imbens G. Instrumental variables estimates of the effect of
subsidized training on the quantiles of trainee earnings. Econometrica 2002;
70(1); 91-117.

Abiko A, de Azevedo Cardoso LR, Rinaldelli R, Riogi Haga HC, Basic costs of
slum upgrading in Brazil, Global Urban Development Magazine Nov 2007, 3(1)

Abrevaya J. The effects of demographics and maternal behavior on the
distribution of birth outcomes. Empirical Economics 2001; 26 (1); 247-257.

Abrevaya J, Dahl CM. The effects of birth inputs on birthweight: evidence from
quantile estimation on panel data. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
2006 (conditionally accepted).

Abou-Ali H. The effect of water and sanitation on child mortality in Egypt.
Department of Economics, Goteburg University, Scandinavian Working Papers in
Economics # 112, 2003.

Ahn S, Schmidt P, Lee Y. GMM Estimation of a Panel Data Regression Model
with Time-Varying Individual Effects. Journal of Econometrics 2001; 101; 219-
255.

Alves D, Belluzzo W. Infant mortality and child health in Brazil. Economics and
Human Biology 2004; Special Issue 2(3); 391-410.

Anderson JE. Survey of maternal and child health and family planning in
Northeastern Brazil: measurement of the duration of breastfeeding and
postpartum amenorrhea. US Department of Health and Human Services, Center
for Disease Control working paper; 1991.

Arias O, Hallock K, Sosa-Escudero, W. Individual heterogeneity in the returns to
schooling: instrumental variable quantile regression using twins data. Empirical
Economics 2001; 26; 7-40.

Barnum, H. Interaction of infant mortality and fertility and the effectiveness of
health and family planning programs. Policy Planning and Research Working
Papers, Population Health and Nutrition, Population and Human Resources
Department, the World Bank, WPS 65; July 1988.

Barrera, A. The role of maternal schooling and its interaction with public health
programs in child health production. Journal of Development Economics 1990a;
32; 69-91.




                                       41
Barrera, A. The interactive effects of mother's schooling and unsupplemented
breastfeeding on child health. Journal of Development Economics 1990b; 34; 81-
98.

Barreto ML, Genser B, Strina A, Teixeira MG, Assis AM, Rego RF, Teles CA,
Prado MS, Matos SM, Santos DN, dos Santos LA, Cairncross S.
Effect of city-wide sanitation programme on reduction in rate of childhood
diarrhoea in northeast Brazil: assessment by two cohort studies. Lancet 2007;
370(9599);1622-1628.

Bitler M, Gelbach J, Hoynes H. Distributional impacts of the Self-Sufficiency
Project. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11626;
September 2005.

Bitler MP, Gelbach J, Hoynes H. What mean impacts miss: distributional effects
of welfare reform experiments. American Economic Review; 2006; 96; 988-1012.

Black, RE. Diarrheal diseases and child morbidity and mortality. In: Mosley WH,
Chen LC (Eds), Child survival: strategies for research. Population and
Development Review 1984; 10 (suppl); 141-161.

Black RE, Morris SS, Bryce J. Where and why are 10 million children dying every
year? Lancet 2003; 361 (9376); 2226-2234.

Bourne PG. Water and sanitation for all. In: Bourne PG (Ed), Water and
Sanitation: Economic and Sociological Perspectives, Academic Press; Orlando;
1984; 1-20.

Briscoe J. Intervention studies and the definition of dominant transmission routes.
American Journal of Epidemiology 1984a; 120(3); 449-455.

Briscoe J. Water Supply and Health in Developing Countries: Selective Primary
Health Care Revisited, American Journal of Public Health 1984b; 74( 9); 1009-
1013

Briscoe J. Evaluating water supply and other health programs: short-run vs long-
run mortality effects. Public Health 1985; 99; 142-145.

Buchinsky M. Recent advances in quantile regression models: a practical guide
for empirical research. Journal of Human Resources 1998; 33(1); 88-126.

Butz WP, Habicht JP, DaVanzo J. Environmental factors in the relationship
between breastfeeding and Infant mortality: the role of sanitation and water in
Malaysia. American Journal of Epidemiology 1984; 119(4); 516-25.




                                        42
Cairncross S. Health impacts in developing countries: new evidence and new
prospects Journal of the Institution of Water and Environmental Management
1990; 4(6); 571-577.

Cairncross S. Handwashing with soap – a new way to prevent ARIs? Tropical
Medicine and International Health 2003; 8(8); 677–679.

Chamberlain, Gary, Multivariate regression models for panel data, Journal of
Econometrics 1982; 18(1); 5–46.

Chen S, Khan S. Semiparametric estimation of non-stationary censored panel
model data models with time-varying factor. Econometric Theory 2007;
forthcoming

Chernozhukov V, Hansen C. An IV model of quantile treatment effects.
Econometrica 2005; 73(1); 245-261.

Clasen TF, Brown J, Collin, Suntura O , Caincross S. Reducing Diarrhea
Through the Use of Household-Based Ceramic Water Filters: A Randomized
Controlled Trial in Rural Bolivia. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene 2004 70 (6): 651–57.

Clasen T, Roberts I, Rabie T, Schmidt W, Cairncross S Interventions to improve
water quality for preventing diarrhoea (Review), The Cochrane Library 2008,
Issue 2

Conroy RM, Elmore-Meegan M, Joyce T, McGuigan K, Branes J. Solar
disinfection of drinking water and diarrhoea in Maasai children: a controlled field
trial. Lancet 1996; 348; 1695–1697.

Crump JA, Otieno P, Slutsker L, Keswick BH, Rosen DH, Hoekstra RM, Vulule
JM, Luby SP. Household based treatment of drinking water with flocculant-
disinfectant for preventing dirrhoea in areas with turbid source water in rural
western Kenya: a cluster randomized trial. British Medical Journal 2005; 331;
478-83.

Curtis V, Kanki B, Mertens T, Traore E, Diallo I, Tall F, Cousens S. Potties, pits
and pipes: explaining hygiene behaviour in Burkina Faso. Social Science and
Medicine 1995; 41; 383–393.

Cutler D, Miller G. The role of public health improvements in health advances:
the twentieth century United States. Demography 2005; 42(1); 1-22.

Djebbari H, Smith J. Heterogeneous Program Impacts in PROGRESA, mimeo,
Laval University and University of Michigan working paper 2005.




                                        43
ERM (in Association with Stephen Myers Associates and Hydroconseil). Models
of Aggregation for Water and Sanitation Provision Case Studies Volume 2;
November 2003.

ERM (in association with Stephen Meyers Associates and Hydroconseil) and
William D. Kingdom. Models of Aggregation for Water and Sanitation Provision
Water Supply & Sanitation Working Notes Note No. 1, January 2005.

Esrey SA, Feachem RG, Hughes JM. Interventions for the control of diarrhoeal
disease among young children: improving water supplies and excreta disposal
facilities. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 1985; 63; 757–772.

Esrey SA, Habicht JP. Epidemiologic evidence for health benefits from improved
water and sanitation in developing countries. Epidemiologic Reviews 1986; 8;
117-127.

Esrey SA, Habicht JP. Maternal literacy modifies the effect of toilets and piped
water on infant survival in Malaysia. American Journal of Epidemiology 1988;
127(5):1079-1087.

Esrey SA, Habicht JP, Casella G. The complementary effect of latrines and
increased water usage on the growth of infants in rural Lesotho. American
Journal of Epidemiology 1992; 135(6); 659-666.

Esrey SA, Potash JB, Roberts L, Shiff C. Effects of improved water supply and
sanitation on ascariasis, diarrhoea, dracunculiasis, hookworm infection,
schistosomiasis, and tracoma. Bulletin of the World Health Organization
1991;69(5):609–21.

Fewtrell L, Kaufmann R, Kay D , Enanoria W, Haller L , Colford Jr J. Water,
sanitation, and hygiene interventions to reduce diarrhoea in less developed
countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases 2005, 5(1); 42–52.

Fitzenberger B, Koenker R, Machado JAF. Economic applications of quantile
regression. Studies in empirical economics, Heidelberg; Physica Verlag; 2002.

Garrido, R. Insitutional aspects of water quality management in Brazil. In Biswas
AK et. al.). Water Quality Management in the Americas. Springer-Verlag; Berlin,
2006; 95-106.

Habicht JP, Da Vanzo J, Butz WP, Mother’s milk and sewage: their interactive
effects on infant mortality. Pediatrics 1988; 81(3); 456-461.

Haller L, Hutton G, Bartram J. Estimating the costs and health benefits of water
and sanitation improvements at global level. Journal of Water and Health. 2007;



                                       44
5(4);                                                                  467-80.

Heckman J, Smith J, Clements N. Making the most out of programme
evaluations and social experiments: accounting for heterogeneity in programme
impacts. In: The Review of Economic Studies; Special Issue: Evaluation of
Training and Other Social Programmes. 1997; 64(4); 487-535.

Hutton G, Haller L, Bartram J. Global cost-benefit analysis of water supply and
sanitation interventions. Journal of Water and Health. 2007; 5(4); 481-502.

Jalan, J, Ravallion M, Does piped water reduce diarrhea for children in rural
India? Journal of Econometrics 2003; 112(1); 153-173.

Katakura Y. Bakalian, A. PROSANEAR: People, Poverty and Pipes; UNDP-
World Bank Water and Sanitation Program; Washington DC; 1998

Khan S, Tamer E, Inference on endogenously censored regression models using
conditional moment inequalities. Journal of Econometrics 2008; forthcoming.

Kremer M, Leino L, Miguel E, Zwane Spring Cleaning: Rural Water Impacts,
Valuation, and Institutions, Department of Economics, Harvard University
working paper, 2007.

Koenker R, Bassett G. Regression Quantiles. Econometrica 1978; 46(1); 33-51.

Koenker R, Hallock KF. Quantile regression. Journal of Economic Perspectives
2001; 15 (4); 143-156.

Lee LF, Rosenzweig MR, Pitt MM. The effects of improved nutrition, sanitation,
and water quality on child health in high-mortality populations. Journal of
Econometrics 1997; 77; 209-236.

McNallen B. Fixing the leaks in Brazil’s Water Law: encouraging sound private
sector: participation through legal and regulatory reform. Gonzaga Journal of
International Law 2006; 9; 147-199.

Merrick TW. The effect of piped water on early childhood mortality in urban
Brazil: 1970 to 1976. Demography 1985; 22 (1); 1-24.

Mintz, E, Bartram J, Lochery P, Wegelin M, Not Just a Drop in the Bucket:
Expanding Access to Point-of-Use Water Treatment Systems. American Journal
of Public Health 2001; 91(10); 1565–1570.

Mobarak AM, Rajkumar AS, Cropper M. The political economy of health-care
provision and access in Brazil. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
3508; 2005.



                                      45
Mohan P. Inequities in coverage of preventive child health interventions:
The Rural Drinking Water Supply Program and the Universal Immunization
Program in Rajasthan, India. American Journal of Public Health 2005; 95(2);
241-244.

Okun DA. The value of water supply and sanitation in development: an
assessment. American Journal of Public Health 1988; 78(11); 1463-1467.

Pebley AR, Millman S. Birthspacing and child survival, International Family
Planning Perspectives 1986; 12(3); 71-79.

Population Council. Brazil 1986: Results from the Demographic and Health
Survey. Studies in Family Planning 1988; 19(1); 61-65

Population Council. Brazil 1996: Results from the Demographic and Health
Survey Studies in Family Planning 1998; 29(1); 88-92

Potter JE, Schmertmann CP, Cavenaghi SM. Fertility and Development:
Evidence from Brazil. Demography 2002; 39(4): 739-761.

Rosenzweig MR, Schultz TP. Child mortality in Colombia: individual and
community effects. Health Policy and Education 1982; 2(3-4):305-348.

Rosenzweig, MR, Wolpin, K. Evaluating the Effects of Optimally Distributed
Public Programs: Child Health and Family Planning Interventions. American
Economic Review 1986; 76 (3); 470-482.

Rutstein, S.O. 2000. Factors associated with trends in infant and child mortality in
developing countries during the 1990s. Bulletin of the World Health Organization
78(10), 1256-1270

Sastry N. Community characteristics, individual and household attributes, and
child survival in Brazil. Demography 1996; 33(2); 211-229.

Sastry N, Burgard S. Diarrheal disease and its treatment among Brazilian
children: stagnation and progress over a ten-year period, RAND Labor and
Population Program WPS 02-04; 2002.

Sastry N, Burgard S. The prevalence of diarrheal disease among Brazilian
children: trends and differentials from 1986 to 1996. Social Science and
Medicine, 60 (5), 923-935; 2005

Senauer B, Kassouf AL. The effects of breastfeeding on health and the demand
for medical assistance among children in Brazil. Economic Development and
Cultural Change 2000; 48 (4); 719-736.


                                         46
Shuval HR, Tilden RL, Perry BH, Grosse RN. Effect of investments in water
supply and sanitation on health status: a threshold-saturation theory. Bulletin of
World Health Organization 1981; 59(2); 243-248.

Simões CC. Estimativas da mortalidade infantil por microrregiões e municípios.
Brasília: Ministério da Saúde (SPS); 1999.

Stefani P, Biderman C. Returns to education and wage differentials in Brazil: a
quantile approach. Economics Bulletin 2006; 9(1); 1-6.

Thomas D, Strauss J. Prices, infrastructure, household characteristics and child
height. Journal of Development Economics 1992; 39(2); 301-331.

Thomas D, Strauss J, Henriques MH. Child survival, height for age and
household characteristics in Brazil. Journal of Development Economics 1990;
33(2); 197-234.

Thomas D, Strauss J, Henriques MH. How does mother’s education affect child
height? Journal of Human Resources 1991; 26(2); 183-211.

Troesken W. Race Disease and the Provision of Water in American cities (1889-
1921), Journal of Economic History 2001; 61(3); 750-756.

UNICEF. The Progress of Nations 1997 - New York: UNICEF, 1997. (ISBN 92-
806-3314-7)

United Nations. The Millenium Development Goals Report 2005; United Nations:
New York; 2005.

Victora CG. Potential interventions to improve the health of mothers and children
in Brazil. Revista Brasileira de Epidemiologia 2001; 4(1); 3-69 (In Portuguese).

Victora CG, Barros FC. Infant mortality due to perinatal causes in Brazil: trends,
regional patterns and possible interventions. Sao Paolo Medical Journal 2001;
191(1); 33-42.

Victora CG, Olinto MTA, Barros, FC, Nobre LC. Falling diarrhea mortality in
Northeastern Brazil: did ORT play a role? Health Policy and Planning 1996;
11(2); 132-141.

Victora CG, Smith PG, Vaughan JP. Social and Environmental Influences on
Child Mortality in Brazil: Logistic Regression Analysis from Census Files Journal
of Biosocial Science 1986 18(1); 87-101.




                                        47
Victora CG, Smith PG, Vaughan JP, Nobre LC, Lombardi C, Teixeira AMB,
Fuchs SC, Moreira LB, Gigante LP, Barros FC. 1987. Evidence for protection by
breast-feeding against infant deaths from infectious diseases in Brazil. Lancet
1987; 2(8554); 319–322.

Victora CG, Smith PG, Vaughan JP, Nobre LC, Lombard C, Teixeira AMB, Fuchs
SC, L.B. Moreira LB, Gigante LP, Barros FC. Water supply, sanitation and
housing in relation to the risk of infant mortality from diarrhea. International
Journal of Epidemiology 1988; 17(3); 651-654.

Watson T. Public health investments and the infant mortality gap: evidence from
federal sanitation interventions in US Indian Reservations. Journal of Public
Economics 2006; 90 (8-9); 1537-1560.

Weinreb AA. First Politics, Then Culture: Accounting for Ethnic Differences in
Demographic Behavior in Kenya. Population and Development Review 2001,
27(3); 437-467.

Woldemicael G. The effects of water supply and sanitation on childhood mortality
in urban Eritrea. Journal of Biosocial Science 2000; 32; 207-227.

World Bank. Brazil: Equitable, Competitive, Sustainable: Contributions for
Debate. World Bank: Washington DC; 2003.

WHO/UNICEF. Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment 2000 Report.
Geneva: Joint WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and
Sanitation 2000 (ISBN 92 4 1562021)

World Health Organization and United National Children’s Fund. 2006. Joint
Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation. Coverage Estimates.
Improved Sanitation.

Zwane AP, Kremer M. What works in fighting diarrheal diseases in developing
countries? A critical review. World Bank Research Observer 2007; forthcoming.




                                       48
Table 1A: Provision of piped water by region (1970-2000)
Year                            1970       1970       1980      1980         1990      1990       2000       2000
Location                       Urban      Rural      Urban      Rural       Urban      Rural     Urban       Rural

Water      Northeast              15          2          29         8           39        19         62        42
IMR        Northeast             192        180         138       136           73        78         50        55

Water      North                  17          4          22         8           27        13         50        31
IMR        North                 118        113          72        70           54        59         40        42

Water      Center-West             20         4          21         7           44        25         69        48
IMR        Center-West             93        92          60        60           33        36         25        31

Water      South                   27         8          43        16           62        32         74        44
IMR        South                   84        85          55        53           32        31         19        19

Water     Southeast               51        20           52        23            66       33         77        47
IMR       Southeast               96        98           60        62            31       40         22        32
Notes: Water denotes the percentage of households in a county with piped water.
      IMR denotes the under-1 infant mortality rate in deaths per 1000 live births.
      Urban counties in a given year are those with 50% or more of their population living in urban areas.
Table 1B: Summary Statistics
                               Year    Mean    Std. Dev.
Infant mortality rate          1970    125.3        52.7
(in deaths per 1000 live
births)                        1980     86.8       45.2
                               1991     49.2       24.4
                               2000     33.7       18.1

Percentage households          1970     15.1       19.5
with piped water (%)           1980     24.0       21.8
(Water)                        1991     42.2       23.9
                               2000     62.4       20.5

Percentage households          1970      5.3       12.3
with sewage connections
(%)                            1980     10.6       19.1
(Sewage)                       1991     18.0       26.6
                               2000     29.4       30.4

Human Development Index        1970     0.22       0.16
Income (income)                1980     0.54       0.27
                               1991     0.56       0.10
                               2000     0.61       0.10

Human Development Index        1970     0.40       0.14
Education (education)          1980     0.47       0.14
                               1991     0.65       0.13
                               2000     0.78       0.09

Total fertility rate           1970      5.9        1.5
                               1980      4.5        1.4
                               1991      3.6        1.2
                               2000      2.8        0.7

Female population              1970   12,796     68,110
                               1980   16,366     93,898
                               1991   20,322    110,204
                               2000   23,542    123,214
Table 1C: Literacy rates by region
                   1981                     1991                   2000
              Male       Female      Male          Female   Male          Female
Northeast     42.3       40.9        38.9          34.1     26.3          22.4
North         14.2       16.7        11.8          13.1     11.5          11.0
Central-west 19.9        22.7        16.6          17.1     10.2          10.3
South         13.5       17.7        10.1          13.1     6.4           7.7
Southeast     12.5       17.6        9.6           13.0     6.7           8.3
Source: IPEA region-level data
Table 2 : The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population
                 (1)            (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)            (9)             (10)
Method       Mean                                                        Quantile
Percentile                             10            20            30             40               50           60          70               80           90
Panel A: 1970-1980
water             -0.48 **         -0.81 **      -0.75 **      -0.69 **       -0.75 **         -0.83 **      -0.79 **    -0.94   **      -0.91    **    -0.95   **
                 (0.06)           (0.17)        (0.17)        (0.15)         (0.14)           (0.15)        (0.16)      (0.16)          (0.19)         (0.28)
sewage             0.14             0.33          0.44          0.23           0.38             0.38          0.46 *      0.41            0.20           0.31
                 (0.11)           (0.30)        (0.28)        (0.27)         (0.27)           (0.27)        (0.28)      (0.29)          (0.35)         (0.48)
income              -56 **            -47 **       -45 **         -49 **         -56 **           -56 **       -58 **      -66   **        -70    **      -77   **
                 (2.99)           (6.52)        (6.20)        (6.42)         (6.40)           (6.62)        (7.08)      (7.51)          (8.39)         (11.3)
education          -242 **          -179 **       -212 **       -224 **        -221 **          -231 **       -243 **     -256   **       -270    **     -277   **
                 (9.90)              (21)       (21.6)           (21)           (22)             (23)       (25.5)      (28.9)          (30.5)         (37.0)
water              0.46 **          0.90 **       0.68 **       0.68 **        0.76 **          0.80 **       0.77 **     1.15   **       1.04    **     1.08   **
   x income      (0.06)           (0.22)        (0.21)        (0.18)         (0.18)           (0.19)        (0.20)      (0.22)          (0.26)         (0.39)
sewage            -0.08            -0.16         -0.48 *       -0.24          -0.37            -0.47 *       -0.44 *     -0.43           -0.21          -0.21
  x income       (0.10)           (0.30)        (0.27)        (0.26)         (0.25)           (0.24)        (0.26)      (0.28)          (0.35)         (0.53)
water           -0.003 **        -0.012 *      -0.002        -0.002         -0.002           -0.001        -0.002      -0.008          -0.007         -0.008
  x sewage     (0.001)         (0.006)        (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.005)          (0.005)       (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.006)        (0.009)
Notes: No. obs. 3568. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 2 (continued) : The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population
                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)            (10)
Method       Mean                                                       Quantile
Percentile                           10             20            30             40               50            60          70          80           90
Panel B: 1980-1991
water             -1.36 **        -0.76 **      -0.74 **       -0.93 **       -1.04 **         -1.25 **      -1.40 **    -1.74 **    -2.01   **    -2.00   **
                 (0.10)          (0.15)        (0.13)         (0.15)         (0.15)           (0.16)        (0.17)      (0.18)      (0.19)        (0.23)
sewage             0.32 **        -0.31         -0.40           0.02          -0.05             0.09          0.20        0.28        0.28          0.37
                 (0.14)          (0.31)        (0.31)         (0.32)         (0.30)           (0.30)        (0.32)      (0.34)      (0.37)        (0.39)
income          -69.27 **           -32 **        -41 **         -56 **         -67 **           -81 **        -93 **     -110 **     -136   **     -155   **
                 (4.48)          (5.52)        (5.70)         (6.29)         (6.49)           (6.93)        (7.50)      (8.11)      (8.43)        (9.68)
education     -139.37 **            -74 **        -91 **        -107 **        -116 **          -124 **       -130 **     -146 **     -166   **     -203   **
                 (5.51)          (7.57)        (7.30)         (7.50)         (8.14)           (7.86)        (8.55)      (9.44)      (11.0)        (13.0)
water              1.26 **         0.76 **       0.69 **        1.20 **        1.31 **          1.59 **       1.75 **     2.16 **     2.59   **     2.67   **
   x income      (0.13)          (0.24)        (0.23)         (0.24)         (0.23)           (0.23)        (0.25)      (0.27)      (0.27)        (0.31)
sewage            -0.19            0.50 *        0.66 **        0.13           0.20             0.09          0.09       -0.04       -0.07         -0.19
  x income       (0.12)          (0.30)        (0.29)         (0.29)         (0.27)           (0.27)        (0.29)      (0.30)      (0.33)        (0.33)
water           -0.004 **       0.0008        0.0002         -0.002         -0.003           -0.003        -0.005 **   -0.003      -0.003        -0.003
  x sewage     (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.003)
Notes: No. obs. 3568. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 2 (continued) : The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population
                (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)         (8)        (9)            (10)
Method       Mean                                                       Quantile
Percentile                            10            20            30             40              50             60          70          80          90
Panel C1: 1991-2000
water            -0.20 **          -0.10        -0.22 **       -0.19          -0.10           -0.08          -0.21 *     -0.31 **    -0.40   **   -0.47   **
                (0.04)            (0.13)       (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.12)          (0.12)        (0.12)       (0.12)      (0.13)       (0.16)
sewage            0.05              0.15         0.20           0.22 *         0.11            0.16           0.17        0.13        0.27   * -0.004
                (0.04)            (0.15)       (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.13)          (0.13)        (0.12)       (0.13)      (0.16)       (0.22)
income         -14.01 **             -27          -34 **         -32 **         -23             -18            -37 **      -51 **      -32          -32
                (6.87)            (16.6)       (14.3)         (15.3)         (15.2)          (16.2)        (16.7)       (18.4)      (19.7)       (22.7)
education      -99.50 **             -77 **       -77 **         -85 **         -95 **         -101 **        -107 **     -105 **     -112   **    -118   **
                (2.54)            (7.17)       (6.18)         (6.72)         (6.76)          (7.24)        (7.19)       (6.97)      (7.59)       (9.74)
water             0.17 **           0.15         0.33 *         0.30           0.15            0.10           0.31        0.43 **     0.54   **    0.59   **
   x income     (0.08)            (0.22)       (0.19)         (0.19)         (0.19)          (0.21)        (0.21)       (0.21)      (0.23)       (0.28)
sewage           -0.07              0.01        -0.10          -0.21          -0.11           -0.33          -0.31       -0.13       -0.26         0.15
  x income      (0.08)            (0.30)       (0.27)         (0.26)         (0.26)          (0.25)        (0.24)       (0.25)      (0.30)       (0.41)
water          -0.001 **         -0.002 ** -0.002 **         -0.002 **      -0.001       -0.00004        -0.0001       -0.001      -0.003    * -0.003     *
  x sewage (0.0004)            (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.002)
Notes: No. obs. 3568. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 2 (continued): The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population
                      (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)         (7)        (8)          (9)       (10)
Method          Mean                                                      Quantile
Percentile                           10              20            30             40              50          60         70           80          90
Panel C2: 1991-2000. Fertility rate is included as a regressor.
water              -0.09 **        0.01            0.02         -0.01          -0.01           -0.07       -0.21 *    -0.16       -0.12         -0.28    *
                  (0.04)         (0.13)          (0.11)        (0.11)         (0.12)          (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)      (0.13)        (0.17)
sewage              0.03           0.22            0.15          0.06           0.10            0.15        0.14       0.08        0.16          0.14
                  (0.04)         (0.16)          (0.14)        (0.14)         (0.13)          (0.12)      (0.13)     (0.13)      (0.15)        (0.24)
income             -6.18              -9            -15           -28 **         -27 *           -30 *       -42 **     -28          -13           -19
                  (6.82)           (17)            (14)          (14)           (15)            (16)        (17)       (18)         (19)          (24)
education            -84 **         -78 **          -75 **        -78 **         -81 **          -87 **      -87 **     -96 **     -102 **       -108    **
                  (2.97)         (8.71)          (7.26)        (6.76)         (7.10)          (7.71)      (8.05)     (7.85)      (8.55)           (12)
fertility       -0.0009            1.60 **         1.80 **       2.15 **        2.27 **         2.34 **     2.70 **    2.45 **     3.20 **       3.62    **
   rate           (0.08)         (0.64)          (0.58)        (0.57)         (0.59)          (0.59)      (0.66)     (0.69)      (0.78)        (0.94)
water              -0.05           0.01           -0.02          0.03           0.01            0.12        0.30       0.18        0.11          0.36
   x income       (0.08)         (0.22)          (0.19)        (0.19)         (0.20)          (0.20)      (0.21)     (0.20)      (0.22)        (0.29)
sewage           -0.001 *         -0.05           -0.11          0.05          -0.06           -0.16       -0.26      -0.22       -0.16         -0.10
  x income     (0.0004)          (0.31)          (0.27)        (0.26)         (0.25)          (0.24)      (0.24)     (0.26)      (0.28)        (0.44)
water               2.71 **     -0.002 **       -0.001        -0.002 *       -0.001          -0.001     -0.0002     0.0002      -0.002        -0.003     *
  x sewage        (0.28)       (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)
Notes: No obs. 3568. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for the quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
 Figure 1 : Marginal Impact of One Percentage Point Increase in Households with
              Piped Water Supply on the Under-1 Infant Mortality Rates (IMR).

                 Group of counties that measure low in their development indicators.

      .35


      -.05

IMR
      -.45


      -.85




             0          20           40              60          80           100
                                          Quantile
                                  1991-2000               1980-1991
                                  1970-1980

 Notes: Y-axis: Negative values indicate reduction in IMR.
Figure 2 : Marginal Impact of One Percentage Point Increase in Households with
             Piped Water Supply on the Under-1 Infant Mortality Rates (IMR).


              Group of counties that measure high in their development indicators.

 .35




 -.05

 IMR


 -.45




 -.85
        0            20            40              60          80          100
                                        Quantile
                                1991-2000               1980-1991
                                1970-1980


Notes: Y-axis: Negative values indicate reduction in IMR.
Figure 3 :    Marginal Impact of 0.01 Increase in Income-Related
              Human Development Index on the Under-1 Infant Mortality Rates (IMR).

              Group of counties that measure low in their development indicators.
   .35


   -.05

IMR
  -.45


 -.85




          0          20            40              60         80           100
                                        Quantile
                                1991-2000               1980-1991
                                1970-1980



Notes: Y-axis: Negative values indicate reduction in IMR.
Figure 4 :   Marginal Impact of 0.01 Increase in Income-Related
             Human Development Index on the Under-1 Infant Mortality Rates (IMR).

             Group of counties that measure high in their development indicators.


   .35




 -.05
  IMR


 -.45




 -.85

         0          20           40              60          80           100
                                      Quantile
                               1991-2000
                                                      1980-1991
                               1970-1980
Table 3: The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population. Urban counties only
                     (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)          (9)     (10)
Method           Mean                                                      Quantile
Percentile                           10              20              30              40               50            60          70           80        90
Panel A: 1970-1980 (Urban counties only)
water            -0.14           -0.54 *         -0.44 *         -0.34           -0.43 **         -0.44 **      -0.37       -0.69 **     -0.70 **    -0.49
                (0.09)          (0.28)          (0.25)          (0.22)          (0.22)           (0.22)        (0.23)      (0.25)       (0.31)      (0.38)
sewage            0.02           -0.44           -0.57           -0.16            0.17             0.28          0.19       -0.41        -0.95       -0.47
                (0.17)          (0.59)          (0.50)          (0.49)          (0.45)           (0.46)        (0.51)      (0.54)       (0.65)      (0.82)
income              -51 **          -28             -45 **          -47 **          -46 **           -48 **        -53 **      -51 **       -39         -42
                (7.30)             (21)            (19)            (18)            (18)             (18)          (18)        (21)         (24)        (29)
education         -385 **         -322 **         -255 **         -285 **         -339 **          -340 **       -327 **     -326 **      -324 **     -366 **
                   (23)            (72)            (63)            (64)            (67)             (69)          (73)        (76)         (87)      (105)
water             0.21 *          0.34            0.45            0.27            0.55 *           0.49          0.44        0.74 **      0.56        0.42
  x income      (0.12)          (0.41)          (0.36)          (0.34)          (0.32)           (0.32)        (0.33)      (0.35)       (0.43)      (0.55)
sewage            0.47 **        -0.03            0.20            0.30           -0.10            -0.06          0.10        0.21         0.34        0.19
  x income      (0.15)          (0.39)          (0.35)          (0.33)          (0.31)           (0.30)        (0.31)      (0.34)       (0.43)      (0.55)
water          -0.006 **          0.01         0.0002          -0.002          -0.002           -0.004          -0.01       -0.01      -0.005        -0.01
  x sewage    (0.002)           (0.01)         (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.007)          (0.007)       (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.008)       (0.01)
Notes: No. obs. 704. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions
Table 3 (con't): The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population. Urban counties only
                      (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)           (7)         (8)         (9)        (10)
Method           Mean                                                      Quantile
Percentile                           10              20             30               40               50            60           70          80          90
Panel B: 1980-1991 (Urban counties only)
water             -1.15 **       -0.28           -0.39          -0.65 **         -0.58 **         -0.79 **      -1.02 **     -1.29 **    -1.44 **    -1.35    **
                 (0.20)         (0.27)          (0.27)         (0.26)           (0.25)           (0.26)        (0.27)       (0.30)      (0.35)      (0.45)
sewage             0.24           0.02           -0.37           0.28             0.05             0.12          0.34        -0.12       -0.17     -0.004
                 (0.20)         (0.45)          (0.45)         (0.45)           (0.44)           (0.43)        (0.42)       (0.45)      (0.47)      (0.51)
income               -80 **         -28             -40 **         -66 **           -62 **           -74 **        -83 **     -106 **     -113 **     -133    **
                    (11)           (17)            (16)           (16)             (16)             (16)          (17)         (18)        (22)        (27)
education          -192 **        -122 **         -134 **        -161 **          -160 **          -172 **       -179 **      -189 **     -190 **     -255    **
                    (10)           (16)            (16)           (16)             (15)             (14)          (15)         (16)        (19)        (23)
water              1.00 **        0.51            0.48           1.13 **          0.84 **          1.18 **       1.45 **      1.70 **     1.76 **     1.72    **
  x income       (0.24)         (0.39)          (0.38)         (0.38)           (0.36)           (0.35)        (0.37)       (0.39)      (0.45)      (0.56)
sewage            -0.25           0.32            0.51          -0.09             0.20             0.11         -0.12         0.27        0.25       -0.11
  x income       (0.16)         (0.36)          (0.37)         (0.36)           (0.34)           (0.33)        (0.32)       (0.33)      (0.35)      (0.39)
water           -0.002         -0.003          0.0002         -0.005           -0.004           -0.004        -0.005       -0.001     -0.0003     0.0003
  x sewage     (0.002)        (0.004)          (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.004)
Notes: No. obs. 1275. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions
Table 3 (con't): The influence of piped water on infant mortality rates: panel regression weighted by county-level population. Urban counties only
                     (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)
Method           Mean                                                     Quantile
Percentile                          10              20             30               40               50             60          70          80          90
Panel C: 1991-2000 (urban counties only)
water             -0.32 **       -0.02            0.03         -0.05            -0.14            -0.17          -0.34 *     -0.28       -0.30       -0.22
                 (0.07)         (0.21)          (0.19)        (0.19)           (0.18)           (0.20)         (0.19)      (0.19)      (0.20)      (0.23)
sewage             0.09 *         0.10            0.01          0.11             0.09             0.10           0.07       -0.01        0.11        0.10
                 (0.05)         (0.19)          (0.16)        (0.16)           (0.16)           (0.16)         (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.18)      (0.24)
income            -8.90          -0.91             -11            -18              -30              -31            -55 *       -41         -16       1.60
                    (11)          (31)            (28)           (26)             (27)             (29)           (29)        (30)        (31)        (33)
education          -115 **         -91 **          -88 **       -104 **          -106 **          -117 **        -111 **     -117 **     -120 **     -125 **
                 (3.88)           (12)            (11)           (11)             (12)             (12)           (12)        (12)        (12)        (14)
water              0.39 **        0.05           -0.07          0.13             0.26             0.38           0.60 *      0.42        0.35        0.21
  x income       (0.11)         (0.35)          (0.32)        (0.30)           (0.30)           (0.33)         (0.32)      (0.32)      (0.34)      (0.40)
sewage            -0.20 **       -0.03            0.08         -0.13            -0.15            -0.05           0.01       -0.01       -0.31       -0.06
  x income       (0.09)         (0.37)          (0.33)        (0.33)           (0.33)           (0.31)         (0.29)      (0.29)      (0.32)      (0.42)
water         -0.0003          -0.002          -0.001        -0.001           -0.001           -0.002         -0.002      -0.001     -0.0002      -0.002
  x sewage (0.0004)           (0.002)         (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)          (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.002)    (0.002)
Notes: No. obs. 2026. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions
Figure 5.        Marginal impact of one percentage point increase in households with
                 piped water on the under-1 infant mortality rates (IMR):
                 A comparison of the full sample with the urban only sample.


          Group of counties that measure low in their development indicators

   .35




   -.05


IMR

   -.45




   -.85
           0            20           40              60          80            100
                                          Quantile
                     Full sample 1980-1991           Urban only sample 1980-1991
Figure 6.    Marginal impact of one percentage point increase in households with
             piped water on the under-1 infant mortality rates (IMR):
             A comparison of the full sample with the urban only sample.


             Group of counties that measure high in their development indicators


   .35




 -.05


IMR

 -.45




 -.85
         0          20           40              60          80           100
                                      Quantile
                 Full sample 1980-1991           Urban only sample 1980-1991
Table 4 : The influence of piped water on under-5 infant mortality rates:panel regression weighted by county-level population (1991-2000)
                         (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)          (9)      (10)
Method              Mean                                                Quantile
Percentile                          10              20            30              40            50            60           70           80         90
water                 0.20 **    -0.40 **        -0.02         0.04           -0.01          0.02         -0.02        -0.16         0.13       0.40
                    (0.07)      (0.18)          (0.16)       (0.16)          (0.16)        (0.16)        (0.17)       (0.18)       (0.20)     (0.26)
sewage               -0.18 **     0.16           -0.03        -0.31 *         -0.25         -0.35 *       -0.35 *      -0.02        -0.28      -0.42
                    (0.07)      (0.21)          (0.19)       (0.18)          (0.17)        (0.18)        (0.19)       (0.20)       (0.23)     (0.34)
income                  -15        -45 *           -37 *         -60 **          -56 **        -68 **        -76 **       -82 **       -58 *      -24
                       (11)       (23)            (20)          (19)            (20)          (23)          (24)         (26)         (29)       (38)
education             -107 **      -89 **          -94 **        -92 **        -100 **       -102 **       -110 **      -115 **      -104 **    -156    **
                    (4.63)        (13)            (10)         (9.5)            (10)          (10)          (11)         (11)         (13)       (19)
fertility rate        4.97 **     3.55 **         4.24 **      5.15 **         4.84 **       5.45 **       5.13 **      4.80 **      4.97 **    4.58    **
                    (0.44)      (0.90)          (0.83)       (0.79)          (0.84)        (0.88)        (0.99)       (1.06)       (1.16)       (1.4)
water                -0.45 **     0.65 **         0.02        -0.07            0.01         -0.06          0.01         0.23        -0.43      -0.67
   x income         (0.12)      (0.30)          (0.26)       (0.26)          (0.27)        (0.27)        (0.29)       (0.30)       (0.34)     (0.45)
sewage                0.44 **    -0.13            0.15         0.72 **         0.58 *        0.66 **       0.58 *       0.04         0.47       1.28    *
   x income         (0.12)      (0.41)          (0.36)       (0.33)          (0.31)        (0.33)        (0.35)       (0.37)       (0.44)     (0.68)
water          -0.002726 ** -0.002             -0.001       -0.003 **       -0.003 ** -0.002            -0.001       -0.001       -0.002       -0.01    **
   x sewage      (0.0006)     (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)
Notes: No obs. 3568. ** statistically significant at the 5% level. * statistically significant at the 10% level.
Standard errors for the quantile regressions are from 2000 bootstrap repetititons.
Table 5: Estimated number of averted deaths from simulated changes in health inputs
                                                                        (1)             (2)
Regression:                                                          Quantile          Mean

Section 1: Simulation: One percentage point increase in households with piped water
Source of coefficients:
Panel A: 1970-1980                                                     95,000         67,000

Panel B: 1980-1991                                                    104,000         166,000

Panel C1: 1991-2000                                                    26,000         26,000

Section 2: Simulation: 0.01 increase in income-related Human Development Index
Source of coefficients:
Panel A: 1970-1980                                                   97,000           119,000

Panel B: 1980-1991                                                     14,000         45,000

Panel C1: 1991-2000                                                    16,000         11,000

Notes: Coefficients are from Table 2
Table 6: Correlation of piped water supply and infant mortality rates: cross-section regression weighted by county-level population
Method               Mean                                               Quantile
Percentile                              10          20           30             40           50          60           70            80          90
Panel A: 1970
water                 0.91 **        0.12        0.15         0.21           0.39         0.62 **     0.99 **      1.22 **       1.68 **      3.11    **
                    (0.10)         (0.19)      (0.23)       (0.23)         (0.26)       (0.29)      (0.42)       (0.49)        (0.78)       (0.94)
sewage               -0.54 **       -0.03        0.21         0.28          -0.02        -0.05       -0.48        -0.70         -1.18        -2.94    *
                    (0.19)         (0.32)      (0.33)       (0.34)         (0.39)       (0.42)      (0.54)       (0.69)        (1.05)       (1.65)
income                  14           3.49        2.67        -5.96              11            7          30           42            56           61
                    (8.96)            (18)        (21)         (24)           (24)         (25)        (31)         (33)          (48)       (111)
education             -269 **        -176 **     -202 **      -217 **        -248 **      -268 **     -292 **      -311 **       -350 **      -395    **
                    (8.13)            (12)        (14)         (17)           (18)         (17)        (21)         (25)          (24)         (44)
water                -0.47 **        0.69        0.62         0.61           0.20         0.01       -0.70        -1.21         -1.93        -3.60    *
  x income          (0.16)         (0.43)      (0.51)       (0.51)         (0.55)       (0.57)      (0.76)       (0.89)        (1.27)       (1.93)
sewage                1.68 **       -0.23        0.28         1.03           1.16         1.60 *      2.21 **      2.32 **       2.87 *       4.30    **
  x income          (0.23)         (0.61)      (0.61)       (0.64)         (0.74)       (0.85)      (1.10)       (1.18)        (1.56)       (1.83)
water                -0.01 **     -0.003        -0.01 *      -0.02 **       -0.01 **     -0.02 **    -0.02 **     -0.02 **      -0.02        -0.01
  x sewage         (0.003)       (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.005)        (0.006)      (0.007)     (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.01)      (0.023)
No. obs. 3658. Constant included. ** and * indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Standard errors in quantile reg are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 6 (con't): Correlation of piped water supply and infant mortality rates: cross-section regression weighted by county-level population
Method               Mean                                                Quantile
Percentile                              10           20           30             40            50          60          70             80         90
Panel B:1980
water                  1.25 **        0.57 **     0.55 *       0.82 **        0.82 **       0.82 **     0.91 **     1.28 **        1.60 **      2.10 **
                     (0.12)         (0.22)      (0.30)      (0.34)          (0.35)        (0.41)      (0.32)      (0.36)         (0.38)       (0.62)
sewage                -1.98 **       -1.05 **    -1.36 **     -1.94 **       -1.98 **      -2.08 **    -2.05 **    -2.47 **       -2.27 **     -1.29
                     (0.23)         (0.26)      (0.30)      (0.37)          (0.36)        (0.43)      (0.46)      (0.67)         (1.03)       (1.71)
income                  -40 **         -29 **       -43 **       -55 **         -61 **        -68 **      -66 **      -63 **         -53          -12
                     (5.56)           (15)         (18)         (14)           (14)          (16)        (14)        (17)           (33)         (94)
education              -172 **         -93 **     -102 **      -117 **        -126 **       -146 **     -177 **     -179 **        -228 **      -291 **
                     (8.38)           (16)         (18)         (16)           (16)          (17)        (20)        (25)           (32)         (51)
water                 -0.57 **       -0.20       -0.07        -0.12          -0.01          0.12        0.18       -0.35          -0.74        -1.52
  x income           (0.14)         (0.31)      (0.47)      (0.53)          (0.52)        (0.57)      (0.45)      (0.44)         (0.48)       (0.98)
sewage                 2.51 **        1.40 **     1.71 **      2.54 **        2.68 **       2.84 **     2.72 **     3.44 **        3.15 **      2.35
  x income           (0.30)         (0.35)      (0.43)      (0.52)          (0.51)        (0.55)      (0.65)      (0.88)           (1.3)      (1.85)
water               -0.008 **      -0.004      -0.003         -0.01 **       -0.01 **      -0.01 **    -0.01 **    -0.01 **       -0.01 **     -0.01
  x sewage         (0.001)        (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.004)       (0.006)        (0.01)
No. obs. 3658. Constant included. ** and * indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Standard errors in quantile reg are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 6 (con't): Correlation of piped water supply and infant mortality rates: cross-section regression weighted by county-level population
Method               Mean                                                Quantile
Percentile                               10           20           30            40            50           60           70           80           90
Panel C: 1991
water                 -0.29 **       -0.50 **     -0.40 **     -0.20         -0.35         -0.47        -0.40        -0.61 *      -0.22        -0.53    *
                     (0.07)         (0.15)       (0.17)       (0.23)        (0.29)        (0.33)       (0.31)       (0.31)       (0.33)       (0.32)
sewage                -0.66 **       -0.51 *      -0.73 **     -1.00 **      -0.78 **      -0.67 **     -0.05        -0.46        -0.70 **     -0.59    *
                     (0.08)         (0.26)       (0.26)       (0.26)        (0.30)        (0.34)       (0.35)       (0.32)       (0.32)       (0.31)
income              -127** **         -113 **      -124 **      -120 **       -117 **       -140 **        -88 **     -171 **      -139 **      -189    **
                     (7.85)            (16)         (19)         (23)          (22)          (28)         (31)         (32)         (42)         (35)
education             -82** **          -69 **       -73 **       -77 **        -87 **        -85 **     -109 **        -84 **       -85 **       -65   **
                     (3.86)         (6.51)       (9.70)          (11)          (12)          (16)         (17)         (16)         (15)         (16)
water                  0.76 **        1.05 **      0.94 **      0.62 *        0.83 *        1.10 **      0.95 *       1.47 **      0.76         1.23    **
  x income           (0.11)         (0.24)       (0.26)       (0.37)        (0.47)        (0.56)       (0.55)       (0.54)       (0.61)       (0.56)
sewage                 1.00 **        1.09 **      1.43 **      1.71 **       1.24 **       0.99 *       0.04         0.67         0.98 *       0.86
  x income           (0.13)         (0.52)       (0.50)       (0.44)        (0.46)        (0.51)       (0.55)       (0.51)       (0.50)       (0.54)
water               -0.002 **      -0.004 **    -0.004 **    -0.003 **     -0.002 *      -0.002       -0.001       -0.003 *     -0.003       -0.003
  x sewage        (0.0006)        (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)
No. obs. 3658. Constant included. ** and * indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Standard errors in quantile reg are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Table 6 (con't): Correlation of piped water supply and infant mortality rates: cross-section regression weighted by county-level population
Method                Mean                                               Quantile
Percentile                               10           20           30            40            50           60           70           80           90
Panel D: 2000
water                  -0.42 **      -0.40 **     -0.56 **     -0.62 **      -0.50 **      -0.41 *      -0.51 **     -0.66 **     -0.28        -0.13
                      (0.06)        (0.18)       (0.17)       (0.20)        (0.20)        (0.22)       (0.26)       (0.26)       (0.26)       (0.23)
sewage              -0.22** **       -0.37 **     -0.31        -0.40 *       -0.50 **      -0.44 **     -0.32        -0.07        -0.18        -0.26
                      (0.05)        (0.15)       (0.20)       (0.23)        (0.20)        (0.18)       (0.22)       (0.27)       (0.26)       (0.25)
income                  -132 **       -127 **      -146 **      -147 **       -149 **       -134 **      -141 **      -155 **      -110 **      -121 **
                      (7.80)           (20)         (20)         (23)          (27)          (33)         (35)         (32)         (29)         (26)
education                -87 **         -43 **       -54 **       -72 **        -75 **        -87 **       -85 **       -85 **     -103 **      -110 **
                      (4.24)           (11)         (13)         (14)          (14)          (15)         (18)         (21)         (20)         (27)
water                   0.97 **       0.81 **      1.11 **      1.23 **       1.09 **       0.93 **      1.10 **      1.37 **      0.78 *       0.61
  x income            (0.10)        (0.33)       (0.30)       (0.34)        (0.35)        (0.40)       (0.46)       (0.46)       (0.43)       (0.37)
sewage                  0.47 **       0.79 **      0.64 **      0.76 **       1.03 **       0.89 **      0.63 *       0.20         0.18         0.34
  x income            (0.08)        (0.23)       (0.30)       (0.36)        (0.33)        (0.32)       (0.36)       (0.44)       (0.46)       (0.52)
water                -0.002 **     -0.003 **    -0.002 **    -0.003 *      -0.004 **     -0.003       -0.003       -0.002       -0.001       -0.001
  x sewage        (0.0004)       (0.0009)      (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)
No. obs. 3658. Constant included. ** and * indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Standard errors in quantile reg are from 2000 bootstrap repetitions.
Figure 7.      The association between one percentage point increase in households with
               piped water supply and the under-1 infant mortality rates (IMR), as
               estimated in the cross-sectional regressions.

        Group 1: Counties that measure low in their development indicators.




  IMR

 .35
 -.05

 -.45
 -.85
         0            20            40              60          80            100
                                         Quantile
                                      2000               1990
                                      1980               1970
