                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




DO COMMUNITY COLLEGES PROVIDE A VIABLE PATHWAY TO A BACCALAUREATE
                            DEGREE?

                                         Bridget Terry Long
                                         Michal Kurlaender

                                        Working Paper 14367
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14367


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2008




The authors thank the Ohio Board of Regents and in particular Rod Chu, Darrell Glenn, Robert Sheehan,
and Andy Lechler for help with the data. Eric Bettinger provided invaluable support during the project.
All opinions and mistakes are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Bridget Terry Long and Michal Kurlaender. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Community Colleges provide a Viable Pathway to a Baccalaureate Degree?
Bridget Terry Long and Michal Kurlaender
NBER Working Paper No. 14367
September 2008
JEL No. C1,I2,J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Community colleges have become an important entryway for students intending to complete a baccalaureate
degree. However, many question the viability of the transfer function and wonder whether students
suffer a penalty for starting at a two-year institution. This paper examines how the outcomes of community
college entrants compare to similar students who initially entered four-year institutions within the
Ohio public higher education system. Using a detailed dataset, we track outcomes for nine years and
employ multiple strategies to deal with selection issues: propensity score matching and instrumental
variables. The results suggest that straightforward estimates are significantly biased, but even after
accounting for selection, students who initially begin at a community college were 14.5 percent less
likely to complete a bachelor's degree within nine years.


Bridget Terry Long
Harvard University
Graduate School of Education
Gutman Library 465
6 Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
longbr@gse.harvard.edu

Michal Kurlaender
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
2051 Academic Surge
Davis, CA 95616
mkurlaender@ucdavis.edu
I.     INTRODUCTION

       Community colleges play an important role in American higher education. For many,

they offer open, affordable access to postsecondary schooling.              Nearly one-half of all

undergraduates at public institutions attend a community college, and low-income, minority, and

first-generation students are more likely to attend community colleges than four-year

institutions.1 While community colleges serve a diverse set of needs, their success is often

measured by their ability to facilitate students’ transfer to four-year institutions, and in recent

years, community colleges have become an increasingly important pathway to a baccalaureate

degree. Capacity constraints at many four-year institutions have prompted states to rely on the

community college sector to accommodate much of the continued expansion of higher education

(Evelyn, 2002).2 In addition, rising admissions requirements and escalating tuition costs at four-

year institutions have limited access to these schools for some students (Mills, 2006).

       The viability of the community college transfer function has long been a source of

debate. On the one side, the “democratization” view suggests that community colleges have

increased overall access to postsecondary education by making higher education possible for

many students with open admissions and low costs (Rouse, 1995; Rouse, 1998; Leigh & Gill,

2003). On the other hand, some posit that community colleges serve as a “diversion” by

channeling students into vocational courses and weakening their educational progress with

increased flexibility and nontraditional patterns of attendance (e.g. delayed entry, part-time

enrollment, combining employment with schooling) (Grubb, 1991; Brint & Karabel, 1989;

Dougherty, 1994). In reality, many community college students face a number of personal and

structural barriers to transfer, including financial concerns, limited information, and the lack of

coordination between two-year and four-year institutions. As such, estimates from the most
1
  Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, IPEDS enrollment data
and The Condition of Education 2000.
2
  As noted by Evelyn (2002), some states are even considering using community colleges to award
bachelor’s degrees in areas of specific need to the state.

                                                                                                     1
recent national longitudinal postsecondary study reveal that only 37 percent of students who

graduated high school in 1992 and began at a community college eventually transferred to a

four-year college (Adelman 2005).

        Although previous research has highlighted the reduced likelihood of baccalaureate

attainment for students who begin at a community college, the bulk of research in this area

focuses on students who graduated high school over fifteen years ago and even thirty years ago.3

Given the recent trends highlighted above, a more timely analysis is needed to reexamine and

extend our understanding of the current function of community colleges.4 This paper provides a

new perspective on the role of community colleges for a cohort of students who entered Ohio

public colleges and universities in fall 1998.

        The paper makes several important contributions to the existing literature on community

colleges. First, we use a detailed, robust data source that is an improvement over the data of

many previous studies. We track students over a longer period of time than any other study to

our knowledge (nine years) and across multiple institutions to capture transfer behavior and

periods of stopping out and returning to college. Also, because our dataset is a complete census

of everyone in the public higher education system in Ohio, attrition in our sample is small.5


3
  Studies using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) (e.g, Leigh & Gill, 1997; 2003)
focus on students who were ages 14-22 when first interviewed in 1979 suggesting they graduated high
school in the 1970s or 1980s. Studies using the High School & Beyond (e.g., Rouse, 1995) focus on
students who graduated high school in 1982. Studies using the National Education Longitudinal Study
(NELS88) (e.g., Roksa, 2006; Alfonso, 2006) focus on students who graduated high school in 1992.
4
  Other recent developments that have likely affected the role of community colleges include increases in
high school graduation requirements, which may have improved the academic preparation of some
students while influencing others to drop out and seek their GEDs at community colleges, and the
increasing use of loans beginning with the 1992 Higher Education Act Reauthorization, which may have
affected student choice between two- and four-year college options. At the same time, many community
colleges opted out of giving students federal student loans due to government rules that penalize colleges
with high default rates.
5
  Regardless of where a student enrolls or how many times they change institutions, they are tracked
within the system using their unique Social Security number. This is not the case, however, in many
other studies that have used national data sets. Although these sources are designed to be nationally
representative, they suffer from attrition over time, especially in the later follow-ups.5 For example, the
fourth follow-up study of NELS had a target of 15,649 students, but only 12,144 are considered

                                                                                                         2
Given that all community college students do not aim to complete a baccalaureate degree, one

must also account for degree intent in this sort of analysis (Alfonso, 2006; Alfonso, Bailey, &

Scott, 2005). Our dataset includes important information on student degree intent, and so we are

able to disentangle the many populations that community colleges serve to focus on students

with a four-year degree objective. Finally, unlike many other state unit record datasets, we have

information on family background to control for other differences between students.6

        Research on the transfer function of community colleges must address a number of

empirical difficulties, which have been undertaken with varying degrees of success in past

literature. Students do not randomly choose their colleges, and the types of students who first

attend a community college differ from those who initially enroll in a four-year institution. To

address this selection, past studies have employed a variety of strategies: Heckman two-stage

sample selection model (Alfonso, 2006), propensity score matching (Stephan & Rosenbaum,

2006; Melguizo, Kienzl, & Alfonso, 2007) or instrumental variables (Rouse, 1995).                     Each

method has its own strengths and weaknesses, and so, unlike any other study, this paper utilizes


completed cases resulting in a response rate of 77.6 percent (NCES, 2002). Adjusting the sample weights
in response to this attrition may not be an adequate solution due to the fact that there are likely to be
important, unobservable differences between those in the sample and those missing. Therefore,
information from these databases on behavior several years out of high school may not truly be nationally
representative.
6
  Most state administrative databases lack significant detail on community college students because
information on academic preparation and test scores is not required for admission and financial aid
records are often not part of the data systems. (Even when included, not all students complete the aid
application and so are missing from the dataset.) Therefore, many studies based on administrative data
only have basic demographic information (e.g., Moore & Shulock, 2007; Leigh & Gill, 2007). Efforts to
supplement the data with student surveys often have low response rates. For example, the CUNY
administrative data utilized by Bailey and Weininger (2002) was supplemented with a survey on students'
social background and place of birth, but the response rate was only 31.4 percent (sample weights had to
be developed for the analysis). An exception is the Florida administrative data used by studies such as
Calcagno, Crosta, Bailey, and Jenkins (2007). As a K-20 Data Warehouse, it also includes information
on high school preparation, test scores, and family income (if a FAFSA was submitted). At the other end
of the spectrum, the SUNY data used by Ehrenberg and Smith (2004) is grouped so that analysis cannot
be done at the individual level. In contrast, the data used in this paper has degree intent information from
the college application and details about family income, high school preparation and achievement, and
high school type from the student surveys that accompany college entrance exams (i.e., the ACT and
SAT).

                                                                                                          3
two different methodologies (propensity scores and instrumental variables) to triangulate the

impact of starting at a community college on baccalaureate attainment. This also allows us to

explore the relative effectiveness of each method in dealing with selection. The propensity

scoring method gets its strength from the wealth of observable information we have on student

characteristics and preparation. In contrast, the instrumental variables strategy accounts for

unobservable differences by using, among other things, the importance of college proximity in

college choice. Distance is a particularly relevant issue in the choices of Ohio students, and so

our use of distance as an instrument to deal with selection is more convincing than in other

contexts. The analysis examines the postsecondary outcomes of students who initially enter

higher education through the community college system in comparison to those who began at a

four-year institution.

       The propensity score matching and instrumental variables results point to similar

conclusions. Each suggests that straightforward regression estimates are biased, and so simple

comparisons between two-year and four-year students, which suggest students who initially

enroll at a community college do far worse, should be treated with caution. Additionally,

unobservable differences between students appear to be important, thereby suggesting that the

instrumental variable estimates do a better job reducing bias as a result of self-selection.

However, even after accounting for selection, it appears that students who begin at community

colleges still suffer a penalty.    According to the instrumental variable estimates, the most

conservative of our models, community college students were 14.5 percent less likely to

complete a bachelor's degree in nine years in comparison to similar students who began at a four-

year university. The paper is organized as follows: in Section II we discuss relevant literature

addressing these questions, Section III describes our empirical strategies, Section IV details our

results, and Section V concludes.




                                                                                                4
II.    LITERATURE REVIEW

       The standard human capital model, developed by Becker (1993), provides some insight

for why students might choose to attend a community college over four-year institutions. First,

in an effort to minimize costs, students may select to attend community colleges because they are

less expensive than four-year institutions and can reduce the total costs of a bachelor’s degree.

Community colleges also give students time to improve their educational record, and therefore,

increase their likelihood of being admitted to a higher-quality, degree-granting, four-year

institution. Hilmer (1997) finds that students choose higher quality universities if they first attend

community colleges, with the largest quality increases being observed for students who come

from poor families or who perform poorly in high school.

       Partly because community college participants vary widely in their educational

backgrounds and purposes of participation, it is difficult to characterize the performance of

community colleges in the educational attainment process. Although community colleges were

originally designed to serve as “junior colleges” to four-year programs, today they are an

incredibly diverse set of institutions with varied missions and courses of study (Alfonso, Bailey,

& Scott, 2005). In addition to serving traditional-age students who recently graduated from high

school, community colleges enroll many older, non-traditional students who may take classes for

personal enrichment rather than attempting to complete a degree.             Moreover, community

colleges attract students who are often "experimenting" with postsecondary education, without

necessarily the drive to complete a degree (Grubb, 1991). Nevertheless, community colleges’

success is often measured in their ability to facilitate students’ transfer to four-year institutions

and complete a bachelor's degree.

       Many question whether community colleges offer a genuine path to attaining a

baccalaureate degree. As noted above, the increased flexibility and nontraditional patterns of

attendance afforded by community colleges may weaken a student’s progression through


                                                                                                    5
postsecondary education and make transferring to a four-year college less likely (Grubb, 1991;

Brint & Karabel, 1989; Dougherty, 1994). Furthermore, the administrative costs of transferring

to a four-year college may be exceedingly prohibitive for many students (Anderson, Sun, &

Alfonso, 2006). Some also argue that the educational system is fraught with market failures as a

result of lack of information about the process for postsecondary entry, (e.g. financial aid

procedures and admissions standards at four-year institutions), and other barriers that may limit

the opportunity sets of students from disadvantaged backgrounds (Hilmer, 1998).

       On the other hand, a “democratization” view suggests that community colleges have

increased overall access to postsecondary education with open admissions and low cost. In fact,

Rouse (1995), utilizing the High School and Beyond (HSB) dataset, finds that starting at a two-

year college does not affect the likelihood of attaining a bachelor’s degree for those students

intending to transfer to a four-year college. Although she does estimate a negative “diversion”

effect, the “democratization” effect of increased access to higher education is estimated to be

larger. Using a slightly different methodology, Leigh and Gill (2003), controlling for a student’s

desired level of education, find similar results to Rouse using the National Longitudinal Survey

of Youth (NLSY79).

       There has also been a substantial amount of research describing who utilizes the transfer

route from community colleges. Utilizing the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS),

Adelman (2005) reports that among 1992 twelfth-graders whose first postsecondary institution

was a community college, 37 percent transferred to a four-year college, and 60 percent of those

that transferred had earned a bachelor’s degree by 2000. Using administrative data on a cohort

of students initially enrolled in California community colleges in 1999-2000, Moore and Shulock

(2007) report that among the 60 percent of degree seekers attending California community

colleges, about 25 percent transfer to a university and/or earn an associate’s degree within six

years. Overall, several papers have concluded that those who transfer from a community college


                                                                                                6
to a four-year college are of a higher social class, have higher academic preparation, are less

likely to be minority, and less likely to be female than are those who do not transfer (Dougherty

& Kienzl, 2006; Lee & Frank, 1990; Dougherty, 1987, 1994; Whitaker & Pascarella 1994;

Grubb, 1991; Surette, 2001).

       Questions also exist about whether community college students experience the same

returns to education as their counterparts who entered four-year colleges initially. Kane and

Rouse (1995) use transcript data from the National Longitudinal Study of the Class of 1972

(NLS72) and the NLSY79 to compare the returns to a college credit at two-year and four-year

colleges. Controlling for family income and measured ability, they find wage differentials for

both two-year and four-year college credits are positive and of similar magnitude. In separate

work, Leigh and Gill (1997) (also using the NLSY79), examine whether returns to a community

college education differ for adults who return to college as compared to continuing high school

graduates. They find positive returns of essentially the same magnitude. Finally, Hilmer (2000)

examines whether the return to university quality differs for community college transfer students

and direct attendees. Using the HSB data, he finds that the return to university quality differs

dramatically across both educational paths, and institutional quality ranges with the length of

time spent at the initial institution having a significant negative effect on transfer students.

       Researchers have also debated whether there is a return to getting an education at a

community college without completing a degree. Kane and Rouse (1995) found a positive return

to attending a two-year college even when a degree was not obtained. Grubb (1995) also finds

similar results after corrections to his NLS72 data; in a revision of a 1993 paper where he

concludes that economic benefits may accrue to even modest levels of community college

participation.

       While these studies have laid the foundation on the impact of community colleges on

baccalaureate attainment and labor market outcomes, this study provides an important


                                                                                                   7
comprehensive update, using data on students age 17 to 20 who entered Ohio public colleges and

universities in Fall 1998. The data include important details such as educational intent and

family background and tracks students nine years across public institutions within the state. In

addition, by taking a state-level perspective, the paper provides insight that is difficult to discern

from studies using national data. States differ incredibly in how they choose to use community

colleges within their statewide higher education systems. In some states, community colleges

are the primary access points (e.g., California), while other states focus all remediation there

(e.g., Florida), and still others favor four-year college entry with the community colleges

primarily serving less traditional needs such as older students and workforce retraining efforts

(e.g. Massachusetts). Because of this state-level variation, it can be difficult to fully understand

community college dynamics when looking at national data.               For instance, the marginal

community college student (i.e., the student on the fence between a four- and two-year college)

differs by state, and this makes it hard to interpret some of the patterns observed in national data.

Our interpretation might differ greatly if looking at a community college student in California

versus one in Massachusetts due to the fact that their backgrounds, preparation, and aspirations

are likely to be different as a result of their contrasting state higher education structures. By

using state-level data, we are able to be much more specific about who the marginal student is

and take into account the state context in our interpretation.

       This study also sheds light on a previously-unstudied, important context: the fifth largest

public higher education system in the country. While the external validity of our results are

limited by focusing on a particular state, the higher education system, population demographics,

and diverse labor markets within Ohio are similar to larger national trends and many neighboring

states (Mortenson, 2002), and so our results could be used to reflect on issues facing many other

states. It is worth noting however that because our study and many others on this topic focus on




                                                                                                    8
traditional-age college students, we can say little about the many older students who attend

community colleges.



III.    EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK AND METHODOLOGY

Data

        This paper uses a longitudinal, administrative dataset of students in the Ohio public

higher education system. Maintained by the Ohio Board of Regents (OBR), the data include

information from several sources including applications, college transcripts, and entrance exams

and their accompanying questionnaires.         Therefore, we have detailed information about each

student’s family background, high school preparation, postsecondary intentions, college

performance and course-taking behavior, and degree completion.7 In addition, because the data

cover the entire public higher education system in Ohio, we are able to track students across

schools and determine the outcomes of individuals who may have continued their educations or

completed their degrees at different postsecondary institutions from the ones they originally

entered. With these data, we examine several student outcomes including baccalaureate degree

completion (after four, six, and nine years), total credit hours completed, and stopout behavior

(within one, two, or six years).8 One drawback to the data is that it does not include students

who transfer to private colleges or transfer out of the state; these students may incorrectly be

designated as dropouts. However, this potential measurement error is likely to be very small

7
  We use three main files submitted by all public colleges and universities in Ohio to the OBR Higher
Education Information (HEI) System: Student Entrance, Student Enrollment, and Course Enrollment. In
addition, we use test score and student background information that is the result of an OBR data match
with ACT, Inc. All of these files, which also denote the institution, are linked by the student's Social
Security number (we receive an anonymous version of the data), and a student may have files from
multiple institutions if they attended more than one school during the time period. These data are
available for each term (fall, spring, summer, and for those on the quarter system, winter) from fall 1997
to spring 2007.
8
  In our paper, students who end college attendance sometime during the nine-year period, do not return
to any statewide public institution, and have not completed a bachelor's degree are considered
stop/dropouts. The multiple measures of stopout behavior denote the last time the student was enrolled in
college.

                                                                                                        9
because, according to analysis of Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS)

data, the percentage of students thought to transfer to such schools is a small fraction of the total

number of observed dropouts.9

        This study focuses on first-time freshmen age 17 to 20 who began their postsecondary

study during fall 1998 and follows them for nine years until spring 2007. Due to the focus on

baccalaureate completion, we restrict the sample to individuals who have demonstrated the intent

to complete four-year degree either on their college application or by starting at a four-year

university. OBR collects information on the educational intent of all community college students

on their applications with eight possible options, and we define baccalaureate degree intent as

having designated the intention either: (i) "To obtain a bachelor's degree;" (ii) "To obtain an

associate degree for transfer;" or (iii) "To transfer before completing a degree or certificate."10

Responses to this question about educational intent are completed privately and in no way affect

outcomes such as admissions or access to certain classes, and so we believe the variable is a

fairly accurate depiction of educational goals at the time of college entry. In fall 1998, 60

percent of first-time community college students indicated intent to obtain a bachelor's degree or

transfer to a four-year college with or without an Associate Degree.11


9
   While it is the case that we can not track students who transfer to private institutions or public out-of-
state institutions, this is not likely to be a large group. The IPEDS, a NCES annual database of
postsecondary institutions in the United States, tracks the number of transfers at each institution but does
not record the state of residence of transfer students. However, it does track the states of residence for
incoming freshmen. Assuming that the distribution of transfer students matches the geographical
distribution of the incoming freshmen class, then one would expect around 650 Ohio students to transfer
to non-public or non-Ohio schools. If we further assume that all 650 transfer students just finished their
first year of school, then about 4.3 percent of observed dropouts in our data are actually transfer students.
10
   The other options were: (iv) "To obtain knowledge for personal interest;" (v) "To upgrade skills for
current job by taking only selected courses;" (vi) "To train for a new career by taking only selected
courses;" (vii) "To obtain a certificate;" and (viii) "To obtain an associate degree for the job market."
Students who began at a four-year institution are not asked about intent and are assumed to want a
baccalaureate degree.
11
   The percentage at community colleges intending to get a bachelor's degree is slightly smaller in our
data than that found in other surveys (e.g., NELS and the Beginning Postsecondary Study). Beyond slight
differences in the way the question is posed to students in each survey, one reason for the different
percentages may be related to how the questions are asked. There are concerns that students in other

                                                                                                          10
        We also restrict the sample to students who took the ACT.12 This requirement further

emphasizes that the sample, particularly the community college students, had some baccalaureate

degree intent as most four-year colleges require students to take either the ACT or SAT, though

most schools do not require a minimum score. The ACT restriction is also necessary because

this source gives information on student achievement and other important controls for the

models. Because of this restriction, our results may reflect a more conservative estimate of the

penalty felt by community college students as we may be inadvertently excluding some students

who do want a baccalaureate degree but failed to prepare for admission into a four-year

university. Finally, due to the use of proximity as an instrument, we restrict the sample to Ohio

residents (i.e., distance would not serve as a good instrument for Florida residents attending an

Ohio college). Beyond these sample requirements, we drop observations without complete

college transcript or zip code information.13

        Although this paper focuses on students in Ohio, the results have external validity. The

percentage of Ohio public school students who graduate from high school and enter college the

following fall are near the national averages (Mortenson, 2002), and the higher education system,

demographics, and diverse labor markets within Ohio are similar to many neighboring states and

national conditions. Moreover, Ohio plays a prominent role in higher education as it has the fifth

largest public higher education system in the United States (after California, Florida, New York,

surveys report higher educational aspirations, which may not match the realities surrounding college
admission and/or enrollment (i.e. academic preparation, financial constraints, etc. (Rosenbaum, 2001).
The low-stakes method in which degree intent is collected in our dataset could mean that our survey
yields more honest answers.
12
   Approximately two-thirds of high school students in Ohio take the ACT exam. Our dataset includes the
highest score of the student and his or her most recent responses to the ACT survey, which includes self-
reported information on high school preparation and performance as well as the intended plan of study in
college.
13
   After applying the basic sample restrictions (age 17-20; four-year degree intent; took the ACT; Ohio
resident), we had to drop 1,092 observations (3.1 percent of the sample) due to missing complete college
transcript information and 3,517 observations (10 percent of the sample) due to missing zip code
information. While the number missing zip code information is large, it is mainly driven by the fact that
Kent State University did not submit any zip code information resulting in us dropping its students from
the sample (2,396 observations or 68 of those missing zip code information).

                                                                                                      11
and Texas) (NCES, 2000). While our results could be used to reflect on community college

issues in some other states, caution should be taken when making comparisons to states with

very different postsecondary systems, such as California.



Basic Empirical Strategy

        Our research question asks how the outcomes of community college entrants compare to

similar four-year college students. We address this question using regression techniques,

beginning with a basic Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) model estimating the impact of beginning

at a community college on the total number of college credits completed:

(1)     CREDITSi = α1i + β1 COMMCOLLi + β2 X1i + ε1i

where COMMCOLLi is a dummy variable equal to one if the student initially began at a

community college (zero otherwise), and β1 is the parameter associated with beginning at a two-

year college. Xi is a vector of background controls including student demographics (e.g., race,

gender, age, and age squared), family background (e.g., parents' income and income squared),

and student ability (e.g., percentile ACT score and the score squared).14 The error term is

represented by εi. For the outcomes variables that are dichotomous in nature (e.g., degree

completion within nine years), we employ probit models instead of OLS.

        Our regression models control for observable differences between students in the sample

to isolate the impact of beginning at a community college. However, other factors may influence

who chooses to initially attend a community college versus four-year institution. Stated more

formally, our probit and OLS estimates may lead to biased estimates if ε1i is correlated with

college choice due to unmeasured factors. For this reason we employ two additional empirical


14
   To maintain the largest sample size possible, students missing parental income information were
included by created a "missing parental income" dummy variable. This had to be done for 1,316
observations, or 8.9 percent of the sample. However, for this reason, the coefficients on parental income
should not be used in interpretation.

                                                                                                      12
strategies to deal with selection. The first is to use propensity scores to match similar students on

observable characteristics, and the second uses an instrumental variable approach.



Addressing Selection using a Propensity Matching Approach

       Students’ choices about whether to enroll in two-year versus four-year colleges are

subject to their preferences, financial constraints, academic profile, beliefs about the prospects of

benefiting from the respective institutions, and other unobservable characteristics. To address

the bias that results from this potential selection, we first use a propensity score blocking

technique to model selection into two-year colleges versus nonselective four-year institutions.

Propensity scores are useful for establishing a comparison group that is similar, on average, to a

treatment group (in this case two-year colleges) along a set of observed characteristics. First, we

assembled a set of variables to predict choice of two-year versus four-year postsecondary entry

and estimate the following binomial logistic regression model:

(2)    Pr(COMMCOLL)i = α3i + δX3i + ε3i

where Pr(COMMCOLL)i is the probability for the ith student to enter postsecondary study as a

function of variety demographic characteristics and academic performance indicators, Xi

(summary information on the estimation of the propensity score is included in Appendix Table

1). Thus, the propensity score is a “single number that indicates the extent to which one person

is similar to another along a collection of observed characteristics” (Agodini & Dynarski, 2004).

A histogram of the estimated propensity score for the two-year entrants versus four-year starters

is in Appendix Figure 1.

       Next, we use the propensity score (fitted probabilities of two-year selection from this

model) to stratify the sample into an optimal number of subclasses or “blocks.” In stratifying the

sample, we sort from the lowest to highest estimated propensity scores, discarding the

observations with an estimated propensity score less than the minimum or greater than the


                                                                                                  13
maximum estimated propensity score for treated units (Dehejia & Wahba, 1999). The goal is to

stratify the sample into groups of respondents with similar observed chances of postsecondary

entry via two-year versus four-year institutions. The strata are chosen so that the covariates are

“balanced” within each stratum, meaning that there are no statistically significant differences in

means of covariates between those who started at two-year and those who started at four-year

institutions (Dehejia & Wahba, 1999).15 We present mean propensity scores for two-year

entrants (treated) and four-year entrants (control) by strata in Appendix Table 2 We then

conduct our subsequent substantive models testing the effect of starting at a community college

as fixed effects models on the propensity score blocks, thereby evaluating the within-stratum

difference in the outcomes between two-year and four-year entrants (Dehejia & Whaba, 1999).16

Although the approach does not solve the selection problem on unobservables, it is an effective

way to control for observed heterogeneity in type of postsecondary entry (Rubin, 1997; Morgan,

2001; Rosenbaum & Rubin, 1983).



Addressing Selection using an Instrumental Variables Approach

        Our second strategy to address the issue of selection is an instrumental variables (IV)

approach. In order to be a valid instrument, one must identify a variable that influences the

choice of a two-year versus four-year institution while not impacting the outcomes of interest

(i.e., persistence, degree completion, and stop out behavior). For this paper, we use proximity as

instruments. Previous research has shown that students are more likely to attend one school over

another based on how close the colleges are to their homes (Rouse, 1995; Long, 2004). More

specifically, our instruments are the distance from the student's home to the closest two-year
15
   To ensure that the individual covariates are balanced within each stratum, we include additional higher
order terms of the background variables, see Appendix, Table 1.
16
   For a more detailed discussion of propensity score “binning” procedures see Dehejia and Wahba
(2002); Conniffe, Gash, and O’Connell (2000); Dehejia and Wahba (1999); Rosenbaum and Rubin
(1983). Several studies demonstrate that propensity score impacts are not sensitive to the ways in which
matching is conducted (Dehejia & Wahba, 2002; Smith & Todd, 2000)

                                                                                                       14
college and distance to the closest nonselective four-year university.17 The IV approach is

described as follows:

(3)     CREDITSi = α4i + θ1 COMMCOLLi + θ2 Xi4i + ε4i

        where: COMMCOLLi = f ( DIST_2YRi, DIST_NONSEL4YRi) + νi

As in the earlier equations, CREDITSi is the outcome variable, and COMMCOLLi is a dummy

variable equal to one if the person began at a two-year college. The difference with this

approach is that COMMCOLLi is instrumented for in the second part of the equation with the

distance from the student's home to the closest two-year college and nonselective four-year

university, represented by DIST_2YRi and DIST_NONSEL4YRi , respectively.

        There have been several critiques of using distance as an instrument. First, Rouse (1995)

and Card (1995) caution that the estimates should be interpreted with caution because families

who value education might choose to live in close proximity to colleges, and therefore distance

could be endogenous. If so, the instruments would be invalid because residence would also be

correlated with educational outcomes (due to family preferences). Additionally, the relevance of

distance is problematic when using national data sets because of differences in the way distance

is perceived across the country and extreme variation in the geographical dispersion of colleges

across a state.18 However, these concerns are limited in this context. First, in Ohio, the colleges

and universities are purposely distributed throughout the state so that each resident is within 30

miles of a school. During the 1960s and 1970s, with the goal of improving college access in

Ohio, Governor James Rhodes influenced the location of colleges so that every state resident was

located within 30 miles of a college campus (OBR, 2001). Therefore, the four-year and two-year

17
   The distances were calculated from the student's high school to the nearest of each type of
postsecondary institution. In Ohio, the nonselective, four-year universities are open admissions schools.
18
   These critiques have focused on the power of proximity as a predictor. Clearly, distance might be
perceived differently in Nevada versus New Jersey. Also, the geography of college locations differs
greatly by state as this creates very different norms in college attendance patterns by distance. However,
this paper focuses on one state in which students have a strong pattern of attending the closest college to
their home.

                                                                                                        15
colleges are scattered throughout the state, and each resident is close to one or both of each type

of college regardless of their underlying preferences. Proximity is a particularly relevant factor

in Ohio enrollment patterns. The median distance from a student's home to the college of

attendance is only 26 miles in our sample with nearly 60 percent of students attending a college

within 50 miles of their homes. In addition, due to the fact that we focus on traditional-age

college students, their residential decisions are likely due to parental decisions made when the

student was in high school or even earlier, long before the college choice decision (Rouse, 1995).

       Results from the first stage of the IV are displayed in Appendix Table 3.19 In addition to

the instruments, the regression also includes the following exogenous variables: a dummy

variable for female students (baseline: male students), dummy variables for Black, Hispanic,

Asian, and Native American students (baseline: White students), age, age-squared, parental

income, parental income-squared, a dummy indicating missing values for parental income, and

the student's math and English ACT scores. The signs of the estimates of the first stage of IV are

as expected: our sample of students was more likely to choose to initially attend a community

college the closer the nearest two-year college and the farther away the nearest four-year

nonselective university. The test of joint significance for the instruments suggests that they have

substantial explanatory power in the first stage with an F statistic of 3263.11.



IV.    RESULTS

Descriptive Analysis: Comparing students with Four-year Degree Intent?

       Table 1 displays summary statistics for our sample. The sample focuses on students who

began their postsecondary study at age 17-20 years old, who not only indicate four-year degree

intent but also took the ACT, an additional sign of aspirations to get a baccalaureate degree. As


19
  These first-stage results apply to the IV estimates discussed below in Table 3, Panel C, and Table 4,
specifications (3) and (6).

                                                                                                    16
discussed above, previous empirical work suggest that community college students enter

postsecondary schooling with lower academic credentials on average than their counterparts at

four-year institutions (as measured by high school grade point average and ACT scores).

However, the differences are not large between students at nonselective four-year universities in

Ohio and those at community colleges. Thus, for most of our analysis we focus more explicitly

on students at nonselective, four-year institutions as the main comparison group to community

college students.20

        The bottom part of Table 1 displays the mean enrollment and educational outcomes of

students at each type of college. Students at each type of institution experience very different

outcomes. Among all students who start at two-year colleges, nearly 44 percent have dropped

out or stopped out six years after starting, as compared with 34 percent who start at nonselective,

four-year institutions and 18 percent who start at selective, four-year institutions. The rates of

departure are consistently higher for those who start at community colleges versus four-year

institutions, regardless of timing of exit.        More importantly, it is hard to ignore the vast

differences in bachelor’s degree receipt between those who start at two-year colleges and those

who begin at four-year institutions. Among community college students with the demonstrated

intention to get a four-year degree, only 26 percent obtain a bachelor’s degree within nine years

of starting. Meanwhile nearly twice and three times as many students who begin at nonselective

(50 percent) and selective four-year institutions (73 percent), do so. However, these comparisons

do not account for differences between the students at each type of institution and should not be


20
   It is worth noting that our sample characteristics are different than those of college students generally
due to the fact that we limit the sample by age and to those who indicate wanting a four-year degree and
who took the ACT. In the general population, one would find much starker differences between students
at selective four-year colleges and community colleges. Meanwhile, the data suggest that the student
bodies at nonselective four-year colleges and community colleges have much more similar backgrounds
and academic preparation even without our sample restrictions. Students at nonselective four-year and
two-year (i.e. community colleges) institutions tend to be older, are more likely to be non-White, and
have lower academic performance levels. Students at these schools are also more likely to attend part-
time or less-than-part-time.

                                                                                                         17
interpreted as causal effects. Community college students are also less likely to be enrolled full-

time, with 56 percent of two-year students enrolling full-time as first-time freshmen, as

compared to 82 percent of students enrolled at selective, four-year institutions and 67 percent of

students enrolled at nonselective, four-year institutions. This may be a decision endogenous to

college choice as community colleges offer more flexibility to be able to attend part-time.



Is there a Community College Penalty? Results from the Regression Analysis

        Table 2 displays the relative likelihood that students who began at different types of

institutions complete a degree within six or nine years of initial enrollment. The six-year

benchmark, or 150 percent of the time needed to complete a four-year degree full-time, is

commonly used in the literature to calculate graduation rates, but we also show nine-year

graduation rates due to the fact that many community college students enroll in higher education

part-time. The table reports marginal effects estimated by probit regression models of starting at

a community college. However, linear probability models produce similar results.21

        The estimates suggest that students who start at a community college versus a four-year

institution, in particular, in comparison to a selective four-year university, are significantly less

likely to have completed a baccalaureate during the time frame. Specifications 1 and 6 show the

simple comparison without any controls in the model. As shown in the upper part of the table,

community college students were 43 percent less likely to complete a bachelor's degree than a

student who began at a selective four-year college. However, given differences between students

who begin at community colleges versus four-year schools, the following specifications control

for student demographic characteristics (race, gender, age), parents' income, and student ability

(ACT scores). Even after accounting for these differences, although lower in magnitude (from -

21
   For instance, specification (9) with all of the controls yields a probit estimate of -0.2023 (0.0078).
Using OLS instead, the estimate is -0.1913 (0.0074). Likewise, specification (10) yields a probit estimate
of -0.2174 (0.0081). Using OLS instead, the estimate is -0.2046 (0.0076).

                                                                                                       18
0.426 to -0.363), the estimated penalty nevertheless persists. There is also an estimated penalty,

albeit a smaller one, for students who attend nonselective four-year institutions in comparison to

their counterparts at selective four-year institutions.    The F-test comparing the results of

attending a community college versus a nonselective four-year university suggests that the

estimates are statistically different from each other.

       The bottom part of the table limits the sample only to students at nonselective

institutions, both four-year and two-year. As discussed above, these students are much more

similar across institutions. Again, we note the lower likelihood of degree completion among

those who start at a community college. We also note that the estimated penalty is smaller now

that we have omitted the comparison with selective four-year institutions. In comparison to the

results in the upper part of the table, however, there is only a modest change in the size of the

estimate when including controls for background and ability (from -0.225 to -0.202). This

suggests that the sample of students at nonselective schools is already very similar and so the

covariates do not explain much of the variation in outcomes (below we focus on making

comparisons between two-year and nonselective four-year entrants). The lower likelihood of

graduation for community college entrants remains larger even after extending the time frame to

nine years.    Nevertheless, selection into two-year versus four-year colleges may still be

influenced by a variety of factors not accounted for in our model, thus next we turn to alternate

specifications that address potential selectivity bias.



Comparing the Probit to the Propensity Score and IV Results

       Table 3 presents a series of fitted models investigating the effect of starting at a two-year

college versus a nonselective four-year institution on a host of outcomes — bachelor’s receipt

within nine years (column 1), six years (column 2), and four years (column 3), and total credit

hours earned after six years (column 4). In addition, the last column looks at the negative


                                                                                                 19
outcome of stopping out within six years without completing a degree (column 5). Panel A

presents the results without any correction for selection, Panel B presents the propensity score

specification results, and Panel C presents the results with the instrumental variables

specification. The results using discrete outcomes were run using probit models. However, the

results are robust to using linear probability models instead.

        Looking at each outcome across the three specifications, we see that students who start at

a community college had a significantly smaller likelihood of degree receipt, fewer total credits

earned, and an increased likelihood of stopping out without a degree. However, as expected,

upon controlling for selection, the size of the estimated penalty falls. In terms of nine-year

graduation rates, the negative effect of starting at a community college falls from 0.217

(specification 1) to 0.211 when using propensity score methods (specification 2), a very minor

difference. However, using the IV approach to control for unobserved differences between

community college and nonselective four-year entrants consistently results in the smallest

estimate of the penalty (0.145 in terms of degree completion within nine years; specification 11).

For credit hours completed, over six years, there is a difference of 15.4 credits in the simple

comparison (specification 4), but this drops to 14.4 credits in the PS results, and 5.6 credits in the

IV estimate (specification 14). Therefore, while propensity scores likely address some small part

of the selection bias in the straightforward results, the IV strategy, by dealing with unobservable

differences, seems to do a better job addressing concerns about the comparability of students

across types of schools. For the IV estimates, we also report overidentification tests under the

null hypothesis that the instruments are valid. The test is χ2 (chi-square) distributed in the

number of overidentifying restrictions.22 As is evident in the table, the test consistently fails to




22
  Intuitively, it is a test of whether, after eliminating its correlation with choice (instrumented) and the
other covariates, the educational outcomes are still correlated with the distance variables.

                                                                                                         20
reject the null hypothesis in all cases except for specification 15 (stop out behavior within six

years), and so we have confidence in the results.

       While the penalty experienced by community college students is much smaller once

accounting for bias, there is still an important difference in outcomes not explained by initial

selection into two-year versus four-year institutions. Even after adjusting for selection bias, our

analyses still find a consistent, albeit more modest, negative effect from beginning at a

community college. Focusing on the IV estimates, the penalty becomes larger once taking into

account a longer period of time: the difference in rates of degree completion are not all that

different within four-years (-0.019) because few students who began at nonselective four-year

universities are able to do this, but the gap grows once giving students six (-0.98) and nine years

(-0.145). Likewise, the difference in total credits earned within six years is equivalent to nearly

two average college courses.

       This conclusion is similar to that found in earlier work (Rouse, 1995; Leigh & Gill, 2003;

Sandy, Gonzalez, & Hilmer, 2006; Alfonso, 2006). However, these studies are based on cohorts

that graduated high school fifteen or even twenty-five years ago. Meanwhile, there has been

increasing pressure on community colleges to fill the role as an alternative pathway to a

baccalaureate degree due to capacity constraints, rising admissions requirements, and escalating

tuition costs at many four-year institutions. With our focus on a cohort that is the most recently

available to investigate nine year outcomes (having entered college in fall 1998), we provide a

timely estimate of the impact of starting at a community college.



How does the Community College Penalty differ by Student Type?

       Earlier work on college access and degree receipt has pointed to important differences by

race and gender in the educational attainment process. As such, we ask if the penalty of

community college entry is greater for females versus males, black versus white students, and


                                                                                                21
lower achieving students versus higher achieving students. To answer this question, we test

three sets of interactions in Tables 4, 5, and 6. It is important to note that the comparison of

estimates across strategies becomes more complicated using the interactions due to the need to

take into account the overall effect, interaction coefficient, and baseline dummy variable. Panel

B of each table adds these coefficients together to calculate the overall effect for each group.

       Table 4 summarizes the results for gender for our two most important outcomes:

baccalaureate degree completion within nine years and total credit hours completed within six

years. Each of the models includes an interaction between the variable of interest (starting at a

community college) and a dummy variable equal to one for female students. As shown in the

table, there is a statistically significant interaction between two-year entry and being female for

the simple probit and PS estimates (while negative and similar in size, the IV estimates are not

statistically significant). This suggests women experience a larger penalty for initially entering a

community college than men. However, because women tend to do better than men overall in

terms of educational outcomes (regardless of where they attend college), the overall effects are

still more negative for men, as shown in panel B. Looking at the overall effects, it is still clear

that correcting for selection using PS or IV models reduces the estimate of the community

college penalty for both men and women.

       We next test for whether the community college penalty is greater for Black versus White

students. Table 5 summarizes the results by race; the sample is limited to black and white

students only so the total sample size decreases to 13,836. Each of the models includes an

interaction between the variable of interest (starting at a community college) and a dummy

variable equal to one for being a black student. Here we note that the interaction variable is

statistically significant across all the models. In other words, a differential effect is found for

black versus white students with black students experiencing worse outcomes from beginning at

a community college than white students.        Again, the size of the estimate decreases once


                                                                                                   22
accounting for selection using the PS and IV strategies. However, the overidentification tests for

the IV models cause us to be wary of these results. Focusing on the PS estimates instead, the

results suggest that Black students had worse educational outcomes (i.e., a lower overall

likelihood of graduation) and attending a community college only exacerbated the educational

gap between Black and White students. Controlling for the propensity score differences (i.e., the

likelihood of initially choosing to attend a community college), black students are much less

likely to complete a degree or more credits than white students. This is possibly because within

a propensity score block, white students have better academic preparation for college than do

black students.

       Finally, we look at whether there are differences by previous academic achievement

level. One might hypothesize that community colleges are the best entry point for students with

weaker academic achievement in that they may specialize in providing the necessary preparation

for more challenging work at the four-year level.     Work by Light and Strayer (2000) suggests

that lower-achieving students who attend less selective schools are more likely to complete

college than their counterparts at more selective institutions. On the other hand, others have

argued that in fact students perform better, regardless of their demonstrated ability, in more

academically challenging environments. For example, some find that attending a more selective

institution, regardless of relative academic preparation, is associated with higher graduation rates

(Kane, 1998; Alon & Tienda, 2005). These hypotheses would lead to different conclusions

about whether the penalty of starting at a community college differs (and in what direction) for

students of different demonstrated abilities.

       Table 6 summarizes the results for models where we include interactions between type of

college entrance and a categorical measure of ACT score — low (0-17) and high (23-36) with

the left out categories being average scores (18-22). Without controlling for bias, it appears that

higher-ability students at community colleges are at a real disadvantage over average ability


                                                                                                 23
students. In the propensity score analysis, students with higher ACT scores are less likely to

complete a degree or more credits than students with more average ACT scores. This is because

within a propensity score block, students with more average ACT scores are likely to otherwise

have better performance on other indicators (years of high school math or English, high school

rank, etc.), or may otherwise be different on other demographics (race, parental income, etc.) and

therefore, have better outcomes overall. But it may be the case that there are unobservable

differences we are not catching – it may be the case that students with higher scores who enter

the community colleges are less motivated, actually lack the right preparation to succeed, or have

other demands on their time. Once we account for this, higher-ability students do not suffer any

special penalty in terms of graduation and the interaction results are not statistically significant in

terms of credits completed. On the other side, students with lower ACT scores also seem to do

worse at community colleges than the average student in terms of degree completion (the results

for credits completed are not statistically significant).      These results are robust across the

estimation strategies and lend credence to students doing better if at a nonselective four-year

institution.



V.      CONCLUSION

        Although community colleges serve an important function in postsecondary education,

comparatively little education research assesses their effectiveness or examines their students.

While several studies have examined the consequences of attending a community college, many

questions remain about both the goals and intentions of community college students and their

post-collegiate outcomes. The increased flexibility and nontraditional patterns of attendance

afforded by community colleges may weaken a student’s progression through postsecondary

education and make transferring to a four-year college less likely (Grubb, 1991). Furthermore,




                                                                                                    24
the administrative costs of transferring to a four-year college may be exceedingly prohibitive for

many students.

       Using a detailed dataset of individuals in a large, public higher education system, this

paper provides a timely examination of the experiences of community colleges students who

intend to get a four-year degree. Our paper, beyond utilizing straightforward regression models,

uses two additional research strategies to account for the fact that students do not sort into

community colleges versus four-year institutions randomly. Accounting for selection using both

propensity score methods and instrumental variables gives us the opportunity to measure and

compare differences in postsecondary outcomes in two ways. In addition, we use a longer time

span of data (nine years) than any other study, have important information on transfer behavior

and student degree intent, and shed light on a context that has not previously been studied.

       Although the paper does not specifically test a democratization or diversion theory of

community colleges, it does however ask whether, for those who divert (or perhaps detour) to the

bachelor’s degree via the community college, is there a cost? We find that in fact there is a cost

in terms of degree completion, credit accumulation, and risk of dropping out to initially entering

postsecondary study through the community college. In other words, we find a persistent

community college penalty.      Moreover, this penalty persists even after controlling for key

student demographic and academic achievement variables. It is also evident after accounting for

students’ self-selection into community colleges using two different empirical methodologies.

Selection into type of postsecondary institution is clearly a factor that biases straightforward

estimates of the penalty of starting at a community college. We also find that the penalty of

starting at two-year rather than nonselective four-year institutions varies by type of student with

female students experiencing a different penalty than male students.

       As noted above, these results may be a conservative estimate of the "community college

penalty" due to our sample restriction that students must have taken the ACT; the results of this


                                                                                                25
paper do not reflect the penalty experienced by students who want a baccalaureate degree but

failed to prepare for admission into a four-year university, a group who is likely to have less

academic preparation. As shown by the summary statistics in Table 1, the results are

representative for more traditional-age, primarily white college students on the margin between

attending a two- and four-year institution who have slightly below average ACT scores

(somewhere in the 25th to 50th percentile in scores).23

       These findings are particularly relevant in today's debates about how to improve

educational attainment given the growing importance of community colleges as a pathway to a

baccalaureate degree. Amidst rising demands for skilled workers coupled with the increasing

numbers of individuals seeking higher education, community colleges have been forced to

accommodate much of the expansion in postsecondary schooling.                 However, one must

acknowledge that, on average, the outcomes of students who initially enter higher education

through the two-year system appear to lag behind those who enter via a four-year college. Our

conservative estimates suggest that these students are 14.5 percent less likely to complete a

baccalaureate degree within nine years. This has significant consequences, especially for low-

income and minority students who disproportionally rely on the community colleges as the

primary portal for postsecondary entry.       Due to the "penalty" experienced by community

colleges students, caution should be exercised when designing policies that might shift

enrollment patterns more towards the two-year colleges. On the other hand, because community

colleges are less expensive, it is worth comparing the size of the penalty to the difference in costs

at two-year versus four-year institutions. In addition, greater focus is warranted on institutional

policies and programs that support community college students and help them transfer to four-

year institutions to reach their intended goals of obtaining a baccalaureate degree.

23
  The average composite ACT score in 1997-98 was 21. Source: ACT (n.d.) The 1998 ACT High School
Profile Report - National Data. Accessed on May 14, 2008 from
http://www.act.org/news/data/98/tsum.html.

                                                                                                  26
REFERENCES

Agodini, R. & Dynarski, M. (2004). Are Experiments the Only Option? A Look at Dropout

       Prevention Programs. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 86(1), 180-194.

Adelman, C. (2005). The Toolbox Revisited. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Education.

Alfonso, M. (2006). The impact of community college attendance on Baccalaureate Attainment.

       Research in Higher Education, 47(8), 873-903.

Alfonso, M., Bailey, T., & Scott, M. (2005) The Educational Outcomes of Occupational Sub-

       baccalaureate Students: Evidence from the 1990s. Economics of Education Review,

       24(2),197-212.

Alon, S., & Tienda, M. (2005). Assessing the “Mismatch” Hypothesis: Differences in College

       Graduation Rates by College Selectivity. Sociology of Education, 78(4), 294-315.

Anderson, G., Sun, J. C., & Alfonso, M. (2006) Effectiveness of Statewide Articulation

       Agreements on the Probability of Transfer: A Preliminary Policy Analysis. Review of

       Higher Education, 29(3), 261-291.

Bailey, T. R., & Weininger, E. (2002) Performance, Graduation, and Transfer of Immigrants and

       Natives in the City University of New York Community Colleges. Educational

       Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 24(4), 359-377.

Becker, G. (1993). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special

       Reference to Education. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Brint, S., & Karabel, J. (1989). The Diverted Dream: Community Colleges and the Promise of

       Educational Opportunity in America, 1900-1985. New York: Oxford University Press.

Calcagno, J. C, Crosta, P., Bailey, T. R., & Jenkins, D. (2007) Stepping Stones to a Degree: The

       Impact of Enrollment Pathways and Milestones on Community College Student

       Outcomes. Research in Higher Education, 48(7), 755-801.




                                                                                             27
Card, D. (1995) Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to

       Schooling". In L.N.Christofides, E.K. Grant, & R. Swidinsky (Eds.), Aspects of Labor

       Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp. Toronto: University of

       Toronto Press.

Conniffe, D., Gash, V., & O’Connell, P. (2000). Evaluating State Programmes: “Natural

       Experiments” and Propensity Scores. The Economic and Social Review, 31(4), 283-308.

Dehejia, R. H., & Wahba. (2002). Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental

       Causal Studies. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (1), 151-161.

Dehejia, R. H., & Wahba. (1999). Causal Effects in Nonexperimental Studies: Reevaluating the

       Evaluation of Training Programs. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 94

       (448), 1053-1062.

Dougherty, K. (1987). The Effects of Community Colleges: Aid or Hindrance to Socioeconomic

       Attainment? Sociology of Education, 60(2), 86-103.

Dougherty, K. (1994). The Contradictory College: The Conflicting Origins, Impacts, and

       Futures of the Community College. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

Dougherty, K., & Kienzl. G. S. (2006) It’s Not Enough to Get Through the Open Door:

       Inequalities by Social Background in Transfer from Community College to Four-Year

       Colleges. Teachers College Record, 108(3), 452-487.

Ehrenberg, R. & Smith, C. (2004) Analyzing the Success of Student Transitions from 2- to 4-

       year Institutions within a State. Economics of Education Review, 23 (1), 11-28.

Evelyn, J. (2002) “Budget Cuts Force Community Colleges to Consider Turning Away

       Students.” Chronicle of Higher Education, 48(46),A25-A26, July 2002.

Grubb, W. N. (1995). Postsecondary education and the sub-baccalaureate labor market:

       Corrections and extensions. Economics of Education Review, 14(3), 285-299.




                                                                                           28
Grubb, W. N. (1991). The Decline of Community College Transfer Rates: Evidence from

       National Longitudinal Surveys. Journal of Higher Education, 62(2), 194-222.

Hilmer, M. J. (1997). Does community college attendance provide a strategic path to a higher

       quality education? Economics of Education Review, 16(1), 59-68.

Hilmer, M. J. (1998). Post-secondary fees and the decision to attend a university or a community

       college. Journal of Public Economics, 67(3), 329-348.

Hilmer, M. J. (2000). Does the Return to Quality Differ for Transfer Students and Direct

       Attendees? Economics of Education Review, 19(1), 47-61.

Kane, T. (1998). “Misconceptions in the Debate over Affirmative Action in College

       Admissions” in G. Orfield & E. Miller (Eds.), Chilling Admissions: The Affirmative

       Action Crisis and the Search for Alternatives (pp.17-31). Cambridge, MA: Harvard

       Education Publishing Group.

Kane, T., & Rouse, C. (1995). “Labor Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year College.”

       American Economic Review, 85(3), 600-614.

Kyung, W. (1996). In-migration of College Students to the State of New York. The Journal of

       Higher Education, 67(3), 349-358.

Lee, V., & Frank, K. (1990). Students’ Characteristics that facilitate the Transfer from Two-

       year to Four-year Colleges. Sociology of Education, 63(3), 178-193.

Leigh, D. E., & Gill, A. M. (2003). Do community colleges really divert students from earning

       bachelor’s degrees? Economics of Education Review, 22(1), 23-30.

Leigh, D. E., & Gill, A. M. (2007). Do Community Colleges Respond to Local Needs: Evidence

       from California. Kalamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Light, A., & Strayer, W. (2000). Determinants of College Completion: School Quality or Student

       Ability. Journal of Human Resources, 35(2), 299-332.




                                                                                             29
Long, B. T. (2004). How Have College Decisions Changed Overtime? An Application of the

      Conditional Logistic Choice Model. Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2), 271-296.

Melguizo, T., Kienzl, G., & Alfonso, M. (2007). "Evaluating the effect of community college

      attendance on educational attainment: Application of propensity score matching

      methods." Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual

      Meeting ,Chicago, IL.

Mills, Kay. (2006). "Enrollment Squeeze: Virginia's community colleges cope with increasing

      demand and a changing world." National CrossTalk, 14(1), Winter 2006.

Moore, C., & Shulock, N. (2007). Beyond the Open Door: Increasing Student Success in the

      California Community Colleges. Sacramento: Institute for Higher Education Leadership

      & Policy, California State University- Sacramento.

Morgan, S.L. (2001). Counterfactuals, Causal Effect Heterogeneity, and the Catholic School

      Effect on Learning. Sociology of Education, 74, 341-374.

Mortenson, T. (2002). “Chance for College by Age 19 by State in 2000.” Oskaloosa, IA:

      Postsecondary Education OPPORTUNITY, no. 123, September.

NCES (2002). National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988: Base-Year to Fourth Follow-up

      Data File User's Manual (NCES 2002-323). Table C-12: NELS:88 fourth follow-up study

      completion rates, by selected sample strata: 2000. Accessed on April 21, 2008, from:

      http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2002/2002323.pdf.

Ohio Board of Regents (2001). Ohio Colleges and Universities 2001: Profile of Student

      Outcomes, Experiences and Campus Measures. Columbus, O.H.: Ohio Board of Regents.

Ohio Board of Regents (2002). Making the Transition from High School to College in Ohio

      2002. Columbus, O.H.: Ohio Board of Regents.

Roksa, J. (2006). Does Vocational Focus of Community Colleges Hinder Students’ Educational

      Attainment? The Review of Higher Education, 29, 499-526.


                                                                                        30
Rouse, C. E. (1995). Democratization or Diversion? The Effect of Community Colleges on

       Educational Attainment. Journal of Business Economics and Statistics, 13(2), 217-224.

Rouse, C. (1998). Do two-year colleges increase overall educational attainment? Evidence from

       the states. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 17(4), 595-620.

Rosenbaum, P.R , &      Rubin, D.B. (1983). The Central Role of the Propensity Score in

       Observational Studies for Causal Effects. Biometrika, 70, 41-55.

Rubin, D.B. (1997). Estimating Causal Effects from Large Data Sets Using Propensity Scores.

       Annals of Internal Medicine, 127(8), 757-763.

Rosenbaum, J. (2001). Beyond College For All: Career Paths for the Forgotten Half. New York,

       NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Sandy, J., Gonzalez, A., &. Hilmer, M. (2006). “Alternative Paths to College Completion: Effect

       of Attending a Two-Year School on the Probability of Completing a Four-Year Degree.”

       Economics of Education Review, 25(5), 463-471.

Smith, J.A., & Todd, P. E. (2004). Does matching overcome LaLonde’s critique of

       nonexperimental estimators? Journal of Econometrics, 125, 305-353

Stephan, J. L. and Rosenbaum, J. (2006). "Do Some Colleges Improve Students’ Chances of

       Completing Degrees? How Propensity Scores Change the Question" Paper presented at

       the annual meeting of the American Sociological Association, Montreal Convention

       Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (August 2006).

Surette, B. J. (2001). Transfer from two-year to four-year college: An analysis of gender

       differences. Economics of Education Review, 20(2), 151–163.

Whitaker, D., & Pascarella, E. (1994). Two-Year College Attendance and Socioeconomic

       Attainment: Some Additional Evidence. Journal of Higher Education, 65(2), 194-210.




                                                                                               31
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Sample: Fall 1998 entering cohort age 17-20 who had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                                                                Public, Four-year
                                   Public, Four-year                                       Public, Two-year
                                                                  Nonselective
                                 Selective Universities                                   Community Colleges
                                                                  Universities
                                          18.351                      18.432                      18.425
Age in 1998
                                         (0.4995)                    (0.5898)                    (0.6446)
Percent Female                           0.5500                       0.5387                      0.5498
Percent White                            0.8655                       0.7991                      0.8973
Percent African American                 0.0730                       0.1178                      0.0544
Percent Hispanic                         0.0151                       0.0171                      0.0142
Percent Asian                            0.0245                       0.0148                      0.0073
                                          3.297                       2.959                       2.816
High School GPA
                                         (0.4467)                    (0.5901)                    (0.5871)
                                          3.204                       2.758                       2.548
Grades in HS Math
                                         (0.7829)                    (0.9905)                    (1.0249)
                                          3.326                       2.959                       2.805
Grades in HS English
                                         (0.7195)                    (0.8589)                    (0.9084)
ACT Composite Score                      23.553                       20.730                      19.550
  (36 maximum)                           (3.838)                     (4.2603)                    (3.7237)
                                         23.515                       20.488                      19.198
ACT Math
                                         (4.480)                     (4.6840)                    (3.8956)
                                         22.938                       19.965                      18.692
ACT English
                                         (4.397)                     (4.8705)                    (4.5223)
                                          0.0807                      0.2749                      0.4639
In Math Remediation
                                         [11,255]                     [7421]                      [6889]
                                          0.0237                      0.2372                      0.2700
In English Remediation
                                         [11,255]                     [7421]                      [6889]
Percent Full-time                         0.8188                      0.6708                      0.5550
Stopped Out within 1 year                0.0431                       0.1103                      0.1642
Stopped Out within 2 years               0.0852                       0.1886                      0.2761
Stopped Out within 6 years                0.1810                      0.3406                      0.4392
                                         110.893                      85.218                      66.230
Total Credit Hours after 6 yrs
                                         (43.058)                    (52.016)                    (48.247)
Rcvd Bach. Deg. within 4 yrs              0.3647                      0.1525                      0.0564
Rcvd Bach. Deg. within 6 yrs             0.6900                       0.4372                      0.2118
Rcvd Bach. Deg. within 9 yrs             0.7291                       0.4972                      0.2587
Observations                             13,683                       7,422                        7,388
Source: Ohio Board of Regents (OBR) Higher Education Information (HEI) System: Student Entrance, Student
Enrollment, and Course Enrollment files along with test score and student background information from ACT, Inc.
Notes: The sample consists of the fall 1998 entering cohort age 17-20 who had intent to complete a baccalaureate
degree. Due to the estimation techniques used, we also limit the sample to students who took the ACT (because of
the information it provides on background) and Ohio residents (because we use residential proximity to an Ohio
college as an instrumental variable). Standard deviations are shown in the parentheses. If the entire sample was not
used in the calculation of the statistic, the observations are shown in brackets. In Ohio, the selective, public
institutions require a certain academic standard but are not considered highly selective by national norms; in
contrast, the nonselective, four-year universities are open admissions schools.


                                                                                                                 32
Table 2: The Role of the Initial Institution on Degree Completion
Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Fall 1998 entering cohort age 17-20 who had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                                      ALL FOUR- AND TWO-YEAR INSTITUTIONS
                          Outcome: Completed a Bachelor's Degree within 6 Years     Outcome: Completed
                                     Adding        Adding Parents'     Adding ACT   a Bachelor's Degree
                       Baseline
                                   Demographics        Income            percentile    within 9 Years
                         (1)           (2)                (3)               (4)              (5)

                       -0.4259**        -0.4274**          -0.4175**         -0.3626**             -0.3544**
Initially Attend 2yr
                        (0.0069)         (0.0071)           (0.0072)          (0.0081)              (0.0084)


Initially Attend       -0.2136**        -0.1920**          -0.1799**         -0.1415**             -0.1266**
Nonselective 4yr        (0.0076)         (0.0078)           (0.0079)          (0.0082)              (0.0083)

Pseudo R2                 0.09             0.11               0.12              0.14                  0.14
Observations            28,493            28,493            28,493             28,493                28,493
                                NONSELECTIVE FOUR- AND TWO-YEAR INSTITUTIONS ONLY
                          Outcome: Completed a Bachelor's Degree within 6 Years     Outcome: Completed
                                      Adding       Adding Parents'     Adding ACT   a Bachelor's Degree
                       Baseline
                                   Demographics        Income            percentile    within 9 Years
                         (6)           (7)                (8)               (9)             (10)

                       -0.2254**        -0.2409**          -0.2396**         -0.2023**             -0.2174**
Initially Attend 2yr
                        (0.0075)         (0.0075)           (0.0076)          (0.0078)              (0.0081)

Pseudo R2                 0.05              0.07               0.07              0.12                 0.11
Observations             14,810            14,810            14,810             14,810               14,810
* significant at 10%       ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Due to the estimation techniques used, the sample is also limited to
ACT-takers and Ohio residents. The baseline only includes the variables for where the student initially attended (the
shown coefficients). The second column adds the following demographic controls: a dummy variable for female
students (baseline: male students), dummy variables for Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American students
(baseline: White students), age, and age-squared. The third column adds parental income, parental income-squared,
and a dummy indicating missing values for parental income. The fourth column adds the math and English ACT
scores. The last column includes all the controls (the same as the fourth column).




                                                                                                                  33
Table 3: The Role of the Initial Institution – Comparing Estimation Strategies
Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Students age 17-20 who entered a two- or nonselective four-year college during fall
1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                         Completed          Completed          Completed             Total
                                                                                                       Stop out
Outcome                   Bachelor's         Bachelor's         Bachelor's         Credit Hrs
                                                                                                    within 6 years
                         Degree 9 yrs       Degree 6 yrs       Degree 4 yrs         6 years
PANEL A: PROBIT RESULTS
                              (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)

                          -0.2174**          -0.2023**          -0.0693**         -15.3948**          0.0796**
Initially Attend 2yr
                           (0.0081)           (0.0078)           (0.0046)           (0.8085)          (0.0083)

Pseudo R2/ R2                0.11               0.12               0.13              0.1285              0.04

PANEL B: PROPENSITY SCORE PROBIT RESULTS
                              (6)                (7)                (8)                (9)               (10)

                          -0.2110**          -0.1953**          -0.0642**         -14.4028**          0.0734**
Initially Attend 2yr
                           (0.0082)           (0.0079)           (0.0045)           (0.8035)          (0.0083)

Pseudo R2/ R2                0.12               0.13               0.14              0.1465              0.04

PANEL C: INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLES PROBIT RESULTS
                              (11)              (12)               (13)               (14)               (15)

                          -0.1451**          -0.0983**          -0.0194**          -5.5882**          0.0488**
Initially Attend 2yr
                           (0.0170)           (0.0164)           (0.0090)           (1.6446)          (0.0169)

Overidentification
                             0.371             1.227              1.760              0.204              7.801
test (χ2d.f.=1)
Overid. test P-value          0.5427             0.2681          0.1846             0.6517             0.0052
          2   2
Pseudo R / R                   0.08               0.08            0.11              0.1198               0.03
* significant at 10%        ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Due to the estimation techniques used, the sample is also limited to
ACT-takers and Ohio residents. All regressions have 14,810 observations. The results for "Total Credit Hours"
were estimated using OLS instead of probit models. R-squares are displayed for the "Total Credit Hours" results.
All others are Pseudo R-squares. The number of blocks with the propensity score estimates is 10. Each regression
includes the following controls: a dummy variable for female students (baseline: male students), dummy variables
for Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American students (baseline: White students), age, age-squared, parental
income, parental income-squared, a dummy indicating missing values for parental income, and the student's math
and English ACT scores. The results using discrete outcomes were run using probit models. However, the results
are robust to using linear probability models instead.




                                                                                                                  34
Table 4: The Role of Initial Institution on Educational Outcomes by Gender – IV Results
Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Students age 17-20 who entered a two- or nonselective four-year college during fall
1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                         Completed Bachelor's Degree within 9 yrs                      Total Credit Hrs (6 years)
                       Probit Results   PS Results      IV Results        Probit Results      PS Results       IV Results
                            (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)               (5)                 (6)
A. ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS
                        -0.1915**       -0.1841**       -0.1165**          -12.8725**         -11.8093**         -2.9279
Initially Attend 2yr
                         (0.0121)        (0.0122)        (0.0256)           (1.1809)           (1.1724)         (2.4406)

Initially Attend 2yr
                        -0.0483**       -0.0499**         -0.0503           -4.6203**         -4.7436**          -4.7042
* Female Dummy
                         (0.0163)        (0.0164)        (0.0326)            (1.5770)          (1.5619)         (3.1661)
Variable

Female Dummy             0.0889**       0.0908**         0.0904**           11.3608**         11.5337**        11.4751**
Variable                 (0.0117)       (0.0117)         (0.0187)            (1.1533)          (1.1425)         (1.8036)

Overidentification
                            ---             ---            3.713                ---               ---               0.139
test (χ2d.f.=3)
Overid. test P-value        ---             ---           0.2942                                                    0.9867
Pseudo R2/ R2              0.11            0.12            0.08              0.1290             0.1471              0.1201
B. OVERALL EFFECT OF STARTING AT A COMMUNITY COLLEGE
Male Students             -0.1915        -0.1841          -0.1165           -12.8725           -11.8093             -2.9279

Female Students           -0.1509        -0.1432          -0.0764            -6.1320            -5.0192             3.8430
* significant at 10%       ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample is students age 17-20 who entered a nonselective two-
or four-year college during fall 1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree. Due to the estimation
techniques used, the sample is also limited to ACT-takers and Ohio residents. All regressions have 14,810
observations. The results for "Total Credit Hours" were estimated using OLS instead of probit models. R-squares
are displayed for the "Total Credit Hours" results. All others are Pseudo R-squares. The number of blocks with the
propensity score estimates is 10. Each regression includes the following controls: a dummy variable for female
students (baseline: male students), dummy variables for Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American students
(baseline: White students), age, age-squared, parental income, parental income-squared, a dummy indicating missing
values for parental income, and the student's math and English ACT scores.




                                                                                                                    35
Table 5: The Role of Initial Institution on Educational Outcomes by Race (Black and
White Students Only) – Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Students age 17-20 who entered a two- or nonselective four-year college during fall
1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                         Completed Bachelor's Degree within 9 yrs                      Total Credit Hrs (6 years)
                       Probit Results   PS Results       IV Results        Probit Results     PS Results       IV Results
                            (1)             (2)              (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
A. ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS
                        -0.2112**       -0.2043**        -0.1281**          -14.7258**        -13.6650**       -3.6118**
Initially Attend 2yr
                         (0.0087)        (0.0088)         (0.0182)           (0.8720)          (0.8665)         (1.7655)

Initially Attend 2yr
                        -0.1203**       -0.1162**        -0.1590**           -8.5411**        -8.5039**        -18.0057**
* Black Dummy
                         (0.0343)        (0.0344)         (0.0657)            (2.9982)         (2.9950)         (6.7629)
Variable

Black Student           -0.0547**       -0.2914**          -0.0133           -8.5703**        -45.4329**         -2.1279
Dummy Variable           (0.0180)        (0.0178)         (0.0313)            (1.8182)         (3.0703)         (2.7534)

Overidentification
                            ---             ---            10.359               ---               ---               8.272
test (χ2d.f.=3)
Overid. test P-value        ---             ---            0.0158               ---               ---               0.0407
Pseudo R2/ R2              0.11            0.12             0.08              0.1306            0.1490              0.1203
B. OVERALL EFFECT OF STARTING AT A COMMUNITY COLLEGE
White Students            -0.2112        -0.2043          -0.1281            -14.7258          -13.6650             -3.6118

Black Students            -0.3862        -0.6119          -0.3004            -31.8372          -67.6018         -23.7454
* significant at 10%       ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample is students age 17-20 who entered a nonselective two-
and four-year college during fall 1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree. Due to the estimation
techniques used, the sample is also limited to ACT-takers and Ohio residents. All regressions have 13,836
observations due to the fact non-white and non-black students were dropped from the sample for this analysis. The
results for "Total Credit Hours" were estimated using OLS instead of probit models. R-squares are displayed for the
"Total Credit Hours" results. All others are Pseudo R-squares. The number of blocks with the propensity score
estimates is 10. Each regression includes the following controls: a dummy variable for female students (baseline:
male students), dummy variables for Black, Hispanic, Asian, and Native American students (baseline: White
students), age, age-squared, parental income, parental income-squared, a dummy indicating missing values for
parental income, and the student's math and English ACT scores.




                                                                                                                    36
Table 6: The Role of Initial Institution on Outcomes by Preparation – IV Results
Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Students age 17-20 who entered a two- or nonselective four-year college during fall
1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                         Completed Bachelor's Degree within 9 yrs                      Total Credit Hrs (6 years)
                       Probit Results   PS Results      IV Results        Probit Results      PS Results       IV Results
                            (1)            (2)              (3)                 (4)               (5)                 (6)
A. ESTIMATED COEFFICIENTS
                        -0.1981**       -0.1871**       -0.1308**          -13.6647**         -12.0216**         -3.5609
Initially Attend 2yr
                         (0.0116)        (0.0117)        (0.0231)           (1.1816)           (1.1596)         (2.3114)


Initially Attend 2yr    -0.0794**       -0.0621**         -0.0121          -11.4030**         -9.0981**          -6.1703
* High ACT Score         (0.0186)        (0.0192)        (0.0403)           (1.9837)           (1.9530)         (4.0394)


Initially Attend 2yr    -0.0414**       -0.0423**        -0.0745*             -1.6363           -1.3450          -4.7433
* Low ACT Score          (0.0198)        (0.0201)        (0.0387)            (1.9221)          (1.8896)         (3.8159)


High ACT Score           0.1663**       -0.0361**        0.1488**           17.0388**         -4.9744**        16.4880**
Dummy Variable           (0.0135)        (0.0163)        (0.0210)            (1.3107)          (1.6080)         (2.0191)


Low ACT Score           -0.0962**       0.0445**        -0.0826**          -11.7951**          4.6348**        -10.8974**
Dummy Variable           (0.0139)       (0.0173)         (0.0241)           (1.4546)           (1.6327)         (2.3609)

Overidentification
                            ---             ---            5.800                ---               ---               3.742
test (χ2d.f.=5)
Overid. test P-value        ---             ---           0.3262                ---               ---               0.5871
Pseudo R2/ R2              0.09            0.12            0.05              0.1068             0.1460              0.0957
B. OVERALL EFFECT OF STARTING AT A COMMUNITY COLLEGE
High ACT                  -0.1112        -0.2853          0.0059             -8.0289           -26.0941             6.7568

Middle ACT                -0.1981        -0.1871          -0.1308           -13.6647           -12.0216             -3.5609

Low ACT                   -0.3357        -0.1849          -0.2879           -27.0961            -8.7318         -19.2016
* significant at 10%       ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample is students age 17-20 who entered a nonselective two-
and four-year college during fall 1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree. Due to the estimation
techniques used, the sample is also limited to ACT-takers and Ohio residents. All regressions have 14,810
observations. The results for "Total Credit Hours" were estimated using OLS instead of probit models. R-squares
are displayed for the "Total Credit Hours" results. All others are Pseudo R-squares. The number of blocks with the
propensity score estimates is 10. "High ACT" is a dummy variable for having a composite ACT score of 23 to 36;
"Middle ACT" is for scores 18 to 22; and "Low ACT is for scores 17 and below. Each regression includes the
following controls: a dummy variable for female students (baseline: male students), dummy variables for Black,
Hispanic, Asian, and Native American students (baseline: White students), age, age-squared, parental income,
parental income-squared, a dummy indicating missing values for parental income, and dummy variables for having a
high ACT score (23-36) or low ACT score (17 or below).




                                                                                                                    37
Appendix Table 1: Logit Coefficients from the Model Estimating the Probability of
Entering a Public Two-Year College
                                          Community College versus Nonselective
                                                 Four-Year University
                                                        0.0234
Female
                                                       (0.0363)
                                                        -1.2707***
Black
                                                          (0.0682)
                                                        -0.3737**
Hispanic
                                                         (0.1379)
                                                        -0.8822***
Asian
                                                          (0.1759)
                                                         -0.0360
Native Am
                                                         (0.3414)
                                                        -0.1256***
Age
                                                          (0.0283)
                                                       -2.27e-06**
Parent Income
                                                        (7.82e-07)
                                                          0.0086
Parent Income Missing Dummy
                                                         (0.0709)
                                                          0.3533
High School GPA
                                                         (0.2430)
                                                        -0.1244**
High School GPA-squared
                                                         (0.0438)
                                                          0.0833
High School GPA Rank
                                                         (0.1090)
                                                        -0.0961**
Years of High School Math
                                                         (.0324)
                                                         -0.0911~
Years of High School English
                                                         (0.0513)
                                                        1.5928***
High School Math Grades
                                                         (0.1281)
                                                        0.4193***
Missing HS Math grades dummy
                                                         (0.1226)
                                                          0.0039
High School English Grades
                                                         (0.0340)
                                                         0.3444**
Missing HS English grades dummy
                                                         (0.1702)
                                                        -0.0112***
ACT percentile
                                                          (0.0008)
                                                        -0.3452***
Private High School
                                                          (0.0539)
                                                            3.3205
Constant
                                                           (0.6629)
R-squared                                                    .0672
Observations                                                14,819
~ significant at 10%     * significant at 5%         ***significant at .01%
Notes: The sample is limited to fall 1998 first-time students age 17-20 who had four-year degree intent, took the
ACT, and were Ohio residents. Standard errors are shown in the parentheses.


                                                                                                              38
Appendix Figure 1: Histogram of the Estimated Propensity Score for the Two-year versus
Nonselective Four-year Starters

                 Histogram of Estimated Propensity Score for Community College and Non-Selective Four-Year Starters
           400
           300
   Frequency
           200
           100
           0




                   0                      .2                 .4                        .6                     .8
                                                 Estimated propensity score

                                                          CC                 4-Year




Appendix Table 2: Mean Propensity Scores for Two-year Entrants (treated) and
Nonselective Four-year Entrants (control) by Strata (Blocks)
                          Mean Propensity Score        Number of Observations
                                                                                                                   T-Test
                       Community College Four-Year Community College Four-Year                                Mean(C)-Mean (T)
Blocks
                          (Treatment)      (Control)  (Treatment)      (Control)
Block 1                     .2099           .2076         79                315                                       -0.5738
Block 2                        .2672                .2654                   50                     231                -1.2420
Block 3                        .3286                .3280                 501                    1190                 -0.5486
Block 4                        .3679                .3673                 197                      313                -1.4686
Block 5                        .3905                .3898                 422                      674                -1.3004
Block 6                        .4215                .4221                 580                      637                1.1514
Block 7                        .4704                .4692                1227                    1210                 -1.6696
Block 8                        .5501                .5488                2274                    1845                 -1.4120
Block 9                        .6191                .6184                 745                      542                -1.0513
Block 10                       .6748                .6746                 812                      454                -0.1740




                                                                                                                                39
Appendix Table 3: First stage IV Results – Probit Models with Marginal Effects reported
Sample: Students age 17-20 who entered a two- or nonselective four-year college during fall
1998 and had intent to complete a baccalaureate degree
                                              Choose Two-year College
Distance to closest Two-year College                    -0.0942**
(per 100 miles)                                          (0.0458)

Distance to closest Nonselective Four-                  1.3510**
year University (per 100 miles)                         (0.0236)

                                                         -0.0134
Female
                                                        (0.0098)

                                                        -0.1698**
Black
                                                         (0.0168)

                                                         -0.0201
Hispanic
                                                        (0.0357)

                                                        -0.1747**
Asian
                                                         (0.0420)

                                                         -0.0289
Native American
                                                        (0.0970)

                                                        -3.8844**
Age
                                                         (0.3523)

                                                        0.1038**
Age-squared
                                                        (0.0095)

Parent Income                                            0.0006
(per $1,000)                                            (0.0008)

Parent Income-squared                                    -0.0000
(per $1,000,000)                                        (0.0000)

                                                         0.0398
Parent Income Missing Dummy
                                                        (0.0246)

                                                        -0.0188**
ACT Math Score
                                                         (0.0015)

                                                        -0.0096**
ACT English Score
                                                         (0.0013)
Test of joint significance of IVs                        3263.11
Pseudo R-squared                                          0.24
Observations                                             14,810
* significant at 10%       ** significant at 5%
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. The variables listed above are the instruments for the selection of a two-year
college (over a nonselective four-year university). The regression also includes the following exogenous variables:
a dummy variable for female students (baseline: male students), dummy variables for Black, Hispanic, Asian, and
Native American students (baseline: White students), age, age-squared, parental income, parental income-squared, a
dummy indicating missing values for parental income, and the student's math and English ACT scores.



                                                                                                                  40
