                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FORECASTING THE COST OF U.S. HEALTH CARE IN 2040

                                         Robert W. Fogel

                                       Working Paper 14361
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14361


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 2008




This work was supported in part by NIH program project grant number P01 AG10120. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Robert W. Fogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Forecasting the Cost of U.S. Health Care in 2040
Robert W. Fogel
NBER Working Paper No. 14361
September 2008
JEL No. I11

                                               ABSTRACT

One of the most important debates among health economists in rich nations is whether advances in
biotechnology will spare their health care systems from a financial crisis. We must consider that prevalence
rates of chronic diseases declined during the twentieth century and that this rate of decline has accelerated.
However, health care costs may continue to increase even as the age of onset of chronic diseases is
delayed, because the proportion of a cohort living to late ages will increase. The accelerating decline
in the prevalence of chronic diseases during the course of the twentieth century supports the proposition
that increases in life expectancy during the twenty-first century will be fairly large, but the effect on
health care in the U.S. will be modest. The income elasticity for health services is calculated at 1.6,
meaning that income expenditures on health care in the U.S. are likely to rise from a current level
of about 15 percent to about 29 percent of GDP in 2040.


Robert W. Fogel
Director, Center for Population Economics
University of Chicago, Graduate School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue, Suite 367
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rwf@cpe.uchicago.edu
                              Forecasting the Cost of U.S. Health Care in 2040



        In attempting to forecast the cost of health care a generation into the future, several different

issues must be considered. The first of these is the likely downward trend in age‐specific prevalence

rates of chronic diseases and disabilities. Secondly, there is the rate of change in the cost of treating

these conditions: will advances in biotechnology reduce or increase the cost of treatment? A third issue

is the likely increase in the number and proportion of the population that is elderly. A fourth issue is the

rate of growth of per capita income and the impact of economic growth on the demand for the quantity

and quality of health care.

        Each of these issues is so large and complex that it would take a book to address them properly.

My aim in this paper is merely to outline the issues and to sketch some tentative answers.



                          Trends in Prevalence Rates and the Cost of Health Care



        One of the most important debates among health economists and biomedical specialists in the

United States and other rich (OECD) nations is whether rapid advances in biotechnology will spare their

health systems from a financial crisis. This debate turns on four propositions.

        First, there is now convincing evidence that prevalence rates of chronic diseases declined during

the twentieth century. Second, the rate of decline in these prevalence rates has accelerated. In the

American case, prevalence rates declined at a rate of about 1 percent per annum between 1910 and

1980. Between the early 1980s and 1989, they declined at about 1.2 percent per annum. During the

1990s, the rate of decline further accelerated, reaching a level of about 2.0 percent per annum. Some

investigators believe that a rate of decline in annual prevalence rates of 1.5 percent will be enough to

offset the rising cost of health care, thus stabilizing the share of health care costs in GDP at its current



                                                 Page 2 of 16
level of about 15 percent.

        Third, there is an unresolved issue regarding how much of the decline in the prevalence rates

of OECD nations has been due to improvements in the environment and how much has been due to

biomedical interventions. Partitioning the decline in prevalence rates into environmental effects and

medical intervention effects is quite complex because of the long reach of nutritional and other

biomedical insults at earlier ages on the odds of developing chronic diseases at middle and late ages.

Although such life‐cycle effects have long been suspected in particular diseases, only recently has a

substantial body of evidence bearing on the interconnections been amassed. Longitudinal studies

connecting chronic diseases at maturity, middle ages, and late ages to conditions in utero, infancy, and

early childhood were reported with increasing frequency beginning in the 1980s and extending through

the end of the twentieth century. The exact mechanisms by which malnutrition and trauma at early ages

affect waiting time to the onset of chronic diseases are still unclear, but it seems reasonable to infer that

environmental insults during the period when cell growth is rapid could lead to long‐lasting impairments

of vital organs.

        It is important to emphasize that medical interventions have not only contributed to the decline

in prevalence rates of chronic conditions but also to the reduction in their severity. Advances in both

surgical and drug therapies have significantly reduced the rate at which chronic conditions turn into

disabilities that severely impair functioning. Such interventions have been especially effective in

genitourinary, circulatory, digestive, and musculoskeletal conditions. However, many of the surgical

procedures are quite expensive, and the cost of the new and more effective drugs is increasing sharply,

mainly because of the large investments in developing these drugs.

        Fourth, there is a debate over whether the mounting evidence of the long‐term decline in the

prevalence rate of chronic diseases means that the supply of treatable chronic diseases is declining. (The

word supply here distinguishes the physiological burden of health care from the demand for health care


                                                Page 3 of 16
services that may rise even if the physiological burden remains constant or declines.) Moreover, to

address the question of whether declines in age‐specific physiological prevalence rates will relieve

current fiscal pressure on the health care systems of OECD nations, it is necessary to weight the

existence of a particular chronic disease by the cost of treating that condition, which generally increases

with age.

                                                      Figure 1

                           Relative Burden of Health Care by Age, U.S. Data circa 1996




                                               Source: Fogel 2004.




        Such an index is shown in Figure 1. In this figure, the burden of per capita health care costs,

which is based on U.S. data, is standardized at 100 for ages 50–54. Figure 1 shows that the financial

burden of health care per capita rises slowly in the 50s, accelerates in the 60s, accelerates again in the


                                                Page 4 of 16
70s, and accelerates even more rapidly after the mid‐80s. The financial per capita burden at age 85 and

older is nearly six times as high as the burden at ages 50–54. Notice that the financial burden of health

care for ages 85 and older is over 75 percent higher per capita than at ages 75–79. However, the

physiological prevalence rates (number of conditions per person) is roughly constant at ages 80 and

over.

                                                 Figure 2

                          How Will the Curve of Relative Disease Burden Shift?




                                           Source: Fogel 2004.




        Costs rise, even though the number of conditions (comorbidities) per person remains constant,

because the severity of the conditions increases or because the cost of preventing further deterioration

(or even partially reversing deterioration) increases with age. It should be kept in mind that standard

prevalence rates merely count the number of conditions, neglecting both the increasing physiological

deterioration with age and the rising cost of treatment per condition. Figure 1 indicates that to forecast


                                               Page 5 of 16
the future financial burden of health care, it is necessary to make use of a function of the age‐specific

cost of health care, such as that shown in Figure 1.

        What, then, can be said about the likely movements in the curve of the relative burden of health

care costs over the next generation? Figure 2 lays out three possibilities. The first possibility is that there

will be a proportional downward shift in the curve (case A). This is the curve obtained by using the

change in the average prevalence rates, which implies a shift downward at a constant average rate at all

ages. The example shown in Figure 2 implies a decline in average prevalence rates of 1.2 percent per

annum, which locates all of the points in case A at about two‐thirds of the previous level. If 1.5 percent

had been used, which is the high end of current forecasts of the decline in prevalence rates, the points

on the case A curve would all be located at about 60 percent of the original level.

        A second alternative, shown as case B in Figure 2, is that the curve of disease burden by age will

shift to the right. The case B curve was constructed on the assumption that over the course of a

generation, the average age of onset of chronic conditions is delayed by about five years. This

assumption is supported by a number of epidemiological studies in the Netherlands, Britain, the United

States, and elsewhere. This forecast is based partly on the evidence that the average age of the onset of

chronic disabilities has been declining since the start of the twentieth century. It is also based on studies

of the relative cost of health care by years before death. These studies have produced the curve shown

in Figure 3, which is standardized on the average costs of health care for all persons age 65 and over in

the U.S. Medicare program. Figure 3 shows that, five years before the year of death, annual health cost

is virtually the same as all annual Medicare costs per capita. By the second year before death the cost

has risen by about 60 percent, and in the year of death the annual cost exceeds the average by over four

times. Indeed, expenditure on persons during their last two years of life account for 40 percent of all

Medicare expenditures.




                                                 Page 6 of 16
                                                      Figure 3

                            Index of Average Annual Health Care by Year before Death




                                                 Source: Fogel 2004.




        The pattern portrayed in Figure 3 has not changed significantly over the past two decades. The

relative constancy in health care costs by years before death supports Case B in Figure 2 because it

implies that no matter how far to the right the health care curve shifts, age‐specific costs will eventually

rise sharply as the proportion of persons who die in any given age category increases. This line of

reasoning implies that health care costs may continue to increase even if the age of onset of chronic

diseases is delayed, because the proportion of a cohort living to late ages will increase. Moreover, the

cost of keeping disabilities under control may rise because more effective drugs and procedures may be

more expensive than the current set.




                                                Page 7 of 16
                                         Trends in Life Expectancy



        Will the twenty‐first century witness as large an increase in the average life expectancy of the

rich countries—thirty to forty years —as occurred during the twentieth century? Most experts believe it

will not. The middle estimate of the U.S. Census Bureau, for example, is that the increase in life

expectancy between 2000 and 2050 will be only about 7 years, and the estimated increase for the entire

twenty‐first century is just 13 years. This is less than half the increase that occurred during the twentieth

century. The same conservatism is evident in the projections of the UN, OECD, and other national and

international agencies (US Census Bureau 2000).

        These pessimistic projections rest on several propositions. Perhaps the most widely accepted is

the proposition that opportunities for large reductions in mortality rates are possible only when death

rates under age 5 are very high. Proponents of this view argue, for example, that the sharp decline in

U.S. mortality rates during the twentieth century was the result of a unique opportunity that cannot be

replicated by those nations that have already experienced it: the opportunity to wipe out the majority of

deaths due to acute infectious diseases, which were concentrated in infancy and early

childhood. Whereas more than a third of all deaths at the turn of the twentieth century were of children

under 5, today infant and childhood deaths are less than 2 percent of the annual total. By contrast,

deaths among persons age 65 and over, which accounted for just 18 percent of the total in 1900, have

grown to three‐quarters of all deaths today (US National Center for Health Statistics 1997; Preston,

Keyfitz, and Schoen 1972; Preston 1985; Linder and Grove 1947). Thus, at the start of the twenty‐first

century, the argument goes, the more than 90 percent of birth cohorts who live to age 50 begin to suffer

from an increasing number of chronic diseases because their vital organ systems naturally lose their

effectiveness with aging, and this deterioration eventually increases to a point where life can no longer

be sustained.



                                                Page 8 of 16
        Empirical observations are buttressed by a variety of theories, some of them drawn from

evolutionary biology, as to why the cells of vital organ systems decay. One prominent theory holds that

because reproduction ceases at age 50, there is a sharp rise in deaths at post reproductive ages because

the forces of natural selection have not eliminated the genes that hasten rapid physiological decline past

age 50. There are, however, persuasive arguments that spell out a more optimistic view of the course of

changes in health and longevity during the twenty‐first century. One of these arguments is based on the

projection not of past changes in average life expectancy but of record life expectancy since 1840.

Record life expectancy is defined as the highest life expectancy experienced by any country at each

point in time. For example, the record life expectancy at birth in 1840 was found among Swedish

women, who lived on average a bit over 45 years. In the year 2000, Japanese women achieved a record

life expectancy of nearly 85 years. Fitting a curve to such best practice observations over a period of 160

years yields a linear curve, which suggests that for the foreseeable future, female life expectancy will

increase at 2.4 years per decade and male life expectancy will increase at 2.2 years per decade. These

equations lead to the prediction that by 2070 female life expectancy in the United States will be

between 92.5 and 101.5 years, which substantially exceeds the forecast of 83.9 years made by the Social

Security Administration in 1999 (Oeppen and Vaupel 2002).

        The fact is that demographers’ past predictions of maximum life expectancy have been

notoriously conservative when these forecasts were based on average experience. In the late 1920s, L. I.

Dublin, the chief actuary of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, put a cap of 64.75 years on life

expectancy for both men and women. In 1936, he collaborated with the leading mathematical

demographer of the first half of the twentieth century to publish a revised upper limit of 69.93 years

(Dublin 1928; Dublin and Lotka 1936). More recently, a leading gerontologist set an upper limit on life

(excluding some major breakthrough in molecular biology) of 85 plus or minus 7 years (Fries 1980,




                                               Page 9 of 16
1990). Generally speaking, these caps tend to be in the range of 5 to 10 years beyond the observed life

expectancy at the time the forecasts were published (Oeppen and Vaupel 2002 suppl).

        The accelerating decline in the prevalence of chronic diseases during the course of the twentieth

century supports the proposition that increases in life expectancy during the twenty‐first century will be

fairly large. At the beginning of the twentieth century, the burden of chronic diseases among elderly

Americans was not only more severe but began more than 10 years earlier in the life cycle than it does

today. Moreover, the number of comorbidities at each age between 50 and 70 is well below levels that

prevailed a century ago. This is, according to one study, equivalent to pushing back old age, since an

increase of one unit in a comorbidity index is the equivalent of being a decade older. Studies of changes

in functional limitations among persons who have reached age 65 since the early 1980s indicate that

such limitations declined at an accelerating rate during the balance of the 1980s and the 1990s

(Helmchen 2003; Charlson et al. 1994; Stuck et al. 1999; Manton and Gu 2001).

        Dora Costa has found that favorable changes in body size, particularly the decline in the waist‐

to‐hip ratio (a measure of abdominal fat), explained close to half of the decline in mortality rates above

age 65 during the course of the twentieth century (Costa 2004). Taking account of the characteristics of

men of military age in 1988, she predicts that the annual decline in male mortality rates after age 65 will

be nearly twice as high between 1988 and 2022 as it was between 1914 and 1988. Overall, the work on

trends in chronic diseases and on frame sizes tends to support forecasts of continued linear trends in

the extension of longevity during the twenty‐first century.



                                Changes in the Age Structure of the U.S. Population



        The increase in life expectancy coupled with stability in the fertility rate will lead to an increase

in the share of the population over age 65. Since the per capita consumption of health care services rises



                                               Page 10 of 16
with age, the aging of the U.S. population would by itself lead to an increase in the burden of health

care. However, as Table 1 shows, the effect will be modest. The change in the age structure of the

population will raise annual per capita consumption from $3,819 in 1999 to $4,443 in 2040, is a rise of

just 16 percent in 41 years, or an annual rate of growth of 0.4 percent.



                                                        Table 1

                           The Effect of Changes in the Age Structure of the Population
                              on the Per Capita Cost of Health Services, 1999–2040

                          Per capita            Age                             Age
                        consumption of      distribution       Col 1        distribution        Col 1
                        health services       in 1999         x Col 2         in 2040          x Col 4
                              (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)
       0‐18                       1,872            .2865             536          .2408            451
       19‐64                      3,230            .5878           1,899          .5615          1,814
       65+                      11,018             .1256           1,374          .1977          2,178
       Per capita
       over all ages                                              3,819                          4,443
                       Sources: Col 1, Hartman et al. 2007; Cols 2and 4, Population Projection Program,
                       Population Division, U.S. Census Bureau
                       (http://www.census.gov/population/www/projections/index.html).




        However, the demand for health care will grow much more rapidly than indicated by Table 1.

Hence, changes in the age structure are a minor factor in the expected rise in the burden of health

services over the next several decades. The main factor is the increase in the demand for health care.



                               Explaining the Growth in the Demand for Health Care



        The principal factor driving the growth in expenditures on health care is demand. As people get

richer, they want to spend a larger share of their income on improving their health. The fact is that the

structure of consumption has changed drastically in the U.S. since the late nineteenth century and the



                                                Page 11 of 16
growth in demand for health care has to be evaluated in that context.

        Table 2 presents the change in the structure of consumption in the United States between 1875

and 1995. The trend in the structure of consumption in other OECD nations has been quite similar. The

term “expanded consumption” takes account of the fact that as income has increased, consumers have

preferred to take an increasing share of their real income in the form of leisure rather than in purchasing

more commodities, as would be possible if they did not reduce their hours of work.

        One notable feature of Table 2 is the change in the share of income spent on food, clothing, and

shelter, which has declined from 74 percent of expanded consumption to just 13 percent over the 120‐

year period. Another striking change is the share of income spent on health care, which has increased

nine‐fold, from 1 percent of expenditures to 9 percent.



                                                   Table 2

                         The Long‐Term Trend in the Structure of Consumption
                 and the Implied Income Elasticities of Several Consumption Categories

                                             Distribution of
                                            Consumption (%)      .
                                                                         Long‐Term
                    Consumption                                            Income
                    Class                  1875               1995       Elasticities
                    Food                     49                 5               0.2
                    Clothing                 12                 2               0.3
                    Shelter                  13                 6               0.7
                    Health care                1                9               1.6
                    Education                  1                5               1.5
                    Other                      6                7               1.1
                    Leisure                  18                68               1.5

                    Source: Fogel 2000.




                                              Page 12 of 16
        For purposes of forecasting, the most important feature of Table 2 is the last column, which

presents the long‐term income elasticities for each category of expenditures. The “income elasticity” is

defined as the percentage increase in expenditures on a given commodity that will occur with a 1

percent increase in income. Notice that the income elasticities for food and clothing are quite low,

which means that the share of these items in total consumption will continue to decline. An income

elasticity of 1 means that the share of a given item in total consumption will remain constant. Notice

that shelter, which includes most consumer durables, is closer to but still below 1. On the other hand,

the income elasticities for health care, education, and leisure are all well above 1. The income elasticity

of 1.6 means that income expenditures on health care in the United States are likely to rise from a

current level of about 15 percent of GDP to about 29 percent of GDP in 2040 (Fogel 2007).

        Is that bad? Should such a development be avoided? Should governments seek to thwart

consumer demand for health care services? Such a policy would be necessary only if OECD nations

lacked the resources to provide that much health care. However, the growth in productivity of

traditional commodities, including food, clothing, shelter, and consumer durables will release the

resources required to provide expanded health care. In the United States a century ago, it took about

1,700 hours of work to purchase the annual food supply for a family. Today it requires just 260 hours. If

agricultural productivity grows at just two‐thirds of its recent rates, then by 2040 a family’s annual food

supply may be purchased with about 160 hours of labor.

        A recent study of the role of the change in the benefits and costs of health care conducted by

investigators at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) concluded that the benefits of health

care services over the past 40 years have more than justified their costs. This analysis suggests a

fundamental repositioning of the public debate about medical care from how governments can limit

spending to how to get the most out of the spending that is undertaken. Other NBER investigators have

also suggested changing the methods of health care financing so that the consumer demand for



                                               Page 13 of 16
increasingly effective services is not unnecessarily thwarted.

        Public policy should not be aimed at suppressing the demand for health care. Expenditures on

health care are driven by demand, which is spurred by income and by advances in biotechnology that

make health interventions increasingly effective. Just as electricity and manufacturing were the

industries that stimulated the growth of the rest of the economy at the beginning of the twentieth

century, health care is the growth industry of the twenty‐first century. It is a leading sector, which

means that expenditures on health care will pull forward a wide array of other industries including

manufacturing, education, financial services, communications, and construction.

        The pressure to suppress health care expenditures arises from the way that governments and

businesses currently provide insurance in OECD countries. These institutions need to provide a basic and

affordable package of health services. Beyond that, they should offer additional policies at higher costs

that provide upscale services (such as private rooms, the most expensive alternative procedures and

medicines, the shortest waiting time, the fullest coverage of optional services, and access to physicians

anywhere in the country, not just in local clinics). Health care is not a homogeneous good, all of which is

essential. There are large luxury components in health services that may appeal to some tastes but that

are not necessary for sound basic health care. It is, of course, necessary to provide medical care for

those who are too poor to purchase it from their own resources, but for those with more resources,

shifting to private savings accounts for health services is an effective way to relieve pressure on the

finances of both businesses and government.




                                               Page 14 of 16
References

Charlson M, Szatrowski TP, Peterson J, Gold J. 1994. Validation of a combined comorbidity index. Journal
of Clinical Epidemiology 47: 1245–1251.

Costa D. 2004. The measure of man and older age mortality: Evidence from the Gould Sample. Journal of
Economic History 64: 1–23.

Dublin LI. 1928. Health and Wealth: A Survey of the Economics of World Health. New York and London:
Harper and Brothers.

Dublin LI, Lotka AJ. 1936. Length of Life: A Study of the Life Table. New York: Ronald Press.

Fogel RW. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of Egalitarianism. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Fogel RW. 2003. Forecasting the demand for health care in OECD nations and China. Contemporary
Economic Policy 21 ( 1): 1–10.

Fogel RW. 2004. The Escape from Hunger and Premature Death, 1700–2100: Europe, America, and the
Third World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fogel RW. 2007. Capitalism and democracy in 2040: Forecasts and speculations. NBER Working Paper
13184.

Fries JF. 1980. Ageing, natural death, and the compression of morbidity. New England Journal of
Medicine 303: 130–136.

Fries JF. 1990. The sunny side of aging. Journal of the American Medical Association 263: 2354–2355.

Hartman M, Catlin A, Lassman D, Cylus J, Heffler S. 2007. U.S. Health Spending By Age, Selected Years
through 2004. Health Affairs, January/February 2008: 27(1): w1–w12.

Helmchen L. 2003. Changes in the age at onset of chronic disease among elderly Americans, 1870–2000.
Typescript: Center for Population Economics, University of Chicago.

Linder FE, Grove RD. 1947. Vital Statistics Rates in the United States 1900–1940. U.S. Government
Printing Office: Washington, DC.

Manton KG, Gu X. 2001. Changes in the prevalence of chronic disability in the United States black and
nonblack population above age 65 from 1982 to 1999. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 98: 6354–6359.

Oeppen J, Vaupel J. 2002. Broken limits to life expectancy. Science 296: 1029–1031.




                                               Page 15 of 16
Oeppen J, Vaupel J. 2002 suppl. Broken limits to life expectancy, supplementary material. Available on
the Internet at http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/296/5570/1029/DC1 (last accessed 6
August 2008).

Preston SH. 1985. Resources, knowledge, and child mortality: A comparison of the U.S. in the late
nineteenth century and developing countries today. In International Property Conference, Florence, 5–12
June, vol. 2, 373–386. Liège, Belgium: International Union for the Scientific Study of Population.

Preston SH, Keyfitz N, Schoen R. 1972. Causes of Death: Life Tables for National Populations. New York:
Seminar Press.

Stuck AE, Walthert JM, Nikolaus T, Bula CJ, Hohmann C, Beck JC. 1999. Risk factors for functional status
decline in community‐living elderly people: A systematic literature review. Social Science and Medicine
48: 445–469.

US Census Bureau. 2000. Table C: Projected life expectancy at birth by race and Hispanic origin, 1999 to
2100. Available on the Internet at http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/
twps0038/tabC.txt (last accessed 6 August 2008).

US National Center for Health Statistics. 1997. Monthly Vital Statistics Report 46(1) suppl. (11
September).




                                               Page 16 of 16
