                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INFLATION-OUTPUT TRADEOFF AS EQUILIBRIUM OUTCOME OF GLOBALIZATION

                                           Alon Binyamini
                                            Assaf Razin

                                        Working Paper 14379
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14379


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alon Binyamini and Assaf Razin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Inflation-Output Tradeoff as Equilibrium Outcome of Globalization
Alon Binyamini and Assaf Razin
NBER Working Paper No. 14379
October 2008
JEL No. E3,E4,E5,F37,F4,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

The paper provides an integrated analysis of globalization effects on the inflation-output tradeoff
and monetary policy in the New-Keynesian framework. The prediction of the analysis is threefold.
First, labor, goods, and capital mobility flatten the Phillips curve, the tradeoff between inflation and
activity. Second, the same globalization forces lead the welfare-based monetary policy to be more
aggressive with regard to inflation fluctuations, and at the same time, more benign with respect to
the output-gap fluctuations. Third, the equilibrium response of inflation to supply and demand shocks
is more moderate, and the response of the output gap to these shocks is more pronounced, when the
economy opens up; under such welfare-based monetary policy.


Alon Binyamini
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
Israel
And Bank of Israel
alonbiny@post.tau.ac.il

Assaf Razin
Department of Economics
Cornell University
Uris 422
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
ar256@cornell.edu
                                                    -1-




    1. Introduction

It has been observed, by economists and policy makers that the short-run tradeoff
between inflation and activity has recently become flatten.

Bean (2006) writes succinctly about this trend, as follows.

”One of the most notable developments of the past decade or so has been the apparent
flattening of the short-run trade-off between inflation and activity. The seventies were
characterized by an almost vertical relationship in the United Kingdom, in which attempt
to hold unemployment below its natural rate resulted in rising inflation. In the eighties,
the downward sloping relationship reappears, as inflation was squeezed out of the system
by the slack of the economy. However, since the early Nineties, the relationship looks to
have been rather flat. Three factors - increased specialization; the intensification of
product market competition; and the impact of that intensified competition and migration
on the behavior of wages-should all work to flatten the short-run tradeoff between
inflation and domestic activity.” 1

Recent evidence on the decline in the sensitivity of U.S. inflation to unemployment, and
other measures of resource utilization, includes also Roberts (2006) and Williams (2006).
Work by staff at the Federal Reserve Board indicates that this result generally holds
across a variety of regression specifications, estimation methods, and data definitions.
(See Ihrig et al (forthcoming)).




1
  Similarly, Mishkin (2007) writes about the US inflation-output tradeoff: “The finding that inflation is less
responsive to the unemployment gap, suggests that fluctuations in resource utilization will have smaller
implications for inflation than used to be the case. From the point of view of policymakers, this
development is a two-edged sword: On the plus side, it implies that an overheating economy will tend to
generate a smaller increase in inflation. On the negative side, however, a flatter Phillips curve also implies
that a given increase in inflation will be more costly to wring out of the system".
                                                    -2-

A massive globalization process has swept emerging markets in Latin America, the
European transition economies, and the East Asia emerging economies in the past two
decades. The 1992 single-market reform in Europe, and the formation of the Euro zone,
is remarkable episodes of globalization. Similarly, emerging markets, including China
and India, became significantly more open.


Wynne and Kersting (2007) note that in the 1970s, more than three quarters of industrial
countries had restrictions of some sort on international financial transactions. By the
2000s, none did. Likewise restrictions on these transactions, among emerging markets
fell from 78 percent in the 1970s to 58 percent in the 2000s.


An important aspect of openness relates to labor flows. International migrants constitute
2.9 percent of the world population in the 2000s, up from 2.1 percent in the 1975. In
some countries changes have been more dramatic. In Israel in the 1990s there was a surge
of immigrants of up to 17 percent of the population, and the central Bank accomplished
also a sizable decline of inflation. It is possible that the two episodes are related.2 In
Spain in 1995, the percentages of foreigners in the population and in the labor force were,
respectively, below 1% and below 0.5%. At the end of 2006, these rates were around 9%
and 14%, respectively. The impact of the Spanish immigration boom on the Phillips
curve has been recently addressed by Bentolila, Dolado and Jimeno (2007).


Recently, inflation around the world reduced substantially. The average annual inflation
rate, among developing countries, was 41 percent in the early 1980s, and came down to
13 percent towards the end of the 1990s. Global inflation in the 1990s has dropped from
30 percent a year to about 4 percent a year.




Indeed, Rogoff (2003, 2004) is one of the first to observe that favorable factors have been
helping to drive down global inflation in the last two decades. A hypothesis, which he put


2
    For some related literature see Artstein (2002) and Friedman and Suchoy (2004).
                                                   -3-

forth, is that “globalization – interacting with deregulation and privatization – has
played a strong supporting role in the past decade’s disinflation.”3


Evidence on the effect of globalization on the Phillips curve includes Loungani, Razin
and Yuen (2001), Razin and Loungani (2007) and Clarida (2008).4 Previously, Romer
(1993, 1998), and Lane (1997) show that inflation and trade liberalization are negatively,
and significantly, correlated in large (flexible exchange rate) OECD economies.


The purpose of this paper is to provide a unified analysis, of the effects of various
features of globalization on the inflation-output tradeoff, in a New-Keynesian framework.
Globalization features are international capital mobility, international trade in goods, and
international migration. We demonstrate a common effect of these different channels of
openness on the trade-off. That is, each one of these channels helps to flatten the Phillips
curve.


The reason why New-Keynesian framework is capable of generating a trade off, between
inflation and economic activity, is that producer desired prices rise with the economy's
output, when marginal costs slope upward due to diminishing returns to scale.
Furthermore, because labor supply increases, workers experience increasing marginal
disutility of labor. As a result, real-wage demands could rise. Increased wage demands
put an upward pressure on the marginal cost, and consequently on the producer desired




3
  Borio and Filardo (2007) present cross country evidence, in support of their contention, that global
factors have recently become empirically more relevant, for domestic inflation determination. But Ihrig et
al (forthcoming) have shown that their result is very specific to the econometric method used. Based on
cross country analysis, Badinger (2007) find that globalization is also correlated with more aggressive
policy toward inflation. Tetlow and Ironside (2007), although not dealing with globalization, find that for
the United States, the slope of the Phillips curve has – largely and continuously – lessened during recent
years.

4
  Following Razin and Yuen (2002), Razin and Loungani (2007) demonstrate that globalization flattens the
Phillips curve and changes the inflation-output weights in the reduced form welfare-based loss function of
the central bank in favor of inflation control. These aspects of globalization are also addressed by Clarida
(2008) in a model with imported raw materials in addition to imported finished goods.
                                            -4-

prices. Thus, our analytical challenge is to find how trade in goods, financial openness,
and migration affect economic output utilization and wage demands.


To accomplish our task we extend the New-Keynesian model in the following directions:
(1) International labor mobility; both inward- and outward-migration. The presumption is
that labor flows tend to mitigate wage demands, because they introduce a substitution
between domestic and foreign labor; (2) International trade in goods. The presumption is
that trade leads to specialization in domestic production and diversification in domestic
consumption. Therefore, trade tends to weaken the link between domestic production and
domestic consumption. As a result, the effect of the fluctuations of domestic production
on inflation is also weakened by the presence of international trade in goods; (3) financial
integration with the rest of the world. International trade in financial assets allows
households to smooth their consumption over time and over states of nature. Such
consumption smoothing also mitigates the fluctuations in the representative household
labor supply. Smoothed fluctuations weaken the link between domestic output
fluctuations and those associated with inflation.


The organization of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the analytical framework
and analyzes the effect of migration on the marginal cost. Section 3 derives the aggregate
supply relationship for various aspect of openness. Section 4 derives a utility-based
quadratic loss function, from the representative household utility function, for different
regimes of openness. Section 5 derives the optimal monetary policy rule under discretion,
for different regimes of trade in goods, trade in financial assets, and international
mobility of labor. Section 6 derives a closed-form solution for the equilibrium inflation
and output gap. Section 7 concludes.




   2. The Analytical Framework

The analytical framework draws on the recent New-Keynesian macroeconomics literature
(See Woodford (2003)). Main features of the open-economy New-Keynesian model are:
                                                  -5-

   (1) The domestic economy produces a continuum of differentiated goods. Decisions
       of the representative household are governed by Dixit-Stiglitz preferences
       (generating fixed elasticities). Purchasing power parity conditions prevail for the
       flexible price goods and foreign firms' prices are taken as exogenous.

   (2) The representative-household utility is defined over consumption and leisure, as
       in the standard micro-based welfare analysis.

   (3) There is international trade in goods and financial assets.

   (4) Labor supply is divided between domestic and foreign destinations. Exported
       labor receive wage premium over unskilled foreign labor. Imported labor is
       unskilled and native born labor commands an endogenously determined skill
       premium.

   (5) Price updates are staggered (see Calvo (1983)). Namely, producers update prices
       upon receiving a signal drawn from a stochastic distribution.

   (6) World prices are exogenous (that is, a small open economy assumption).


   2.1. The Representative Household
We assume that all goods are tradable. There is a continuum of goods, which is uniformly
distributed over the unit interval, so that j ∈ [0,1] . The utility function of the
representative household is:

                                           ∫ (h          ( j ) + δ ⋅ htexp ort ( j ))1+ϕ ⋅ dj + Γ( MP t ;ξt ) ⎫⎬ ,
                 ∞
                     ⎧
        Max E0 ∑ β t ⎨u (Ct ; ξt ) −
                                      1     1
                                                 hom e
                                                                                                                     (1)
               t =0  ⎩               1+ϕ   0
                                                t
                                                                                                     t       ⎭
where E is the expectations operator The instantaneous utility function consists of a
consumption composite, Ct , domestic labor supply, hthom e ( j ) , exported labor supply,

                                                Mt
htexp ort ( j ) , and of real money balances,      (the ratio of money holdings, M t , and the
                                                Pt

price level, Pt ). We denote the discount factor by β and the labor disutility parameter

by ϕ . The relative disutility of labor export in terms of domestic labor supply is indicated
                                                              -6-


by the parameter δ > 1 .5 The term ξ t is a vector of preference shocks. The consumption

composite, Ct is a Dixit-Stiglitz composite of goods produced at home and imported
goods:
                                                                                             θ
                                       ⎡n                         1
                                                                                         ⎤ θ −1
                                  Ct ≡ ⎢ ∫ (cH ,t ( j )) θ ⋅ dj + ∫ (cW ,t ( j )) θ ⋅ dj ⎥ ,
                                                        θ −1                     θ −1
                                                                                                                          (2)
                                       ⎣0                         n                      ⎦
where n is the number of domestically produced goods, in the consumption basket; and
thus, 1 − n can serve as a trade openness parameter. Subscripts H and W indicate
home and foreign country variables, respectively. The variable ci,t ( j ) is the consumption

level of good j , which is produced in country i = H ,W . The parameter θ > 1 is the
elasticity of substitution among different goods in the consumption composite.

The budget constraint is:
         Pt Ct − Pt Tt + M t + BH ,t + ε t BW ,t − (1 + iH ,t −1 )BH ,t −1 − (1 + iW ,t −1 )ε t BW ,t −1 =
                                                                                                             1            (3)
                          M t −1 + μtHWt H ∫ hthom e ( j ) ⋅ dj + ε t ⋅ μtW WtW ∫ htexp ort ( j ) ⋅ dj + ∫ Dt ( j )dj ,
                                               n                                     1

                                               0                                     n
                                                                                                             0


where:
BH ,t = Bond holdings at the beginning of date t (denominated in the domestic currency).

BW ,t = Bond holdings at the beginning of date t (denominated in the foreign currency).

M t = Money holdings in the end of period t.
Pt =       The Consumer price level.

Wt H = Wage rate of unskilled labor in the domestic market, in domestic currency.

WtW = Wage rate of unskilled labor in the foreign market, in foreign currency.

μtH = Skill premium, of native-born labor, in the domestic market.
μtW = Skill premium, of domestic native-born labor, in the foreign market.
iH ,t = The interest rate in the domestic economy.



5
    This approach to migration was originally suggested by Engler (2007).
                                                     -7-


iW ,t = The world interest rate.

Dt ( j ) = Profit of the domestic j firm.
εt =    Exchange rate in period t.
Tt =    Government lump-sum transfers.

By arbitrage, a free migration of unskilled labor implies that Wt H = ε t ⋅WtW .



   2.2. Producers
Domestic firms produce with the aid of a decreasing return-to-scale production function,
by using native born labor and immigrants' labor:
                                            ν −1                                           νχ
                                   ⎡                                   ν −1               1⎤
                  y t ( j ) = At ⋅ ⎢(1 − ψ ) ν ⋅ h thom e ( j )ν + (ψ ) ν ⋅ htimport ( j )ν ⎥ ,
                                                               1
                                                                                                   (4)
                                   ⎣                                                        ⎦
where yt ( j ) is the output level of the j the firm and At is an exogenous aggregate
technology shock, common to all firms. The elasticity of substitution, between imported
                                                      ν
and native-born labor inputs, is given by                   , where ν > 1 , and the degree of returns-
                                                    ν −1
to-scale is given by χ < 1 . The variable htimport ( j ) is the labor supply by immigrants,

employed by domestic firm j . We assume that native born are skilled, and immigrant
labor is unskilled. (This captures labor market patterns in an industrialized economy).
           ⎡ 1⎤
Hence, ψ ∈ ⎢0, ⎥ . It follows that the marginal productivity of domestic labor exceeds
           ⎣ 2⎦
that of immigrant labor (for the same amount of labor input). Skill premium in the foreign
market μtW is exogenous. Skill premium in the domestic market μtH is endogenously
determined.



   2.3. Skill Premium in the Domestic Market
The first order conditions for the domestic household who allocates time between leisure,
work in the domestic market, and work in the foreign market are:
                                                                 -8-


                                                    μtH ε tWtW
                               uc (Ct ; ξ t ) ⋅
                                                         Pt
                                                                          [                             ]
                                                                    = hthom e ( j ) + δhtexp ort ( j ) ϕ ,           (5)


                                                μtW ε tWtW
                       uc (Ct ; ξt ) ⋅
                                                    Pt
                                                                      [                             ]
                                                               = δ ⋅ hthom e ( j ) + δhtexp ort ( j ) ϕ .            (6)

Dividing equation (6) by equation (5) yields:
                                                             μtW
                                                         μ =
                                                           H
                                                                 .                                                   (7)
                                                          t
                                                             δ
The equilibrium skill premium is determined through outward-migration flows (note the
δ parameter in equation (7)).



   2.4. Marginal Cost
Real marginal cost function, in the presence of migration, is given by:
                                                                               1− χ
                                                    mct ( j ) = zt ⋅ yt ( j )      χ   ,                             (8)
                         1− χ
where the term yt ( j )    χ        reflects the diminishing marginal productivity of labor; the

exogenous term zt is equal to:

                       1        1           1                                          1
                zt ≡       ⋅            ⋅       ⋅ μtW ⋅ wtW                                                      ,
                       χ            1
                                    χ
                                            δ                  ⎡               2ν −1                      1 ν
                                                                                                            ⎤
                               At                                      ν −1
                                                               ⎢(1 −ψ ) ν + ψ   ν     ⎛ μtW        ⎞    ν −1
                                                                                                            ⎥
                                                               ⎢            (1 −ψ ) ⎜⎜⎝ δ          ⎟⎟
                                                                                                    ⎠       ⎥
                                                               ⎢⎣                                           ⎥⎦

where the real wage, wtW in the foreign market, is defined by:

                                                                   ε t ⋅WtW
                                                         wtW ≡                 ;
                                                                          Pt


Thus, the exogenous term zt consists of technology and preferences parameters, the
technology shock, the foreign market skill premium, and the labor wage in the foreign
market.
                                                               -9-

If the labor market is open to out-migration but closed to in-migration, the marginal cost
function still takes the form of equation (8); in this case however, the exogenous term zt
will be replaced by
                                    1       1            1                            1
                          ztout ≡       ⋅            ⋅       ⋅ μtW ⋅ wtW                          .
                                    χ        χ
                                                 1
                                                         δ                  ⎡(1 −ψ )(νν−1) ⎤
                                                                                              ν
                                            At                              ⎢⎣             ⎥⎦



It can be verified that   z tout > z t . That is, in-migration exerts a lowering cost effect akin
to technological progress.
To see the effect of in- and out-migration on the marginal cost, compare equation (8) with
the corresponding expression for the marginal cost function with no migration:
                                                                                       1+ϕ − χ
                             mctclosed ( j ) = ztclosed ⋅                    ⋅ yt ( j ) χ ,
                                                                       1
                                                                                                      (9)
                                                                    uc (Yt )
Where,

                                ztclosed ≡
                                                     1
                                                         ⋅
                                                              1
                                                                    ⋅
                                                                            (1 + ϕ ) ;
                                                     χ        1+ϕ
                                                                        (1 −ψ )(ν −1)(1+ϕ )
                                                             At χ

uc is the derivative of u with respect to C , and
                                                                                  θ
                                             ⎡1             θ −1    ⎤ θ −1
                                        Yt ≡ ⎢ ∫ ( yt ( j )) θ ⋅ dj ⎥ .
                                             ⎣0                     ⎦


The output elasticity is equal to (1 − χ ) / χ in equation (8), while the corresponding
elasticity is equal to (1 + ϕ − χ ) / χ in equation (9). This means that in the presence of
out-migration, which tends to make the labor supply faced by domestic producers more
flexible, the output elasticity of the marginal cost decreases.


When the labor market is closed to outward-migration, wage demands faced by domestic
producers are upward sloping, both under in-migration and under a completely closed
labor market. However, when the labor market is open to in-migration, domestic
producers face an expanded labor supply: additional to the skilled native born labor
                                                           - 10 -

supply (with upward sloping wage demand), they also face a complementary unskilled
foreign labor supply (with exogenously determined wage demand). That means that in-
migration acts essentially like a productivity shock, At .


To summarize, outward-migration reduces the output elasticity of the marginal cost,
whereas inward-migration essentially works like a positive domestic productivity shock
that lowers marginal costs.




   3. The Aggregate Supply

   3.1     Perfect International Mobility of Goods, Capital and Labor
When there is perfect mobility of goods, then domestic producers specialize, and n < 1 .
That is, the number of domestically produced goods, n, falls short of the number of
consumed goods, 1. Perfect mobility of capital implies perfect consumption smoothing;
        )    )
that is Ct = CtN . Superscript N indicates the perfect price flexibility case.


The approximated aggregate supply curve is derived from the log linearization of the
aggregate supply equations, around a purely deterministic steady state.


Upper hat denotes proportional deviation from the purely deterministic steady state, and
the superscript N denotes the "natural" value of real variables, that is, the value of a
variable that would have prevailed under completely flexible prices.


In the case of perfect mobility of labor, capital, and goods, the approximate aggregate
supply curve is given by:
                    ⎡ ωp ⋅ n
          π)t = κ ⋅ ⎢
                                   ω ⋅ (1 − n ) ) F ) N
                             ⋅ xt + p          ⋅ (Yt − Yt ) +
                                                                1    ) W + (1 − n ) ⋅ q) ⎤
                                                                    ⋅w                  t ⎥
                        ω
                    ⎣1 + p θ        1+ pω  θ                    ω
                                                              1+ pθ    t
                                                                              n           ⎦
                                                                                              (10)

                +
                    (1 − n ) ⋅ (q)   − q)t −1 ) + β ⋅ Et ⎢π)t +1 −
                                                         ⎡         (1 − n ) (q) − q) )⎤ .
                                 t                                             t +1 t ⎥
                        n                                ⎣            n               ⎦
                                            - 11 -



Hence, π)t is the deviation of CPI inflation from its target; xt ≡ (Yt H − Yt N ) is the
                                                                          )    )

domestic output gap; (Yt F − Yt N ) is the difference between foreign output and domestic
                      )      )

natural output; the parameter ω p , defined in the next section, is the elasticity of the

marginal cost with respect to producer's output.
The term

                                     κ=
                                          (1 - α )(1 - αβ )
                                                 α
captures the price flexibility parameter; and (1 - α ) is the probability of receiving a price
                                 )
updating signal. The variable qt is the real exchange rate, formally defined as:
                                                    )       )
                                        q)t = ε)t + PF ,t - Pt ,
       )
where PF ,t is the foreign price index.


The focus of attention of this paper is the slope of the aggregate supply curve. The slope
            κnω p
is ψ 1 ≡            .
           1 + ω pθ


The slope of the aggregate supply curve increases with n ( 1 - n is the trade openness
parameter) and κ .


Other terms in the aggregate supply curve capture the effects on the domestic inflation of
foreign output shocks, foreign wage shocks, and past, present and future real exchange
rate shocks.
                                                             - 12 -


      3.2.     Perfect International Mobility of Goods and Capital, with no Labor
             Mobility
In the case of perfect international mobility of goods and capital, but with no labor
mobility, the aggregate supply curve is given by: 6


                                 ⎡ ω⋅n           ω ⋅ (1 − n ) ) F ) N (1 − n ) ) ⎤
                        π)t = κ ⋅ ⎢       ⋅ xt +             ⋅ (Yt − Yt ) +   ⋅ qt ⎥
                                 ⎣ 1 + ωθ         1 + ωθ                    n      ⎦
                                                                                                        (11)
                              +
                                (1 − n ) ⋅ (q)   − q)t −1 ) + β ⋅ Et ⎢π)t +1 −
                                                                     ⎡         (1 − n ) (q) − q) )⎤ ,
                                             t                                             t +1 t ⎥
                                      n                              ⎣            n               ⎦

where ω = ω p + ωw is the elasticity of marginal cost with respect to domestic output; It

includes the expression
                                                                1− χ
                                                        ωp =             ,
                                                                   χ
which is the elasticity of the desired price with respect to output (for given wages). It is
inversely related to the degree of returns to scale. It also includes the expression
                                                                   ϕ
                                                          ωw ≡       ,
                                                                   χ
which is the elasticity of demanded wage with respect to output (consisting of the labor-
disutility elasticity and the labor-output elasticity).
Because ωw > 0 , we have ω > ω p .

Therefore; shutting off the migration channel (particularly outward migration) raises the
slope of the aggregate supply curve.7


In this case, the slope of the Philips curve is:
                                                                κnω
                                                       ψ2 ≡           .
                                                               1 + ωθ


6
 Razin and Yuen (2002) were among the first to extend the closed-economy New Keynesian framework to
an open economy with trade in goods and in capital assets. Gali and Monacelli, (2003) analyze the effect of
exchange rate movements on inflation.
7
    See also Engler (2007).
                                                            - 13 -




    3.3.     Perfect International Mobility of Goods, with no Capital Mobility and no
           Labor Mobility
If the domestic economy is not integrated to the international financial market, then there
is no possibility of consumption smoothing, and we have that the value of aggregate
current spending equals the value of aggregate domestic output:

                           PˆC ,t Cˆ t = PˆY ,t Yˆt         ;        PˆC ,t Cˆ tN = PˆY ,t Yˆt N ,

where PˆC ,t is the CPI-based price level and PˆY ,t is the GDP deflator.


In this case, the aggregate-supply curve is:
                          ⎡ (ω ⋅ n + σ )        ω ⋅ (1 − n ) ) F ) N (1 − n ) ) ⎤
                 π)t = κ ⋅ ⎢             ⋅ xt +             ⋅ (Yt − Yt ) +   ⋅ qt ⎥
                          ⎣ 1 + ωθ               1 + ωθ                    n      ⎦
                                                                                                     (12)
                       +
                         (1 − n ) ⋅ (q)       − q)t −1 ) + β ⋅ Et ⎢π)t +1 −
                                                                  ⎡         (1 − n ) (q) − q) )⎤ .
                                          t                                             t +1 t ⎥
                               n                                  ⎣            n               ⎦



For the case of perfect mobility of goods with no mobility of capital and labor, the slope
of the Philips curve is equal to:
                                                          κ (nω + σ )
                                                   ψ3 ≡               .
                                                            1 + ωθ
The slope of the Phillips curve is steeper than in the previous case.



    3.4.     The Closed Economy
Because, with the trade account closed, the consumption of each good equal domestic
production of the good, production is fully diversified. Namely, n = 1 . If, in addition, the
capital account is closed and in- and out-migration is not possible, the aggregate-supply
curve becomes:


                                                 κ
                                   π)t =             ⋅ (ω + σ ) ⋅ xt + βEtπ)t +1 .                   (13)
                                              1 + ωθ
                                              - 14 -




In this case the slope of the Phillips curve is:

                                              κ (ω + σ )
                                       ψ4 ≡              ,
                                               1 + ωθ

where, σ is the inter-temporal consumption elasticity of substitution.

The slope of the Phillips curve is steeper than in the previous case.




    3.5.     Slope of the Aggregate Supply Curve: Regime Comparisons.
There is a systematic ranking of the slope of the Philips curve across openness regimes.
From subsections 3.1-3.4 one can verify that ψ 1 < ψ 2 < ψ 3 < ψ 4 .


This means that in every successive round of the opening up of the economy,
globalization contributes to flatten the aggregate supply curve. The intuition is that when
an economy opens up to trade in goods, it tends to specialize in production but to
diversify in consumption. This means the number of domestically produced goods (= n),
is less then the number of domestically consumed goods (= 1). Consequently, the
commodity composition of the consumption and output baskets, which are identical if the
trade account is closed, are different when trade in goods is possible. As a result, the
correlation between fluctuations in output and in consumption (which is equal to unity in
the case of a closed trade account) is less than unity if the economy is opened to
international trade in goods.


When the capital account is open, then the correlation between fluctuations in
consumption and domestic output is farther weakened, this is because with open capital
accounts the representative household can smooth consumption through international
borrowing and lending and thereby separate current consumption from current output.
The inflation effects of shocks to the marginal cost are therefore reduced, because the
fluctuations in labor supply are also smoothed, as a consequence of the consumption
smoothing.
                                                   - 15 -



Out-migration reduces the output elasticity of the marginal cost (compare equation (8)
and equation (9)). This implies that, in the presence of out-migration, shocks to domestic
output will have smaller effects on inflation, compared to a closed economy. 8


When the economy opens up to in-migration, the proportional factor, zt , of the marginal
cost curve is lowered. Therefore, the effect of demand shocks on inflation is weakened.




    4. Utility-Based Loss Function
Distortions in the New-Keynesian equilibrium can be grouped into two types:
    (1) Because consumption smoothing is desirable, fluctuations of the output gap,
        which are correlated with consumption, are welfare-reducing.
    (2) Because an efficient allocation of the labor supply implies an equal division of
        labor across differentiated goods (recall that the disutility of labor is a convex
        function), any cross-good dispersion in output (the level of output for goods
        whose prices have been updated is different than the level of output of goods
        whose prices were not updated) is distortionary. Given that not all the prices are
        updated simultaneously, inflation generates a distortion.
The utility based-loss function, which captures distortions 1 and 2, is:9
                                             ∞
                                                   [                 ]
                                    L = E0 ∑ β t π)t2 + λ (xt − x * ) ,
                                            t =0
                                                                     2
                                                                                                      (14)




8
 If the economy imports intermediate goods there is also a real exchange rate effect. The real exchange
rate affects the output inflation tradeoff, even in the absence of other cost push shocks. Clarida Gali and
Gertler (2000) discuss this effect.
9
  In appendix A we derive the utility based loss function along the lines of Woodford (2003). We assume
that foreign producers use a local currency pricing strategy and they update prices at the same frequency
as domestic producers. Note also that we abstract from the money term in the utility function.
                                            - 16 -


where, x * is the (log) ratio of the non-distorted aggregate output and the monopolistic-
competitive distorted output, under perfect price flexibility; and the parameter λ is the
weight of the output-gap term relative to the inflation term.


We find (see Appendix A) that:
                                        ψi
                                   λ=      ; i = 1,2,3,4 ,
                                        θ
where ψ i is the slope of the aggregate supply curve (the inverse of the sacrifice ratio);

and θ is the elasticity of substitution across differentiated goods. Recall that in the
previous subsection we demonstrated that:
                                    ψ1 < ψ 2 < ψ 3 < ψ 4 .


Thus, the ranking of the relative weight of the output-gap term in the loss function is:
                                     λ1 < λ2 < λ3 < λ4 .


Opening up an economy to trade in goods and capital flows weakens the correlation
between the fluctuations in the output gap and the fluctuations in consumption. Recall
that the representative household welfare depends on consumption, not on domestic
output. Therefore, the output-gap weight in the loss function falls as an economy opens
up to trade, and capital assets.


With migration, the representative household’s income and output are separated, one
from the other. Because consumption levels are associated with the income levels (not
GDP levels), fluctuations of domestic output become less important to the representative
household compared to the case of no migration. Thus, the output-gap weight in the loss
function declines when migration is allowed.


We thus establish that the output-gap weight in the utility-based loss function decreases
with the opening up of the economy, in every successive round of opening up.
                                                     - 17 -


     5. Utility-Based Monetary Policy under Discretion
In this section we use the utility-based loss function, along with the aggregate supply and
aggregate demand relationships, to formulate an optimal monetary policy rule, under
discretion.


The approximated aggregate demand equation is:
                         xt = Et xt +1 − σ −1 (iH ,t − Etπ)t +1 − r)t n ) ,
                                               )
                                                                                                         (15)

where r)t n is the deviation of the natural rate of real interest, from steady state.


The approximated (real) interest-parity equation is:
                      qt = Et qt +1 + (iF ,t − Etπ F ,t +1 ) − (iH ,t − Etπ t +1 ) .
                       )       )       )         )              )         )
                                                                                                         (16)



                                                                                  )
The optimal monetary policy rule is obtained by choosing the path of π)t , xt and qt so
as to minimize the loss function in equation (14), subject to the aggregate supply
equation, aggregate demand equation and the (real) interest parity rule, in every
period t = 1,2,..... .


The optimal policy rule (under discretion) depends on the degree of openness10 (a step by
step derivation is included in Appendix B):
                        )       )              )                         )
                        iH ,t = rt n + γ π ⋅ Etπ t +1 + γ x ⋅ xt + γ u ⋅ ut ,                            (17)
      )
where ut collects terms from the right hand side of the aggregate supply curve (apart
from the inflation expectations and the output gap) and where the elasticity of the policy
determined interest rate, with respect to the inflation expectations, depends on the degree
of openness, as follows:



10
  Cecchetti et al (2007) suggest that aggressive monetary policy is the key explanation for the flattening of
the trade-off. They argue that the disinflationary impact of globalization is limited, and partly attributable
to the fixed exchange rate regime, in some of the East Asian countries. They analyze empirically the change
in ex-post Taylor rule, from the high inflation era, to the low inflation era. Our theory can provide an
explanation for this change in the Taylor rule.
                                               - 18 -



I. Perfect mobility of Labor, Capital and Goods:
                          ⎛ Πq ⎞
                          ⎜⎜1 +     σ⎟
                           ⎝    ψ 1 ⎟⎠                 σ [1 + θ (ψ 1 + Π qσ )ψ 1 ]
               γπ = 1+                     σθβ ; γ x =                             .         (18)
                       1 + θ (ψ 1 + Π qσ )                          β


II. No Labor Mobility; Perfect Mobility of Capital and Goods:
                         ⎛ Πq ⎞
                         ⎜⎜1 +     σ⎟
                          ⎝    ψ 2 ⎟⎠                 σ [1 + θ (ψ 2 + Π qσ )ψ 2 ]
              γπ = 1+                     σθβ ; γ x =                             .          (19)
                      1 + θ (ψ 2 + Π qσ )                          β


III. No Labor Mobility; No Capital Mobility; Perfect Goods Mobility:
                          ⎛ Πq ⎞
                          ⎜⎜1 +     σ⎟
                           ⎝    ψ 3 ⎟⎠                 σ [1 + θ (ψ 3 + Π qσ )ψ 3 ]
               γπ = 1+                     σθβ ; γ x =                             .         (20)
                       1 + θ (ψ 3 + Π qσ )                          β


IV. Closed economy:
                                      1                     σ [1+ θψ 42 ]
                         γπ = 1+              σθβ ; γ x =                   .                (21)
                                   1 + θψ 4                      β


              (1 − n )
Where Π q ≡
                 n
                       (1 + κ − β ) is the aggregate-supply elasticity of inflation, with respect
to the real exchange rate. Note that in the closed-economy case Π q = 0 .


The expressions for γ π demonstrates that the optimal monetary policy under discretion
becomes more aggressive with respect to inflation, when the economy opens up to
migration, trade in goods and capital flow. In contrast, the expression for
                                                 - 19 -


 γ x demonstrates that the monetary policy becomes more benign toward fluctuations in
the output-gap when the economy opens up, in every globalization round.11




     6. The Dynamic Equilibrium
In this section we derive the closed-form solution to the equilibrium levels of inflation
and output gap. We use the following procedure in the derivation of the closed form
solution. First, we write the system in a matrix notation. Second, we use the method of
undetermined coefficients to solve for the state-space equilibrium form.



     6.1. Equilibrium Equations in Matrix Notation
Substituting the optimal policy rule (17) into the aggregate demand (15), and then
substituting the result in a generic aggregate-supply curve, we can rearrange the system
using the following matrix notation:
                                   ⎡ xt ⎤           ⎡ xt +1 ⎤   )
                                   ⎢π ⎥
                                     )    = Q ⋅ E t ⎢π) ⎥ + R ⋅ ut ,                              (22)
                                   ⎣ t⎦             ⎣ t +1 ⎦
where the matrices of parameters are defined as follows:
                     ⎡      1                  1−γπ        ⎤       ⎡     γu ⎤
                     ⎢1 + γ / σ                            ⎥          −
                                                                   ⎢ σ +γ ⎥
                                               σ +γ x
                     ⎢       x
                                                           ⎥       ⎢          x
                                                                                 ⎥
                   Q≡⎢                                     ⎥ ; R ≡ ⎢             ⎥.
                     ⎢ ψ                       ψ (γ π − 1)⎥        ⎢1 + ψ ⋅ γ u ⎥
                                            β−
                     ⎢⎣1 + γ x / σ              (σ + γ x ) ⎦
                                                           ⎥       ⎢⎣ (σ + γ x )⎥⎦


Note that in the writing of the equilibrium system we make a simplification. Although the
                    )
real exchange rate, qt is an endogenous variable in our model, we simplify by assuming
that it has an AR(1) representation.


11
  Note however, that in the closed economy the real-exchange-rate channel shuts off, decreasing the
degree of optimal response to output gap. This point is illustrated by comparing the parameter γ x for
closed economy, equation (21), with those for open economies, equations (18)-(20).
                                               - 20 -

We assume that the generic term that collects variables from the right-hand side of the
                         )
aggregated-supply curve, ut , satisfies the following exogenous AR(1) process:
                                       )       )
                                      ut = ρ ⋅ ut −1 + u~t ,                        (23)

where, the parameter ρ is smaller than one in absolute value; and the disturbance term,
u~t , follows a white-noise process.



   6.2. The solution
We guess that equation (22) has the following state space representation:
                                          ⎡ xt ⎤      )
                                          ⎢π) ⎥ = F ⋅ ut     ,                            (24)
                                          ⎣ t⎦
where the parameter matrix, F, is a matrix of order 2 by 2. Substituting the guessed
solution from equation (24) into equation (22), and using the exogenous process from
equation (23), we get:
                                     )                      )
                                 F ⋅ ut = [Q ⋅ F ⋅ ρ + R ]⋅ ut .                          (25)



Since the parameter ρ is a scalar, we are allowed to rewrite equation (25) with ρ pre-
multiplying the matrix F. Thus, we can use the method of undetermined coefficients to
solve for the matrix F:
                                  F = (I 2 x 2 − Q ⋅ ρ ) ⋅ R .
                                                        −1
                                                                                          (26)



Substituting for the matrices Q and R we get that:

               ⎡                                                                    ⎤
               ⎢                                                                    ⎥
               ⎢ − γ u [σ + γ x − ρβ + ρψ (γ π − 1)] + ρ (1 − γ π )(σ + γ x + ψγ u )⎥
              1⎢                                                                    ⎥
            F= ⎢                                                                    ⎥ ;
              G⎢                            γ                                       ⎥
                                        ⎛            ⎞
               ⎢             − γ u ρψ + ⎜1 + x − ρ ⎟(σ + γ x + ψγ u )               ⎥
               ⎢                        ⎝ σ          ⎠                              ⎥
               ⎣                               σ                                    ⎦


               G ≡ (σ + γ x − σρ )(σ + γ x − ρ [β + ψ (1 − γ π )]) + ρ 2ψ (γ π − 1)σ .
                                                - 21 -


   6.3. Impulse Response
At this stage we can compute the impulse response of the equilibrium inflation and the
equilibrium output gap to shocks. We illustrate by computing impulse responses to a
cost-push shock. The impulse-response parameter values are presented Table 1.


             Table 1. Impulse-Response Parameter Values

              Parameter                                       Symbol   Value

              The Calvo parameter                               α       0.35

              Time Discount Factor                              β       0.99

              CRRA                                              σ       1.00

              CES                                               θ       5.00

              MC elasticity w.r.t. own output                  ωp       0.25

              Wage demand elasticity w.r.t. domestic output    ωw       5.00

              Domestically produced goods                       n       0.75

              Persistence of the cost-push shock                ρ       0.80



Figure 1 depicts the impulse response – of the equilibrium inflation and output gap – to a
serially-correlated cost-push shock, under different regimes of openness.
                                                   - 22 -

Figure 1. Impulse response of inflation and output gap, to a serially-correlated cost-push shock



                                                Response of π t to cost push shock
             1
                                                                                             Closed economy
                                                                                             Only goods
            0.8                                                                              No migration
                                                                                             Fully open economy

            0.6


            0.4


            0.2


             0
                  1     2         3         4           5              6             7   8        9               10



                                                Response of xt to cost push shock
             0


             -1


             -2


             -3

                                                                                             Closed economy
             -4                                                                              Only goods
                                                                                             No migration
                                                                                             Fully open economy
             -5
                  1     2         3         4           5              6             7   8        9               10




Figure 1 demonstrates that as the economy opens up, the equilibrium inflation response to
a cost-push shock would be more moderate, while at the same time, the equilibrium
output-gap response to the same shock is more erratic.



    6.4. Comparative static
Figure 2 illustrates the solution sensitivity to the share of domestically-produced goods,
n , and to the substitution elasticity across goods, θ , which is inversely related to the
producers-monopolistic power; both structural parameters are related to the degree of
openness. Figure 2 shows that as the import share grows (that is, as n falls) equilibrium-
output elasticity, with respect to a cost-push shock, becomes more negative. At the same
time, equilibrium-inflation elasticity, with respect to the same shock, is not monotonic: it
                                                         - 23 -

falls so long as the import share grows from 0 to 25 percents, but it increases if import
share grows farther. If we assume that monopolistic power falls with openness, we have
another channel through which globalization influences equilibrium inflation and output.
As monopolistic power falls (that is, as θ grows), equilibrium-output elasticity, with
respect to a cost-push shock, becomes more negative. However, equilibrium-inflation
elasticity again responses ambiguously: if import share is smaller than 25 percents, this
elasticity falls together with the monopolistic power, but it grows otherwise. Altogether,
it implies that our analytical conclusion is limited to the case where economies are open,
but only up to a certain degree. However, this does not necessarily weakens our
argument, since the degree of openness is restricted anyway; for instance—by the no-
Ponzy-game assumption—the import share must be below 50 percents.


                Figure 2. Solution sensitivity to structural parameters, under the fully-open case

                                          Equilibrium-inflation elasticity with respect to a cost-push shock




           1

         0.98

         0.96


          0.9
                      0.8                                                                                              9   10
                                0.7                                                                            7   8
                                           0.6                                            5           6
                                                           0.5     3           4

                                      n                                                           θ

                                           Equilibrium-output elasticity with respect to a cost-push shock




          -10

          -20

          -30

          -40


          0.9
                      0.8                                                                                              9   10
                                0.7                                                                            7   8
                                           0.6                                            5           6
                                                           0.5     3           4

                                      n                                                           θ
                                           - 24 -




      7. Conclusion

The paper provides a unified analysis of the effects of international mobility of goods,
labor, and finance, within a unified New-Keynesian open economy framework, on (1) the
Phillips curve; (2) the weights of inflation and output gap in the approximated, utility-
based, loss function; and (3) the utility-based interest rate rule under discretion, and (4)
the    equilibrium   inflation    and    output     gap.   We    demonstrate     how     an
endogenously determined monetary policy, which is guided by the welfare criterion of
the representative household, becomes more aggressive with regard to inflation
fluctuations but more benign with respect to output-gap fluctuations, when the economy
opens up to in- and out-migration, trade in goods, and capital flows. To concentrate on
the inflation-output trade-off, we treat the real exchange rate as an exogenous-variable
unaffected by the globalization regimes. Exploring the effects of globalization on the real
exchange rate in our framework is left for future research.


The paper assumes that the flex-price markup is constant, unaffected by globalization
forces. But there has been some evidence of greater restraints on domestic prices and
wage growth in sectors more exposed to international competition, such as textiles and
electronics. Chen, Imbs and Scott (2004) analyzed disaggregated data for EU
manufacturing over the period 1988-2000. They find that increased openness lowers
prices by reducing markups and by raising productivity. In response to an increase in
openness, markups show a steep short run decline, which partly reverse later, while
productivity rises in a manner that increases over time. If globalization reduces the
markup, our model predicts that this effect, by itself, leads to a more forceful anti-
inflation policy, and lessens the attention given by the policy maker to the fluctuations in
economic activity.


Finally, as we know, more frequent price updating steepens the tradeoff between inflation
and activity. However, to our knowledge, neither theory nor empirical evidence exists in
                                        - 25 -

support of any systematic relationship between globalization and frequency of price
updating. Interestingly, Gopinath and Rigobon (2007) report, that the time frequency of
price adjustment of US imported goods trended downward, on average, over the last
decade".
                                          - 26 -




References
Artstein, Y. (2002), “The Flexibility of the Israeli Labor Market,” in A. Ben-Bassat (ed.)
        the Israeli Economy, 1985-1998, the MIT Press, 2002.

Badinger, H. (2007), "Globalization, Taylor Rules,             and   Inflation,"   mimeo,
      Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien, Vienna, Austria .

Bean, C., (2006) “Globalization and Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q4,
       468-475.

Bentolila, S., J. J. Dolaldo, and J. F. Jimeno (2007), “Does Immigration Affect the
       Phillips Curve? Some Evidence for Spain,” Mimeo, CEMFI, Madrid.

Borio, C. and A. Filardo (2007). "Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country
       Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation," unpublished paper,
       Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland (March).

Calvo G., "Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework," Journal of Monetary
   Economics 12 (1983), 383-398.

Cecchetti, S. G., P Hooper, B. C. Kasman, K. L. Schoenholtz, and M. W. Watson (2007).
      "Understanding the Evolving Inflation Process," presentation at the U.S.
      Monetary Policy Forum, Washington, D.C., March 9.

Chen, N., J.Imbs and A. Scott. (2004), “Competition, Globalization and the Decline of
      Inflation,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 6495, October.

Clarida, R., J. (2008). "Reflections on Monetary Policy in the Open Economy", NBER
       International seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited by Jeffrey Frankel and
       Christopher Pissarides. University of Chicago Press (Forthcoming).

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
       Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115
       (February), pp. 147-80.

Engler, P. (2007) “Gains from Migration in a New-Keynesian Framework”, mimeo, Freie
       Universität Berlin, Germany,

Freidman, A., and T. Suchoy, (2004), “The NAIRU In Israel: An Unobserved
      Components Approach,” Israel Economic Review, Vol.2, No. 2, December.

Gali, J. and T. Monacelli, (2003) “Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Volatility in a
Small Open Economy,” NBER Working Paper No. 8905.
                                         - 27 -

Gopinath, Gitta, and Roberto Rigobon, (2007), "Sticky Borders," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.

Ihrig, J, S. Kamin, D. Lindner, and J. Marquez (forthcoming). “Some Simple Tests of the
         Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis,” International Finance Discussion
         Papers. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kaminsky, G. L. and S. L. Schmukler. (2001). “On Booms and Crashes: Financial
      Liberalization and Stock Market Cycles”, Washington DC. The World Bank.
      Policy Working Paper No. 2565.

Lane, P., (1997), “Inflation in Open Economies, Journal of International Economics, 42,
       pp. 327-347.

Loungani, P., A. Razin and C. Yuen, 2001, “Capital Mobility and the Output-Inflation
      Tradeoff,” Journal of Development Economics 64, 255-74.

Mishkin, F. S. (2007), Remarks given At the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve
      Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California March 23, 2007

Razin, A. and P. Loungani (2007) “Globalization and Equilibrium Inflation-Output
       Tradeoffs,” NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2005 , edited
       by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Christopher Pissarides. MIT Press.

Razin, A., and C. Yuen, 2002, “The "New Keynesian" Phillips Curve: Closed Economy
       vs. Open Economy,” Economics Letters, Vol. 75 (May), pp. 1–9.

Roberts, J. M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal
       of Central Banking, vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230.

Rogoff, K., 2003, “Disinflation: An Unsung Benefit of Globalization?,” Finance and
       Development, Volume 40, No. 4 (December), pp. 55–56.

Rogoff, K., 2004, "Globalization and Global Disinflation," in Federal Reserve Bank of
       Kansas City, Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing
       Economy proceedings of the 2003 Jackson Hole symposium sponsored by the
       Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Romer, D., 1993, “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, CVII (4), November, pp. 869-904.

Romer, D., 1998, “A New Assessment of Openness and Inflation: Reply,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, CXII (2) May, 649-652.

Tetlow R. and B. Ironside (2007), "Real-Time Model Uncertainty in the United States:
      The Fed, 1996-2003," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 39, No. 7
      (October), pp. 1533-1561.
                                        - 28 -

Williams, J. C. (2006). "The Phillips Curve in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation
       Expectations," unpublished working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of San
       Francisco, September.

Woodford, M., 2003, “Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy”
     (Princeton University Press).

Wynne M. A. and E. K. Kersting. (2007). “Openness and Inflation”, Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, Staff Paper No. 2.
                                                                 - 29 -


Appendix A: Derivation of the Utility-Based Loss Function
In this appendix we derive a quadratic approximation for the welfare criterion of the
representative household, following Woodford (2003).12


In the full mobility case, a first stage in the log-linear approximation of the utility
function, around the purely deterministic steady state, yields:

              Ut = −
                         Y uc
                          2
                                  ∞


                                 s =0
                                          {                     2
                                                                                                         }
                              Et ∑ β s (ω p ⋅ n )(xt + s − x * ) + θ (1 + θω p )⋅Varj p) t + s ( j ) + t.i. p. ,   (A. 1)


           )
where Varj pt ( j ) is the price dispersion of domestically produced goods; and the

expression " t.i. p." collects terms that are independent of monetary policy.


Using the Calvo (1983) set up it follows that:
                                 )
             π) = E [ p) ( j ) − P ]
                     t        j   t           t −1
                                                      )
                                                                            [
                            = nαE j [ p) H ,t ( j ) − Pt −1 ] + n (1 − α ) PH* ,t − Pt −1
                                                                            )       )
                                                                                         ]                         (A. 2)
                                                                      )
                                                                                               [ )       )
                                                                                                             ]
                                + (1 − n )α * E j [ p) F ,t ( j ) − Pt −1 ] + (1 − n )(1 − α * ) PF*,t − Pt −1 ,

where α * is the foreign country Calvo parameter.


We assume that foreign producers use a local currency pricing strategy and that they
update prices at the same frequency as domestic producers, that is, α = α * . It follows
that while optimizing, local and foreign producers set the same price: p) H* ,t = p) F* ,t . Under

these assumptions, we get, as in the closed economy, that:
                                                     π)t = (1 − α )[PH* ,t − Pt −1 ] .
                                                                      )         )
                                                                                                                   (A. 3)



It follows that:
                                                       H         H         α )2
                                                     Δ t = αΔ t −1 +         π ,                                   (A. 4)
                                                                          1−α t




12
     We abstract from the money term in the utility function.
                                                            - 30 -


where ΔHt ≡ Varj p) t ( j ) . Equation (A.4) can be employed with (A.1) to get the utility

based monetary policy welfare criterion:
                                                  ⎧ψ
                                 U t = − Et ∑ β s ⎨ i ⋅ (xt + s − x * ) + π t2+ s ⎬ ,
                                        1 ∞                            2          ⎫
                                                                                                      (A. 5)
                                        2 s =0 ⎩ θ                                ⎭
where ψ i is the slope of the relevant aggregate supply curve (i = 1,2,3,4 ) .




Appendix B: Optimal Monetary Policy under Discretion
In this appendix we derive the optimal monetary policy under discretion. To do this, we
first approximate the aggregate demand, the aggregate supply and the interest parity.
Then we minimize the utility-based loss function subject to these relationships.



     B.1.Aggregate Demand

Maximizing equation (1) with respect to BH ,t , subject to budget constraints, equation (3),

and log linearizing the first order conditions, yields:
                        Ct = Et Ct +1 − σ −1 (iH ,t − Etπ t +1 ) + g t − Et g t +1 ,
                        )        )            )         )          )        )
                                                                                                      (B. 1)


                  ucc     )      u
where σ ≡ −           c ; g t ≡ − cξ ξ t and upper bar indicate the purely deterministic steady
                  uc             ucc

state.



                                                   )    )      )      )
World goods market clearing condition implies that Ct = Yt H + Yt F − CtF . Substituting in

                            )      )
                                       [             ]
(B.1), subtracting the term Yt N + Yt +N1 from both sides, and collecting all the exogenous

terms, yields:

                                xt = Et xt +1 − σ −1 (iH ,t − Etπ)t +1 − r)t n ) ,
                                                      )
                                                                                                      (B. 2)

                                       )        )
                                                            [     )            )       )
                                                                                               ]
where r)t n ≡ σ {(g t − Et g t +1 ) + (Yt n − EtYt +n1 ) + (CtF − Yt F ) − Et (CtF+1 − Yt +F1 ) } .
                                                            )
                                                                 - 31 -

)
rt n is the deviation of the natural real interest rate, from its level at the purely

deterministic steady state level.



    B.2. Interest Parity
The approximated equation describing interest parity is:
                                         )     )
                            ε) = E ε) + i − i . t       t t +1    F ,t    H ,t                                    (B. 3)




Subtracting the expression (Etπ)F ,t +1 + Etπ)t +1 ) from both sides of equation (B.3), we get

the interest parity in real terms, as follows:

                                 qt = Et qt +1 + (iF ,t − Etπ F ,t +1 ) − (iH ,t − Etπ t +1 )
                                 )       )        )         )              )         )
                                                                                                .                 (B. 4)




    B.3. Utility-Based Policy Rule
The optimal monetary rule under discretion is obtained upon minimizing the utility-based
loss function period by period, subject to the aggregate supply equation, the aggregate
demand equation, and the real interest parity.


Formally, optimization is given by:
                                               1 ⎛ )2 ψ
                                                 ⎜ π t + ⋅ (xt − x ) ⎟ + Ft
                                                                  * 2⎞
                         min
                 )         ) )
                 πt , xt , qtc , iH ,t         2⎝       θ            ⎠
                                            ⎡)         )                                ⎤
                                     − φ1,t ⎢π t − βEtπ t +1 − ψ ⋅ xt − ∑ Π i ⋅ it ⎥                              (B. 5)
                                            ⎣                             i             ⎦
                                           [
                                     − φ2,t xt − Et xt +1 + σ (iH ,t − Etπ t +1 + rt )
                                                                −1
                                                                   )           )        )n
                                                                                           ]
                                           [ )       )                 )              )         )
                                                                                                      ]
                                     − φ3,t qt − Et qt +1 − (iF ,t − Etπ F ,t +1 ) + (iH ,t − Etπ t +1 ) ,
                                                              )




where Π i      is the aggregate supply elasticity of inflation with respect to

variable i =   (Y)
                 t
                     F
                           )      )
                                    )   ) )
                                                    (        )
                         − Yt N , wtW , Ct − Ctn , qˆt , qˆt −1 , Et qˆt +1             ; where φ1,t , φ 2,t   and φ3,t
                                                  - 32 -

                                                                     ∞
                                                                           ⎛) ψ
                                                                  Et ∑ β s ⎜ π s2 + ⋅ (x s − x * ) ⎟ and private
                                                                1                                 2⎞
denote Lagrange multipliers; and where Ft ≡
                                                                2 s =t +1 ⎝        θ               ⎠

sector expectations are taken as given. The corresponding set of first order conditions
                                    )
with respect to π)t , xt , q) t and iH ,t are as follows:

                                        )
                                        π t − φ1,t = 0

                                        ψ
                                          ⋅ x + ψ ⋅ φ1,t − φ2,t = 0
                                        θ t
                                                                                                          (B. 6)
                                        Π qφ1,t − φ3,t = 0


                                        − φ2,tσ −1 − φ3,t = 0 .



Assume that the government gives an output subsidy, which fully offsets the distortionary
effect of the monopolistic competition market power, so that x * = 0 . The solution to
equation (B.6) is then given by:
                                                 ⎛ Π ⎞
                                        xt = −θ ⎜⎜1 + q σ ⎟⎟π)t .                                         (B. 7)
                                                 ⎝   ψ ⎠



Define ut ≡ ∑ Π i ⋅ it . Substituting equation (B.7) into the aggregate supply equation and
              i

solving with forward iterations, we get:

                                                                [     ]
                                                         ∞
                                         xt = −Φ Et ∑ τ s u)t + s ,                                       (B. 8)
                                                         s =0




                    ⎛       Πq     ⎞
                  θ ⎜⎜1 +        σ ⎟⎟
                  ⎝      ψ ⎠                       β
where Φ ≡                       , and τ ≡
                                          1 + θ (ψ + Π qσ )ψ
                                                             .
                    ⎛ Πq ⎞
             1 + θ ⎜⎜1 +   σ ⎟ψ
                    ⎝    ψ ⎟⎠


Substituting for the output-gap from equation (B.7) we get:
                                                      - 33 -


                                                                             [              ]
                                                               ∞
                                  )                1                 )
                                 πt =                      E t ∑ τ s ut + s .                        (B. 9)
                                               ⎛ Π ⎞
                                        1 + θ ⎜⎜1 + q σ ⎟⎟ψ s=0
                                               ⎝     ψ ⎠


Under rational expectations it follows that:

                                                                                 [              ]
                                                                 ∞
                                )                     1                )
                              Etπ t +1 =                      Et ∑ τ s ut + s+1 .                   (B. 10)
                                                  ⎛ Π ⎞
                                           1 + θ ⎜⎜1 + q σ ⎟⎟ψ s =0
                                                  ⎝     ψ ⎠


Now, rearranging equation (B.8):

                                                                         [              ]
                                                                   ∞
                                   xt = −Φ ⋅ u)t − Φ ⋅τ ⋅ Et ∑ τ s u)t + s +1 .                     (B. 11)
                                                                  s =0




Substituting (B.10) into equation (B.11):
                                                          ⎛   Πq         ⎞
                                                    θ ⎜⎜1 +        σ ⎟⎟ β
                                                          ⎝   ψ          ⎠
                                xt = −Φ ⋅ u)t −                                      Etπ)t +1 .     (B. 12)
                                                         ⎛     Πq  ⎞
                                                  1 + θ ⎜⎜1 +   σ ⎟⎟ψ
                                                         ⎝    ψ    ⎠


Advancing equation (B.8) by one period, and substituting into equation (B.11):
                                                          Φ) 1
                                             Et xt +1 =    ut + x t .                               (B. 13)
                                                          τ        τ


Substituting (B.12) and (B.13) into the aggregate-demand equation (B.2), and
rearranging, yields the optimal policy rule, as follows:
                           )       )              )                         )
                           iH ,t = rt n + γ π ⋅ Etπ t +1 + γ x ⋅ xt + γ u ⋅ ut ,                    (B. 14)

where:
          ⎛    Π     ⎞
          ⎜⎜1 + q σ ⎟⎟
γπ = 1+ ⎝
               ψ     ⎠ σθβ > 1 ; γ = σ [1 + θ (ψ + Π qσ )ψ ] & γ = σ ⋅ Φ ⎛⎜1 + θ (ψ + Π qσ )ψ + 1 ⎞⎟ .
       1 + θ (ψ + Π qσ )
                                  x
                                                β               u         ⎜            β           ⎟
                                                                          ⎝                        ⎠
