                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    DESIGNING A CARBON TAX TO REDUCE U.S. GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS

                                          Gilbert E. Metcalf

                                        Working Paper 14375
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14375


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Aparna Mathur and Wei Yao provided excellent assistance with CES calculations. Rob Stavins and
an anonymous referee made useful suggestions that have improved the paper. I am also grateful to
the Hamilton Project at Brookings for providing financial support for this research. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gilbert E. Metcalf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Designing A Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Gilbert E. Metcalf
NBER Working Paper No. 14375
October 2008
JEL No. H23,Q54

                                             ABSTRACT

This article describes a revenue and distributionally neutral approach to reducing U.S. greenhouse
gas emissions that uses a carbon tax. The revenue from the carbon tax is used to finance an environmental
earned income tax credit designed to be distributionally neutral. The credit is linked to earned income
and helps offset the regressivity of the carbon tax. The carbon tax reform proposal is also revenue
neutral and avoids conflating carbon policy with debates over the appropriate size of the federal budget.
The article provides a distributional analysis of the proposal and also makes a number of political,
economic and administrative arguments in favor of a carbon tax and responds to the arguments that
have commonly been made against using a tax-based approach to reducing U.S. emissions.


Gilbert E. Metcalf
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
gilbert.metcalf@tufts.edu
1.     Introduction

       Public sentiment and political opinion have recently shifted dramatically in favor

of the United States taking action on climate change. As illustration, the Democratic and

Republican nominees for president last year supported imposing limits on U.S. carbon

emissions. This would complement European actions on carbon emissions through the

European Union’s (EU) Emission Trading Scheme (ETS), which recently finished the

first year of its second phase of emission limits. With the United States poised to take the

major policy step of initiating limits on carbon emissions, this article reviews the

economic and political arguments for using a carbon tax as the policy instrument for

curtailing domestic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

       Conventional wisdom holds that a carbon tax is not a politically viable option for

controlling carbon emissions because the tax makes overly explicit the costs associated

with controlling GHG emissions. While this has perhaps been true historically, it is also

true that any form of carbon pricing has not been politically viable in the United States up

until now. However, as the political discussion and consideration of carbon pricing

schemes has progressed over the last year and a half, it has become clear that a

thoughtfully designed carbon tax would address many of the concerns of those who

oppose carbon pricing in general while overcoming many of the shortcomings of a cap

and trade system. Indeed, the most serious cap and trade proposals include features that

make them "feel" like a tax while looking like a cap and trade system.

       A carbon tax is in large measure an energy tax. Because any policy to raise the

price of energy will disproportionately impact poor households, one of the major

concerns that always arises when energy taxes are discussed is equity. This article


                                                                                            1
describes how a carbon tax swap can be designed for the United States that specifically

addresses this distributional concern. Such a tax swap would be distributionally neutral

by using the proceeds in a way that offsets the regressivity of the carbon tax.

       The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a

revenue and distributionally neutral carbon tax proposal in detail. A detailed

distributional analysis of this proposal is presented in section 3. In Section 4 I argue that a

carbon tax is preferable to a cap and trade system in a number of ways. In section 5 I

respond to the main arguments that have been made against a carbon tax. Some

concluding comments are presented in the final section.

2.     A Revenue and Distributionally Neutral Carbon Tax Proposal

       This section describes the key elements of a carbon tax reform that is both

revenue and distributionally neutral. The carbon tax rate would be set, ideally, to

maximize social welfare, taking into account the dynamic nature of the problem as well

as the interaction between the carbon tax and the various distortionary taxes currently in

place. A starting point for thinking about the optimal tax rate is an estimate of the social

marginal damages of GHG emissions denominated in dollars per metric ton of CO2

equivalent (CO2e). Unfortunately, precise estimates of these social marginal damages do

not exist. The IPCC’s Working Group II estimates a mean cost for 2005 of $12 per

metric ton of CO2, but notes that social cost estimates range from $3 to $95 per ton in a

survey of 100 estimates (IPCC 2007b, p. 16). The report goes on to note that these costs

are likely to underestimate the social costs of carbon because of the difficulty in

quantifying many impacts. This report attributes its higher estimate to its explicit

treatment of risk and the newer evidence on which it relies. Despite the uncertainties, the



                                                                                               2
report suggests that the “net damage costs of climate change are likely to be significant

and to increase over time” (p. 16). Stern (2007) estimates the social cost of CO2 at $85

per ton. In contrast, Nordhaus (forthcoming), using his Dynamic Integrated Model of

Climate and the Economy (DICE) model, estimates an optimal tax rate of just over $11

per ton CO2e in 2015 (in year 2005 dollars). Simply put, the literature does not provide a

consensus view on the marginal damages of GHG emissions and the optimal tax rate.

       Another way to set the initial tax rate is to focus on a given stabilization target. A

recent analysis by researchers at MIT suggests that an initial carbon price of $18 per ton

CO2e that rises over time at 4 percent per year (real) is consistent with the U.S. policy

modeled in the recent U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP) exercise to achieve

a CO2 target by 2100 of 550 parts per million (Paltsev et al., 2007). Whether this is a

sufficiently stringent target is open to debate.

       The proposal presented here takes a more modest approach. It suggests setting an

unambiguous price signal through a tax at a modest level initially with a commitment to

increase it over time. The revenue would be used to fund a reduction in the income tax.

A clear price signal would provide the incentive for firms to begin the process of

adjusting their behavior and investment to offset and avoid emissions. Specifically, the

tax proposal contains the following elements:

   •   A tax on GHG emissions at an initial rate of $15 per metric ton of CO2e that

       gradually increases over time.

   •   A refundable tax credit for sequestered emissions and other approved

       sequestration activities.




                                                                                             3
    •   A refundable credit for the embedded CO2 in exported fuels and taxation imposed

        on the embedded CO2 in imported fossil fuels.

    •   An environmental earned income tax credit on personal income taxes equal to the

        employer and employee payroll taxes on initial earnings, up to a limit.



        Carbon stays in the atmosphere for hundreds of years. Enacting a carbon tax now

and gradually increasing it is more cost effective than having to cut emissions drastically

in the future. As new information emerges on the appropriate time path for carbon

prices, Congress can revisit the issue and adjust the tax rate's time path as needed.


2.1. The Carbon Tax

        The first component of the carbon tax reform proposal is the carbon tax itself. 1 I

begin with some discussion of the tax's short-run impact as well as important design

considerations. Emissions of CO2 were slightly more than 6,000 million metric tons in

2005 (Energy Information Administration, 2006). At these emission levels, a charge of

$15 per metric ton of CO2e would raise $90.1 billion in tax revenues, assuming no

behavioral response.2 In response to the tax, we would expect substantial emissions

reductions in the long run and smaller emission declines in the short run. Table 1 shows

the short-run impact of a carbon tax imposed on all GHGs in the United States in 2015

based on modeling using the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT’s) Emissions

Prediction and Policy Analysis (EPPA) model.


1
  A carbon tax can be levied in units of carbon (C) or carbon dioxide (CO2). One can convert a tax rate
denominated in units of carbon dioxide to a rate in units of carbon by multiplying by 44/12. Thus a $15 per
ton CO2 tax is equivalent to a tax rate of $55 per ton C.
2
  This distributional analysis focuses only on CO2 emissions. If a carbon tax includes other greenhouse
gases, revenues before any behavioral response would be $100.8 billion.


                                                                                                         4
          Table 1. Short-Run Emissions Reductions With a Carbon Tax
                                           Reductions      Percentage
          Source              Reference
                                           with Tax        Reduction
          Emissions (mmt CO2e)
          GHGs                  8,201.5        1,151.7          14.0
             CO2 emissions      6,995.2         586.4           8.4
                        *
             Other GHGs         1,206.3         565.3           46.9
          Primary Energy Use (EJ)
          Coal                    25.8           3.8            14.7
          Petroleum
                                  49.6           2.8             5.6
          products
          Natural gas             26.8           0.9             3.4
          Source: Metcalf et al. (2008).
          * - Methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases.
          mmt = million metric tons
          Note: Results are for a $15 per ton CO2e carbon tax in 2015. The tax is in 2005
          dollars



       The EPPA model shows a 14 percent reduction in GHG emissions. CO2 emissions

fall by 8.4 percent, and other GHGs (methane, nitrous oxide, and fluorinated gases) fall

by nearly 50 percent. CO2 emissions account for just over one half of the CO2-equivalent

emissions reductions, while other GHGs account for the remaining half. Although CO2

emissions make up the largest volume of anthropogenic emissions, they are less potent

than other GHGs and relatively more costly to reduce. This speaks to the importance of

including as many of the non-CO2 emissions as possible in any GHG pricing plan. Early

emission reductions are less costly among non-CO2 gases, and their inclusion provides

flexibility that reduces the overall costs of any given reduction in emissions.

       The lower part of Table 1 shows the reduction that would occur in fossil fuels

used for energy. Based on the carbon content of these fuels (as found in Table 6-1 of

Energy Information Administration, 2006), reductions in coal consumption would be

responsible for 59 percent, petroleum for 34 percent, and natural gas for 8 percent of

energy-related CO2 emissions reductions.


                                                                                            5
       Next I analyze this carbon tax reform using consumption data from 2003. I

assume that a carbon tax levied in 2003 would achieve the same percentage reduction in

carbon emissions as is modeled in the short-run EPPA analysis described above. With

this behavioral response, the tax would collect $82.5 billion in revenues. This may be a

conservative estimate of the initial revenue from the tax. An analysis by the EIA, for

example, suggests that a $15 tax on CO2 would reduce emissions by only about 5 percent

in the short run (see Energy Information Administration, 2006). With a smaller reduction

in emissions, the initial carbon tax revenues would be higher.

2.2 Administrative Issues

       Administrative costs are reduced if a carbon tax is levied upstream on fuel

producers rather than downstream on fuel users. The tax could be applied at the mine

mouth for domestic coal, and at the border for imported coal. The United States had

1,415 functioning mines in 2005. The tax would be based on the amount of coal

extracted (i.e., the tax is applied to coal used at the mine). Natural gas could be taxed at

the processor or on import. Most natural gas is treated at one of 530 processors, imported

through one of forty-nine import pipelines, or one of seven LNG ports. Petroleum

products could be taxed on the crude as it enters the refinery or on the various products

produced from crude oil along with refinery process emissions. Again, the administrative

burden is not particularly cumbersome because there are roughly 150 refineries in the

United States. In all cases above, the taxed firms are already reporting data to the IRS and

paying taxes. A carbon tax would likely create less of an administrative burden than

creating an entirely new accounting scheme for carbon allowances.




                                                                                               6
       One might argue that it would be better to levy the tax downstream because the

carbon price would be more visible to end users and thus more likely to figure into

energy consumption and planning decisions. Such an argument ignores a basic principle

of tax incidence analysis: the ultimate burden and behavioral response to a tax does not

depend on where in the production process the tax is levied. This principle could fail if

consumers respond to the visibility of a tax—the sort of behavioral response that has

recently been studied by economists. It is doubtful that this effect could be very large in

the case of a carbon tax for two reasons. First, firms are likely to advertise the embedded

tax in, say, gasoline so that drivers would be aware that part of the cost of the gasoline is

the tax they are paying. Second, key energy consumers—electric utilities and industrial

energy users—are unlikely to be affected by this behavioral phenomenon. They are more

influenced by the final price of energy, whether that price is affected by taxes or other

factors. Offsetting any apparent advantage of downstream visibility is the greater

administrative burden of levying the tax on many more firms and individuals. A report

by Cambridge Energy Research Associates (2006) estimates that millions of point

sources would fall under an inclusive downstream carbon pricing system.

       Non-energy carbon emissions come from a variety of sources, predominantly

iron, steel, and cement production. These CO2 emissions, along with many other GHGs,

could be taxed either at the point of production or at the point of consumption. Metcalf

and Weisbach (2008) estimate that roughly 90 percent of U.S. GHGs could be brought

into the tax base at relatively low cost.

       With the carbon tax applied at upstream points, it is important to provide tax

credits for carbon capture and storage (CCS) at downstream levels and for fossil fuels



                                                                                                7
used as feedstocks in manufacturing activities where the carbon is permanently stored.

CCS refers to technologies that remove carbon from the exhaust streams of fossil fuel

burning plants and store it underground – either locally or after transportation to a storage

site – for many centuries. Electric utilities that burn coal in an advanced boiler with CCS,

for example, would be allowed a tax credit equal to the tax paid on the carbon that is

sequestered. Since firms that engage in sequestration activities (e.g. coal-fired electric

power plants) may not be the firms subject to the carbon tax (e.g. coal mines), allowing

the permits to be traded would ensure that the credits for sequestration would have full

value. Thus coal companies with carbon tax liability could purchase carbon tax credits

from downstream firms that earn the credits for sequestering CO2.3 Credits for certain

land-use activities, including forestry sequestration, could also be considered for credit

eligibility. This would be a way of allowing sectors not covered by the carbon tax to opt

in to the system and receive payments for approved carbon reducing activities.


2.3. An Offsetting Income Tax Cut

         The carbon tax will raise the price of carbon-intensive products. In order to

address any regressivity in the carbon tax, the reform proposed here uses the tax revenue

to provide an offsetting cut in the income tax tied to payroll taxes. Specifically, an

environmental earned income tax credit is allowed that is equal to the employer and

employee portion of the payroll taxes paid by the worker in the current year, up to a cap.

The cap serves two purposes. First, it contributes to the progressivity of the rebate by

putting a limit on the rebate for higher income workers. Second, it ensures revenue

3
  Alternatively, firms with carbon tax credits could receive a refund from the IRS directly, thereby
obviating the need for tradability. This would be similar to the treatment of zero-rated firms who receive a
credit for a Value Added Tax (VAT) paid at earlier stages of production but pay no gross VAT on their
value added.


                                                                                                           8
neutrality by putting a limit on the aggregate rebate to workers. The credit would be

designed to ensure that households with very low income tax liability would still be able

to receive the credit. In this regard, the environmental earned income tax credit would

operate like the current earned income tax credit.

       An alternative mechanism for providing the offsetting income tax credit would be

to directly rebate payroll taxes and credit the Social Security Trust Fund with the carbon

tax revenue. While this approach would have an equivalent impact, two problems make

the environmental earned income tax credit approach preferable. First, public sensitivity

with "tampering" with Social Security may make this approach politically difficult.

Second, the IRS has considerable experience in providing tax credits through the income

tax, something the Social Security Administration is not well equipped to deal with in the

payroll tax.

       Setting the cap depends on the amount of carbon tax revenue collected and the

number of workers and hours worked. A higher cap will be more costly and could lead to

the rebate exceeding the carbon tax revenue. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure

Survey for 2003 and applying the carbon tax to energy related CO2, I calculate that the

revenue-neutral cap on rebated taxes for that year would be $560 per worker.

Broadening the coverage of the carbon tax to include other GHGs would increase

revenue by roughly 13 percent and raise the cap to approximately $630. Capping the

rebate contributes to the progressivity of the tax cut. The payroll tax cut is greatest for

low-wage workers. Nearly three-quarters of the payroll taxes for a worker earning $5,000

a year would be offset by the credit (see Table 2). In contrast, at maximum covered




                                                                                              9
earnings ($90,000 in 2005), workers would receive a tax credit equal to 4 percent of the

payroll tax.

        This distributionally neutral reform has some modest offsetting efficiency benefits

since the rebate is tied to labor supply. While the rebate is unlikely to appreciably affect

labor supply of current workers, it may contribute to greater labor force participation

among lower-income workers.4 To be clear, however, the reform has been designed to

emphasize distributional neutrality rather than to maximize efficiency gains.

            Table 2 Relation of the Environmental Tax Credit to Payroll Taxes
                                       Payroll tax
            Wages ($) Before credit ($)        After credit ($) Reduction (%)
                 5,000                   765                 205            73
                10,000                 1,530                 970            37
                15,000                 2,295              1,735             24
                20,000                 3,060              2,500             18
                30,000                 4,590              4,030             12
                50,000                 7,650              7,090               7
                90,000                13,770             13,210               4
            Source: Author’s calculation.
            Note: Credit of $560 per covered worker assumed. This assumes payroll tax rules
            as of 2005.



2.4 Additional Components of a Comprehensive Carbon Policy

        While I note arguments for a carbon tax that is revenue and distributionally

neutral, a comprehensive carbon policy would include three other policies that are modest

in cost (or reduce federal spending) and would not jeopardize the overall framework of

revenue and distributional neutrality. These policies would complement the carbon tax

and contribute to reductions in carbon emissions while potentially improving energy

security in the United States. First, increased spending on energy-related research and

4
  For example, Meyer and Rosenbaum (2001) find that changes to the earned income tax credit had
substantial effects on the labor force participation of single mothers.


                                                                                                  10
development (R&D) would be valuable both in the area of renewable fuels as well as in

CCS. To the extent that R&D is a pure public good, a role for government exists to

increase the amount of R&D carried out. While the technologies for CCS are basically

well understood, it is not clear how the United States will develop CCS on the scale

required given projected coal consumption over the next 30 years.5

        Second, the United States provides substantial energy production subsidies that

contribute to a continuing reliance on fossil fuels. These subsidies are often justified on

the basis of encouraging energy independence in the United States since they replace

imported fuels with domestic fuels. However, as argued in Metcalf (2007), energy

security is enhanced by reducing our consumption of petroleum products overall rather

than by simply reducing the share of imports. Many of these subsidies work against

achieving that goal.


        Third, enhanced support for energy efficiency investments contributes to a

reduction in energy consumption and carbon emissions. Increasing energy prices through

a carbon tax will surely contribute to increased efficiency investments, but two factors

suggest additional benefits from more generous tax credits for efficiency investments.

First, certain sectors of the economy may not respond to energy price increases arising

from a carbon policy. Commercial real estate and rental housing are sectors where the

economic agent who makes efficiency investments (developer or homeowner) is not

necessarily the person who benefits from the energy savings (tenant). Second, the hidden

nature of many efficiency improvements makes it difficult to recapture the energy

savings through their capitalization into building prices or rents. In addition, empirical

5
  EIA’s Annual Energy Outlook projects a 47 percent increase in coal consumption between 2005 and 2030
in its reference scenario (see Energy Information Administration, 2007).


                                                                                                   11
work suggests that efficiency investment tax credits have a substantial impact on

efficiency investments (see Hassett and Metcalf, 1995).


3.       Distributional Analysis of the Carbon Tax Proposal

        This section describes the distributional impacts of the proposed carbon tax swap.

I present results from an analysis using the 2003 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CES).

The CES provides very detailed expenditure data at the household level that allows me to

track spending on energy and other commodities whose prices may be increased by a

carbon tax. I begin with an analysis of the price impacts of the tax.

3.1 Price Impacts

        Assuming that the tax is fully passed forward into higher consumer prices, the

direct impact of a $15 per ton CO2 tax would be to raise the price of gasoline by 13¢ a

gallon and the price of natural gas by 54¢ per thousand cubic feet. This would raise the

price of gasoline by just under 7 percent, based on the price of gasoline in 2003, and the

price of natural gas for industrial users by 9 percent.6 Based on data from EPA's

Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database, the carbon tax would raise the

price of coal fired electricity by 1.78¢ per kilowatt hour, an increase of 24 percent, based

on the average retail price of electricity in 2003.

        These price increases are the direct impacts of the carbon tax on fuels. However,

because fossil fuels are used as intermediate inputs in the production of other goods

(including energy products such as gasoline and electricity), the consumer impacts will

differ from the carbon tax based on the embedded carbon in gasoline and other energy

6
 Prices of gasoline and natural gas from Energy Information Administration website (www.eia.gov)
accessed April 2, 2008.


                                                                                                   12
sources. Table 3 provides estimates of price increases for selected commodities if a

carbon tax of $15 per ton of CO2were implemented in 2003 based on the methodology of

Metcalf (1999). This methodology uses U.S. input-output tables to trace through the use

of fossil fuels in the production of other goods and services in the U.S. economy. The

overall price impact of a carbon tax is to raise the price of gasoline by nearly 9 percent

once it is taken into account that fossil fuels are used, among other things, to process

petroleum into gasoline and transport it to service stations.

                   Table 3. Consumer Price Impacts of a Carbon Tax
                   Commodity                     Price increase (%)
                   Electricity and natural
                                                        14.1
                   gas
                   Home heating                         10.9
                   Gasoline                              8.8
                   Air travel                            2.2
                   Other commodities                 0.3 to 1.0
                   Source: Author’s calculations using the input/output
                   accounts and the Consumer Expenditure Survey.
                   Note: A 2003 tax of $15 per metric ton of CO2 (year
                   2005 dollars) is assumed to be passed fully forward
                   to consumers.


       Except for energy products, the carbon tax appears to have only modest impacts

on consumer prices. These budget impacts for the carbon tax assume no consumer

behavioral response. Consumer substitution away from more carbon-intensive products

will contribute to an erosion of the carbon tax base. The burden for consumers, however,

will not be reduced as much as tax collections will fall. Firms incur costs to shift away

from carbon-intensive inputs, costs that will be passed forward to consumers. Consumers

will also engage in welfare-reducing activities as they shift their consumption activities to

avoid paying the full carbon tax. Although the burden impacts reported here do not take




                                                                                             13
account of the range of economic responses to the tax, the impacts provide a reasonable

first approximation of the welfare impacts of a carbon tax.

       In addition to any consumer substitution effects, a worldwide carbon pricing

policy will reduce the demand for energy and shift some of the burden of the U.S. carbon

tax onto owners of fossil fuel resources. My assumption of complete forward shifting

likely biases my results toward less progressivity than would occur with some backward

shifting. In the short run, the price reductions received by producers of oil, natural gas,

and coal would be less than 4 percent based on the analysis in Metcalf et al. (2008).

3.2 Impacts on Household Income

       As described above, the proposed carbon tax uses the revenue from the carbon tax

to reduce the payroll tax by providing a rebate to workers in each household that is equal

to their first $560 in payroll taxes (including the employer portion of the tax). This is

equivalent to exempting from payroll taxation the first $3,660 of wages per covered

worker in 2003.

       Table 4 details the distributional impact of this carbon tax swap on households

based on annual household income.

                  Table 4. Distributional Impacts of the Carbon Tax Swap
                  Change in disposable income ($)        Change as a percentage of
                                                         income
Income group                      Tax                    Carbon
                  Carbon tax                  Net                  Tax credit Net
(decile)                          credit                 tax
1 (lowest)            −276           208        −68        −3.4       2.7          −0.7
2                     −404           284       −120        −3.1       2.1          −1.0
3                     −485           428        −57        −2.4       2.2          −0.2
4                     −551           557          6        −2.0       2.1           0.1
5                     −642           668         26        −1.8       1.9           0.1
6                     −691           805        115        −1.5       1.8           0.3
7                     −781           915        135        −1.4       1.6           0.2


                                                                                              14
8                      −883          982          99      −1.2         1.4          0.2
9                      −965         1,035         70      −1.1         1.1          0.0
10 (highest)          −1,224        1,093       −130      −0.8         0.8         -0.0
Source: Author’s calculations.
Note: The lowest decile includes households in the 5th to 10th percentiles. Mean tax
changes within each decile are reported. The columns titled “Carbon tax” report the
change in income ($ or %) following price changes arising from carbon tax. The columns
titled “Tax credit" report changes in disposable income arising from the new tax credit.


        Using an annual income measure to group households, the carbon tax in isolation

is regressive. The bottom half of the population faces losses in after-tax income ranging

from 1.8 to 3.4 percent of its income, whereas the top half of the population faces losses

between 0.8 and 1.5 percent of its income. Providing a credit of up to the first $560 of

employer and employee payroll taxes largely offsets this regressivity. The average credit

as a fraction of income falls with income, with the lowest income group receiving a credit

worth 2.7 percent of income and the highest income group receiving a credit worth 0.8

percent of income. The final column in Table 4 shows that the lowest 20 percent of the

population faces modest net reductions in after-tax income of between 0.7 and 1 percent

of its income. Otherwise, the tax reform is essentially distributionally neutral.7

        In Table 5, I modify the rebate component of the carbon tax to show how the

distribution of carbon taxes net of the tax credit can be altered through policy design. The

first two columns repeat net distributional information from Table 4. The next two

columns extend the rebate to include recipients of Social Security. Social Security

recipients receive a lump sum rebate equal to the maximum credit for workers. This

could be done by increasing monthly Social Security checks by the amount of the rebate


7
  Note that ranking households using an annual income measure biases energy-related taxes to appear more
regressive than they would be if households were ranked using a measure of lifetime income. See Hassett,
Mathur, and Metcalf (2007) for more discussion of this point.


                                                                                                     15
divided by twelve. Unlike the income tax-based approach, this would require an explicit

bookkeeping adjustment to reflect a transfer of funds from the general fund to the Social

Security Trust Fund to prevent the rebate affecting balances in this latter fund.

       Broadening the recipient pool lowers the maximum credit or rebate to $420. The

effect is to increase the progressivity of the reform. A carbon tax combined with an

earned income tax credit is essentially distributionally neutral. In the last two columns, I

replace the environmental tax credit with a per capita lump sum rebate of $274. This

increases the progressivity of the reform even further. Note though that the costs of

administering a carbon tax with a lump sum rebate will be higher given the need to track

people in households not currently in the federal tax system.

                 Table 5. Modifying the Rebate in the Carbon Tax Swap
                                              Earned income and
                          Earned income                               Lump sum
                                                Social Security
Income group
                       Net ($)     Net (%) Net ($) Net (%)               Net ($) Net (%)
(decile)
1 (lowest)                −68        −0.7        112           1.4         166       2.1
2                         −120       −1.0        125           1.0         128       1.0
3                         −57        −0.2        114           0.6         120       0.6
4                           6         0.1         70           0.3         103       0.4
5                          26         0.1         54           0.1         108       0.3
6                          115        0.3         66           0.1          26       0.1
7                          135        0.2         35           0.1         −32      −0.1
8                          99         0.2        −61          −0.1         −52      −0.1
9                          70         0.0        −95          −0.1        −171      −0.2
10 (highest)              −130        -0.0      −332          −0.2        −355      −0.2
Source: Author’s calculations.
Note: This table reports the change in disposable income resulting from different
proposals for rebating the carbon tax. See text for descriptions of rebate proposals. The
lowest decile includes households in the 5th to 10th percentiles. Mean net tax changes
within each decile are reported. Positive numbers indicate an increase in disposable
income and negative numbers indicate a decrease. Net (%) indicates the change as a
share of income.




                                                                                           16
       Table 5 illustrates the trade-off between distributional and efficiency concerns.

As noted above, the rebate was tied to earned income to provide a modest incentive to

labor supply. Providing a lump-sum rebate of the tax revenue to households would

increase the progressivity of the reform but at the cost of losing the labor supply

incentive.

       The environmental tax reform illustrated in Table 5 emphasizes an essential point:

while a carbon tax itself may be regressive, a carbon tax policy can be designed to be

distributionally neutral. The use of the carbon tax revenue to offset payroll taxes makes

this distributional neutrality possible. If the revenue were not rebated or if a cap-and-trade

system were implemented with freely allocated permits such that the market permit price

equaled $15 per ton of CO2, the reform would raise prices (as illustrated in the second

column of Table 5) but would not provide the offsetting reduction in the payroll tax to

achieve distributional neutrality.

3.3 Geographic Impacts

       Finally, in Table 6, I show the distribution of the net tax across geographic

regions under the three policy scenarios. The largest average difference across regions in

household net disposable income is $100 when the carbon tax is rebated on the basis of

earned income. Similar findings hold for the other policy scenarios. A carbon tax does

not appear to disproportionately burden one region of the country.




                                                                                            17
                               Table 6. Regional Distribution
                                               Earned income and
                         Earned income                               Lump sum
                                               Social Security
Region                   Net ($) Net (%)       Net ($) Net (%) Net ($) Net (%)
New England                 17         0.0        −36         0.2       −65        -0.1
Middle Atlantic             −9         −0.2       −13         0.2       −18        -0.2
East North Central          30         −0.2       −14         0.1       −37        -0.1
West North Central          30         0.1        52          0.5       −26        -0.2
South Atlantic              24         −0.1       17          0.3        2         0.3
East South Central         −75         −0.5       −6          0.3       −75        -0.2
West South Central         −12         0.0        −42         0.2        9         0.4
Mountain                    17         0.1        46          0.5       34         0.4
Pacific                      5         0.0        −4          0.2       59         0.6
Source: Author’s calculations. Mean net changes in disposable income within each age
group are reported. Positive (negative) numbers indicate an increase (decrease) in
disposable income. Net (%) indicates the change as a share of income. The regions are
defined as follows:
New England: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
Vermont
Middle Atlantic: New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania
East North Central: Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin
West North Central: Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, South
Dakota
South Atlantic: Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, West
Virginia
East South Central: Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee
West South Central: Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, Texas
Mountain: Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming
Pacific: Alaska, California, Hawaii, Oregon, Washington




3.4 Applications to a Cap and Trade System

       The distributional results shown in Tables 4 through 6 apply equally to a cap and

trade system in which the permits are fully auctioned and the revenue used to finance the

environmental earned income tax credit. However, the distributional implications of a

cap and trade system in which permits are given to the energy sector through




                                                                                        18
grandfathering are strikingly different.8 Theory and experience with freely allocated

permits in the first phase of the EU-ETS suggest that the value of permits given to the

energy sector is capitalized into the equity prices of these firms. To model the

distribution of a cap and trade system with freely allocated permits requires knowing the

distribution of shareholdings of energy stocks in the U.S. The CES contains a limited set

of information on wealth holdings that can be used to distribute the value of permits

across households. I allocate the value of permits on the basis of these wealth holdings.

This approach is accurate to the degree that energy shares and wealth are distributed

similarly. The results, shown in Table 7, indicate that this approach is decidedly

regressive, with disposable income falling most (in percentage terms) for the lowest

income groups and rising only for the top two income deciles.

Table 7. Distributional Impacts of a Cap and Trade System with Grandfathered Permits
                                                       Change in disposable income as a
                Change in disposable income ($)
                                                             percentage of income
   Income                      Value of                            Value of
                                                       Carbon
    group      Carbon tax grandfathered       Net               grandfathered       Net
                                                         tax
   (decile)                     permits                            permits
1 (lowest)          −276               130    −145      −3.4          1.6           −1.8
2                   −404               321      −83     −3.1          2.4           −0.6
3                   −485               371    −115      −2.4          1.8           −0.6
4                   −551               435    −116      −2.0          1.6           −0.4
5                   −642               454    −191      −1.8          1.3           −0.5
6                   −691               473    −215      −1.5          1.1           −0.5
7                   −781               647    −134      −1.4          1.1           −0.2
8                   −883               752    −131      −1.2          1.0           −0.2
9                   −965             1,087      121     −1.1          1.2            0.1
10 (highest)       −1,224            2,191      967     −0.8          1.3            0.5
Source: Author’s calculations. The lowest decile includes households in the 5th to 10th
percentiles. Mean changes in disposable income within each decile are reported.




8
 Grandfathering means that permits are freely allocated to large energy users on the basis of historic
emissions.


                                                                                                         19
3.5 Efficiency Implications

        While this section focuses on the distributional implications of a revenue-neutral

carbon tax reform, a few comments on efficiency are in order. First, there is no question

that carbon pricing—whether through a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system—has

efficiency costs. Carbon pricing is a tax on inputs used in the production process and

hence gives rise to distortions.9 Carbon pricing, however, is likely to be less costly from

an efficiency point of view than an increase in gasoline taxes because the tax is more

broadly focused and does not single out particular fossil fuels.10 More to the point, the

appropriate tax depends on what you want to achieve. A carbon tax more directly

addresses a carbon emissions externality than taxing a proxy for carbon (e.g. gasoline).

Second, the efficiency costs of carbon pricing are not that large. Metcalf et al. (2008)

find welfare losses for a carbon tax similar in size to the one considered in this analysis to

be less than 0.5 percent per year. Third, one can reduce the efficiency losses by using

carbon revenue to lower other distortionary taxes.11 Estimates of the marginal excess

burden of taxes on income range from 0.2 to 0.4, depending on a number of factors,

including whether capital or labor income taxes are changed (Ballard, Shoven, and

Whalley, 1985). At the upper end of this range, a carbon tax raising $82 billion could

achieve an efficiency gain of more than $30 billion when used to lower income tax rates,

relative to a lump-sum distribution.



9
   The trade-off in benefits and costs of environmental taxes in the presence of other tax distortions has
been extensively discussed in the double-dividend literature. See Goulder (1995) and Fullerton and Metcalf
(1998) for a review of this literature.
10
   On the other hand, taxing gasoline reduces congestion, accidents, and local pollution. Parry and Small
(2005) note that the optimal tax on gasoline is well above current levels of taxation in the United States.
11
   Metcalf (2007), for example, examines the impact of a carbon tax used to finance corporate tax
integration.


                                                                                                        20
4.       Advantages of a Carbon Tax

         In the past several years, momentum has developed for a national cap and trade

program in the United States and several proposals have been put forward (see Paltsev et

al., 2007). While cap and trade has considerable support in the policy community, a

carbon tax remains as a viable policy option. The recent discussion in the Senate of the

Lieberman-Warner cap and trade bill illustrates policymakers’ concerns about the trading

prices for emissions permits.12

         The carbon tax proposal here has several important advantages over cap and

trade. First, the tax by its very nature makes explicit the price that Congress will impose

on carbon emissions. As noted above, the large uncertainties about the optimal amount

of emissions make any policy at this point simply the first step in a U.S. policy

contribution to international reductions in GHG emissions. However, setting a clear price

on emissions provides the impetus for emitters to begin to reduce emissions through

process changes and investment. Second, a commitment to a revenue and distributionally

neutral carbon tax could create political discipline that limits the scope of discussion and

focuses the policy debate. President Ronald Reagan placed similar constraints on the tax

reform debate that contributed to the successful enactment of the Tax Reform Act of

1986. Finally, administrative concerns suggest a carbon tax can be put in place more

rapidly than a cap and trade system. I discuss in greater detail below these and other

advantages of a carbon tax over a cap and trade system.



12
   The Lieberman-Warner Climate Security Act (S. 2191) implements a cap and trade system on fossil fuel
related gases primarily at the upstream level (with the major exception of coal where it is implemented on
large coal using facilities). Hydrofluorocarbons are covered under a separate cap. Initially a little over
one-fifth of the permits would be auctioned with this share rising to just over seventy percent by 2031. See
Appendix D to Paltsev et al. (2007) for a detailed analysis of this bill.


                                                                                                         21
4.1. Revenue

       A cap and trade system is built around the instrument of tradable permits. Permits

are valuable assets. They can be auctioned by the government, thus raising revenue. But

historically they have been given away to industry as part of a process of obtaining

support for the system. To be fair, prior domestic cap and trade programs were an order

of magnitude smaller than any potential carbon cap and trade program. Thus, given the

revenues involved, auctioning permits in those programs was simply not that important.

       The stakes are higher with a carbon cap and trade bill and the need for fiscal

discipline that much greater. The debate last year over the Boxer Amendment to the

Lieberman-Warner Bill is instructive. The bill set very specific uses for the freely

allocated permits as well as for spending from auctioning. In effect the bill implemented

a large-scale set of revenue and spending programs that circumvented the normal

committee process.

       The Congressional Budget Office recognized these indirect revenue implications

of cap and trade bills with its decision in late 2007 to begin counting freely allocated

permits as revenue and offsetting spending (see the CBO cost estimate of S. 2191

released on April 10, 2008). One could push this point further and argue that any new

major revenue source – such as arises from a tradable permit system whether the permits

are auctioned or freely allocated – should go through the usual Congressional budget

process. This ensures that Congress weighs the best use of funds from the initiative

against all the pressing budget needs. This is precisely the process that would occur with

a carbon tax.




                                                                                           22
       This is not to suggest that proponents of carbon pricing couldn't propose fiscal

constraints on the use of carbon revenue. On the contrary, the constraint to be revenue

and distributionally neutral could be imposed and might provide appropriate fiscal

discipline that would contribute to support for the passage of a cap and trade bill. Note

though that the incentives for this sort of discipline may be stronger for a tax than a cap

and trade bill. Any tax bill, including a carbon tax, would emerge from the House

Committee on Ways and Means, which initiates all tax legislation in the House, and the

Senate Finance Committee, which controls tax legislation in the upper chamber.

Members of these committees can more easily impose the revenue and distributional

neutrality constraint than can members of the House Committee on Energy and

Commerce or the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, which are

responsible for cap and trade legislation. These committees have a narrower fiscal focus

and the natural incentive for committee members is to spend revenues on programs under

their purview.


4.2. Administration

       We have a time-tested administrative structure for collecting taxes that can ramp

up a carbon tax in relatively short order. Firms that would be subject to a carbon tax are

already registered with the IRS and have whole departments within their firms that carry

out the record keeping and reporting for tax payments. Coal producers already pay an

excise tax to fund the Black Lung Trust Fund and oil producers pay a tax to fund the Oil

Spill Trust Fund (see Metcalf (2007) for a description of these funds). We also have

precedents for refundable credits for sequestration activities in federal fuels tax credits. In

contrast, we have no administrative structure for running an upstream carbon cap-and-



                                                                                              23
trade program. A report by the Congressional Budget Office (2008) details the lead-time

required to establish allocations. All this suggests that we can implement carbon pricing

through a tax more quickly than through a cap and trade system.


4.3. Efficiency in the Face of Uncertainty

       GHG emissions are an example of what economists call a negative externality: an

activity taken by an individual or firm with social costs that exceed the private cost. In

general, competitive markets will not lead to the socially optimal level of emissions in the

absence of government intervention. In the absence of any controls on emissions, firms

will release GHGs to the point where the marginal cost of emissions equals marginal

abatement costs.

       With full information about the costs and benefits of GHG emissions, the carbon

tax and the cap-and-trade system are both efficient and lead to the same outcome.

However, with uncertainty over the marginal abatement costs of emissions, the two

policy instruments are no longer equivalent. In a pioneering paper, Weitzman (1974)

describes conditions under which a tax provides higher or lower expected social benefits

than a cap-and-trade system in a world with uncertainty. His analysis demonstrates the

importance of the relative slopes of marginal damages and abatement costs in choosing

the optimal instrument.

       Marginal abatement costs are a function of the flow of emissions, whereas

marginal damages are a function of the stock of gases in the atmosphere. Several

economists have modified Weitzman’s model to allow for the stock nature of GHGs (see,

for example, Hoel and Karp, 2002), Newell and Pizer, 2003), and Karp and Zhang,

2005). While this makes the analysis more complicated and involves more than simply


                                                                                             24
the relative slopes of the marginal abatement and damage curves, the analyses

consistently find that taxes outperform cap-and-trade systems on efficiency grounds for a

broad range of parameter values consistent with scientific understanding of the global

warming problem. A tax is especially efficient relative to a cap that provides no

protections against unexpectedly high permit prices. Adding safety valves and price

floors or banking and borrowing reduces the tax advantage. But this simply reflects the

fact that such modifications make the cap and trade system act increasingly like a tax.

       These analyses of price versus quantity instruments assume no other market

distortions. In reality, the decision to choose a carbon pricing instrument takes place in

an economic environment with pre-existing tax and regulatory distortions. Quirion

(2004) adds distortions to the Weitzman analysis and finds that the presence of pre-

existing distortionary taxes enlarges the set of parameters under which a tax dominates a

permit system in expected value. Quirion also adds a political economy dimension by

allowing for industry opposition that must be overcome for carbon pricing to be enacted.

He finds that the expected transfer required to overcome industry opposition is smaller

with a tax-based approach than with a permit-based approach.

4.4. Price Volatility

       The previous discussion suggests a further point. Carbon taxes ensure a given

price for carbon emissions while permit prices in a cap-and-trade system are uncertain.

The price volatility of cap-and-trade systems has been well documented. The EU ETS

illustrated this dramatically in April 2006 when futures prices for CO2 permits fell

sharply following the release of information indicating that the ETS Phase I permit

allocations were overly generous. The December 2008 futures price fell from a peak of



                                                                                             25
€32.25 on April 19 to €22.15 on April 26, and to €17.80 on May 12. Prices rebounded

briefly but drifted downward for much of the rest of the year.

       Volatility in the Phase I permit prices themselves (December 2007 contracts) was

even higher. These permit prices fell from €31.50 on April 19 to €11.95 on May 3, before

rebounding briefly. In late September 2006, the December 2007 contract prices again fell

sharply and proceeded to fall to their recent price of €0.07 on September 17, 2007.

Permit prices fell and remained at low levels because of the over-allocation of permits in

Phase I along with the inability to bank permits across the two control periods.

       Price volatility has been an issue for other cap and trade systems. Permit prices

for the California Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) rose abruptly from

under $5,000 per ton of NOx to nearly $45,000 per ton in the summer of 2000. Ellerman,

Joskow, and Harrison (2003) explain that the price spike arose because of sudden

demands for electricity combined with an inability to import power from out of state.

Permit prices in EPA's Acid Rain Program spiked to nearly $1,600 per ton SO2 in late

2005 from a price of roughly $900 at the beginning of the year. And NOx prices in the

Northeast states' Ozone Transport Commission spiked to nearly $8,000 per ton in early

1999 before falling back to more typical levels between $1,000 and $2,000 per ton.

       Concern over permit price volatility led the drafters of the Lieberman-Warner

Climate Security Act of 2008 to propose a Carbon Market Efficiency Board to be

modeled on the Federal Reserve System. This board would be able to relax firms’

borrowing limits against future permits, extend the repayment period for borrowed

permits, and lower the interest rate on borrowed permits in periods of high permit prices.

However, such a system has the potential to increase political uncertainty and undermine


                                                                                           26
the credibility of our commitment to a given level of GHG emissions. Moreover, the

board may not be able to alleviate price volatility. Efforts to reduce price volatility by

allowing short-term borrowing could be hampered by private banking of permits to offset

longer-term anticipated increases in permit prices.13 The ability of borrowing to dampen

short-run price volatility depends importantly on expectations about long-run permit

prices. If a cap is truly binding over a control period (say from 2012 to 2050), borrowing

is unlikely to be effective at reducing price volatility. Any provision for borrowing, it

must be emphasized, is entirely unnecessary under a carbon tax.

           Another approach to limiting price volatility is to include a “safety-valve”

provision. This allows firms to purchase an unlimited number of permits at a set price

and thus sets a ceiling on the price of permits. If the market price for permits is below the

safety valve price, then firms will simply purchase permits in the open market. Once

permit prices reach the value of the safety valve, firms will purchase any needed permits

directly from the government. A cap and trade system with a binding safety valve in

effect becomes a carbon tax while maintaining the complexity and other disadvantages of

the cap and trade system.

           Burtraw and Palmer (2006) note that a safety valve lowers the expected permit

price and can discourage investment in new technologies to reduce emissions. They

recommend combining a safety valve with a price floor to maintain the same expected

permit price as would occur in the absence of a safety valve. Low permit prices are a

significant problem for induced innovation because predictability about the returns to

investments in innovative technologies to reduce carbon emissions is an essential


13
     This is a larger issue that exists with any borrowing scheme.


                                                                                             27
condition for stimulating that investment. If permit prices fall – as they have done in the

EU and as it appears they will in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI)

program (see Daley, 2008) – we will not see the investment that is needed to move away

from a carbon-based economy. Other flexible cap systems (banking and borrowing or

modifications of the cap based on current price) are critiqued in Congressional Budget

Office (2008). This report finds that an emissions tax "would be the most efficient

incentive-based option for reducing emissions and could be relatively easy to implement"

(p. viii).


5. A Response to Criticisms of a Carbon Tax

         This section responds to a number of arguments that have been made against

using carbon taxes as an instrument for carbon pricing in the United States. I do not

consider objections that have been raised to carbon pricing in general. For a discussion

of those issues, see Metcalf (2007).

5.1.     Tax Base Stability

                One concern with a carbon tax is that it may not provide a consistent and

steady stream of revenue. This is of particular concern if the revenues are earmarked for

tax reductions. If the carbon tax is effective, so the argument goes, carbon emissions will

fall, as will carbon tax revenues. This is a legitimate concern, but it may not be a

significant issue if the tax rate is increased over time to achieve meaningful reductions in

GHGs and stabilize carbon emissions. An analysis of carbon taxes in the U.S. by Metcalf

et al. (2008) is instructive. One of the scenarios it considers is a tax that begins at $15 per

ton CO2e rising at an annual rate of 4 percent after inflation until 2050, at which point the

tax rate will have risen to just under $60 per ton (in 2005 dollars). Figure 1 shows how


                                                                                             28
carbon tax revenues as a share of GDP evolve under this scenario using the EPPA model,

with revenue rising over time from about 0.66 percent of GDP in 2015 to 1.1 percent by

2050.


               FIGURE 1 Expected Carbon Tax Revenue as a Percentage of GDP, 2015–2050

                           Carbon Tax Revenue As a Percentage of GDP

               1.20%


               1.00%


               0.80%
  Percentage




               0.60%


               0.40%


               0.20%


               0.00%
                    2015     2020      2025       2030          2035   2040     2045       2050
                                                         Year


Source: Metcalf et al. (2008).


                 These results are dependent on the assumptions built into the EPPA model and

must be viewed with the same caution as any economic model providing scenarios about

the future. The results, however, suggest that a steadily rising tax rate can offset the

reduction in carbon emissions to provide a stable revenue source for the next several

decades.

5.2.             No Binding Cap on Emissions




                                                                                                  29
       A common criticism of carbon taxes is that they do not provide any binding cap

on emissions. The problem with this argument is that no policy is immutable. Even if

Congress were to enact a cap and trade bill with hard caps, nothing prevents a future

Congress from altering the law. If abatement costs turn out to be unexpectedly high, the

resulting high permit prices will create political pressure for Congress to relax the

quantity constraint. In effect Congress serves as the ultimate safety valve and it is not

clear that this body would allow permit prices in a rigid system to rise to very high levels.

In short, a hard cap and trade system only provides the illusion of certainty over

emissions.

5.3    Tipping Points

       Tipping points provide an important qualification to the efficiency argument for

taxes that was discussed above. Tipping points are discontinuities in marginal damages

that may arise if critical concentrations of GHGs lead to temperature increases that are

sufficiently high to cause large-scale and abrupt climate change. The existence of a

tipping point, it is argued, favors cap and trade type programs to ensure that we avoid

crossing such a threshold.

       The problem with this argument is that we do not know where the tipping point is

or whether we are close to it. Setting a fixed cap at an inappropriately low level could

lead to unnecessarily large welfare losses. Until our knowledge about climate processes

and threshold effects improves we are likely better off setting a gradually increasing price

on GHG emissions and providing clear market signals to firms to reduce emissions.

5.4.   Efficiency and Political Expediency




                                                                                            30
        A political realist might argue that it is inevitable that concessions will have to be

made to the energy industry as part of a grand deal on U.S. carbon policy. Proponents of

a cap-and-trade system argue that concessions in a cap and trade system will not bring

about an efficiency loss whereas concessions in a carbon tax regime would be

distortionary. Concessions in a cap and trade system would be given in the form of a free

distribution of permits, which is a lump-sum transfer. The argument goes that with a

carbon tax, the only way to make concessions is to exempt entire sectors or segments of

sectors. This clearly would be distortionary. But nothing precludes a carbon tax from

providing lump-sum transfers similar in impact to lump-sum distributions of free permits.

A carbon tax, for example, could levy the tax on emissions above some threshold. The

similarity between lump-sum distributions made under cap and trade systems and those

made under tax systems has been pointed out by Pezzey (1992) among others.

5.5     Interactions with International Systems

        A final argument against a U.S. carbon tax is that it is incompatible with efforts to

bring the developing world into an international agreement. The argument is that we will

need to use monetary transfers and technology transfer programs such as the Clean

Development Mechanism (CDM) to engage the large developing countries in setting

limits on GHG emissions, and that such mechanisms are only compatible with cap and

trade programs, where they can be used as offsets to domestic caps.14 However, nothing

about a carbon tax precludes the use of CDM-type projects as offsets. If the United

States so desires it could allow certain offsets like CDM projects to be taken as credits


14
   The Clean Development Mechanism was developed under the Kyoto Protocol as a way to allow GHG
reducing projects in developing countries that are not subject to emissions limits to count towards the
targets for countries that are subject to such limits. See Lecocq and Ambrosi (2007) for a history and
analysis of CDMs.


                                                                                                      31
against the carbon tax. To reduce the administrative burden for firms, the offsets could

be made tradable, in which case brokers would likely emerge to serve as a clearing house

for firms with carbon tax liability to purchase offsets.

        On a related matter, nothing precludes the United States from employing a carbon

tax while other countries rely on cap and trade systems. In the end what matters is that

the international community coordinate on harmonizing carbon prices. Some countries

may choose to do this through a carbon tax while others through cap and trade systems.

So long as the prices are broadly in line across countries, concerns about leakage (i.e.

movements of economic activity from high carbon price to low or no carbon price

countries) should be minimized.15

6.      Conclusion

        Global warming is one of the greatest challenges facing our world today. The

challenge arises in part from the international dimension of the problem and the inability

of individual countries to solve the problem unilaterally. In addition, the costs and

benefits of addressing global warming accrue to different groups. The Stern Review’s

Executive Summary notes this clearly: “Climate change presents a unique challenge for

economics: it is the greatest and widest-ranging market failure ever seen. The economic

analysis must therefore be global, deal with long time horizons, have the economics of

risk and uncertainty at centre stage, and examine the possibility of major, non-marginal

change” (Stern (2007), Executive Summary, p. i.)

        Carbon pricing is a necessary policy step toward addressing this challenge in the

United States. The carbon tax reform presented here would begin with a modest price on
15
   Nordhaus (2007) discusses the advantages of a tax-based approach in the context of global systems. I
take a more modest position here, arguing that a domestic tax-based approach can be made compatible with
whatever international system evolves elsewhere.


                                                                                                     32
CO2 emissions that would gradually rise over time and be subject to Congressional

review as more information becomes available on the costs and benefits of GHG

reductions. The revenue from the tax would be predominantly used to fund an

environmental earned income tax credit tied to payroll tax collections. The combination

of revenue and distributional neutrality could provide the political discipline needed to

overcome obstacles to the proposal’s passage. Allowing a credit for approved

sequestration and offset activities would also provide incentives to stimulate low and zero

emission R&D activities that will be necessary if the United States is to make meaningful

reductions in its GHG emissions.

       This article has argued that strong economic, administrative, and efficiency

arguments can be made for a carbon tax. Constructing a distributional and revenue

neutral reform addresses many of the concerns raised by opponents to carbon pricing. It

addresses the negative impact of carbon pricing on low income households and avoids

conflating carbon policy with debates over the appropriate size of the federal budget. In

this changing political climate, we may find that the conventional wisdom that cap and

trade is the only way to control GHG emissions no longer holds and that a carbon tax is a

viable policy option in the ongoing U.S. policy discussion over how best to address

global warming.




                                                                                            33
Acknowledgments

       Aparna Mathur and Wei Yao provided excellent assistance with CES calculations.

Rob Stavins and an anonymous referee made useful suggestions that have improved the

paper. I am also grateful to the Hamilton Project at Brookings for providing financial

support for this research.




                                                                                         34
References

Ballard, Charles L., John B. Shoven, and John Whalley. 1985. General Equilibrium
        Computations of the Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the United States.
        American Economic Review 75 (1):128-138.
Burtraw, Dallas, and Karen Palmer. 2006. Dynamic Adjustment to Incentive Based
        Policy to Improve Efficiency and Performance. Washington, DC: Resources for
        the Future.
Cambridge Energy Research Associates. 2006. Design Issues for Market-Based
        Greenhouse Gas Reduction Strategies. Washington, D.C.: CERA.
Congressional Budget Office. 2008. Policy Options for Reducing CO2 Emissions.
        Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
Daley, Beth. 2008. Emissions Down, But Lasting Efforts May Suffer. The Boston Globe,
        Jan. 3, 2008.
Ellerman, A. Denny, Paul L. Joskow, and David Harrison. 2003. Emissions Trading in
        the U.S.: Experience, Lessons, and Considerations for Greenhouse Gases.
        Washington, DC: Pew Center on Global Climate Change.
Energy Information Administration. 2006. Documentation for Emissions of Greenhouse
        Gases in the United States 2004. DOE/EIA-0638 (2004). Washington, DC: EIA.
———. 2006. Emissions of Greenhouse Gases in the United States 2005. DOE/EIA-
        0573(2005). Washington, DC: Energy Information Administration.
———. 2006. Energy Market Impacts of Alternative Greenhouse Gas Intensity
        Reduction Goals. SR/OIAF/2006-01. Washington, DC: EIA.
———. 2007. Annual Energy Outlook 2007. DOE/EIA-0383(2007). Washington, DC:
        Energy Information Administration.
Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1998. Environmental Taxes and the Double-
        Dividend Hypothesis: Did You Really Expect Something for Nothing? Chicago-
        Kent Law Review 73:221-256.
Goulder, Lawrence H. 1995. Environmental Taxation and the 'Double Dividend': A
        Reader's Guide. International Tax and Public Finance 2:157- 183.
Hassett, Kevin A., Aparna Mathur, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 2007. The Incidence of a U.S.
        Carbon Tax: A Lifetime and Regional Analysis. NBER Working Paper No. 13554
Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hassett, Kevin, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1995. Energy Tax Credits and Residential
        Conservation Investment: Evidence from Panel Data. Journal of Public
        Economics 57:201-217.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp. 2002. Taxes versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant.
        Resource and Energy Economics 24:367-384.
Karp, Larry, and Jiangfeng Zhang. 2005. Regulation of Stock Externalities with
        Correlated Abatement Costs. Environmental and Resource Economics 32:273-
        299.
Lecocq, Franck, and Philippe Ambrosi. 2007. The Clean Development Mechanism:
        History, Status, and Prospects. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1
        (1):134-151.
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 1999. A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms. National Tax
        Journal 52 (4):655-681.


                                                                                    35
———. 2007. Corporate Tax Integration: Paying the Bill with a Carbon Tax. Public
        Finance Review 35 (3):440-459.
———. 2007. Federal Tax Policy Toward Energy. Tax Policy and the Economy 21:145-
        184.
———. 2007. Federal Tax Policy towards Energy. Tax Policy and the Economy 21:145-
        184.
———. 2007. A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap: An Equitable Tax Reform to
        Address Global Climate Change. Discussion Paper 2007-12. Washington, DC:
        The Hamilton Project.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., Sergey Paltsev, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, and Jennifer
        Holak. 2008. Analysis of a Carbon Tax to Reduce U.S. Greenhouse Gas
        Emissions. Report No. 160. Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the Science
        and Policy of Global Change.
Metcalf, Gilbert E., and David Weisbach. 2008. The Design of a Carbon Tax. Tufts
        University and the University of Chicago.
Meyer, Bruce D., and Dan T. Rosenbaum. 2001. Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit,
        and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116
        (3):1063-1114.
Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. Regulating Stock Externalities Under
        Uncertainty. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45:416-432.
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. To Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative Approaches to Slowing
        Global Warming. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 1 (1):26-44.
———. forthcoming. A Question of Balance. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Paltsev, Sergey, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, Angelo C. Gurgel, Gilbert E. Metcalf,
        Andrei P. Sokolov, and Jennifer F. Holak. 2007. Assessment of U.S. Cap-and-
        Trade Proposals. Report No. 146. Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the
        Science and Policy of Global Change.
Parry, Ian W. H., and Kenneth A. Small. 2005. Does Britain or the United States Have
        the Right Gasoline Tax? American Economic Review 95 (4):1276-1289.
Pezzey, John. 1992. The Symmetry Between Controlling Pollution by Price and
        Controlling It by Quantity. Canadian Journal of Economics 25 (4):983-991.
Quirion, Philippe. 2004. Prices versus Quantities in a Second-Best Setting.
        Environmental and Resource Economics 29:337-359.
Stern, Nicholas. 2007. The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge
        University Press.
Weitzman, Martin. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41 (4):477-
        491.




                                                                                     36
