                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SOCIAL CAPITAL AND URBAN GROWTH

                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                          Charles Redlick

                                        Working Paper 14374
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14374


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We thank the Taubman Center for State and Local Government for research support. This essay was
written in honor of Roger Bolton and his many contributions to regional economics. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Edward L. Glaeser and Charles Redlick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Social Capital and Urban Growth
Edward L. Glaeser and Charles Redlick
NBER Working Paper No. 14374
October 2008
JEL No. D0,H0,I0,J0,R0

                                               ABSTRACT

Social capital is often place-specific while schooling is portable, so the prospect of migration may
reduce the returns to social capital and increase the returns to schooling. If social capital matters for
urban success, it is possible that an area can get caught in a bad equilibrium where the prospect of
out-migration reduces social capital investment and a lack of social capital investment makes out-migration
more appealing. We present a simple model of that process and then test its implications. We find
little evidence to suggest that social capital is correlated with either area growth or rates of out-migration.
We do, however, find significant differences in the returns to human capital across space, and a significant
pattern of skilled people disproportionately leaving declining areas. For people in declining areas,
the prospect of out-migration may increase the returns to investment in human capital, but it does not
seem to impact investment in social capital.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Charles Redlick
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 200
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
credlick@fas.harvard.edu
   I.     Introduction


Should national governments engage in place-based policies that direct resources towards
declining or poor regions? Standard results in urban economics suggest that place-based
policies are unlikely to enhance economic efficiency or prudently promote equity. Unsuccessful
places are generally less productive, so directing people towards those areas may reduce national
productivity, and transfers to poor areas may well help property owners and the prosperous more
than the less fortunate.


Roger Bolton has regularly put forward a contrarian point of view that suggests a greater role for
the central government in “place-making.” This view emphasizes the value of a “sense of
place,” which can be understood as a type of location-specific social capital. Social capital may
be built through a variety of local place-making activities such as group membership and
political activism. In Section III of this paper, we present a simple model of social capital
investment where the incentives to invest decline when individuals expect to leave their current
locale.


This feedback mechanism creates the possibility of multiple equilibria. In one equilibrium,
people expect to leave and therefore invest little in social capital. Low levels of social capital
then make an area less attractive and so people do end up leaving. In a second equilibrium,
people expect to stay and so invest more in social capital. In principle, this type of multiple
equilibria story could explain why geographic mobility is so much higher in the U.S. than in
Europe (as in Spilimbergo and Ubeda, 2004). This virtuous circle holds together because the
high level of social capital investment keeps people interested in staying in the area.


This model creates a defensible rationale for government subsidy of declining areas. By
increasing the attractiveness of an area, the central government raises the probability that an
individual will want to stay in that area, which in turn increases the degree of investment in
social capital. Government support for distressed areas can be seen as a means of subsidizing the
positive externalities associated with social capital investment. In principle, it is even possible



                                                  2
that government intervention could move the city from the bad equilibrium, where everyone
leaves and no one invests, to the good equilibrium, where people stay and invest.


While there is no doubt that theory can provide an intellectually coherent rationale for supporting
declining areas, it is less obvious that the model’s conditions for federal government support to
be beneficial are met in the real world. After all, providing incentives for geographic stability is
a more direct means of promoting social capital investment than propping up declining areas.
The home mortgage interest deduction, which promotes homeownership and reduces mobility,
can be seen as a policy meant to promote social capital (Glaeser and DiPasquale, 1999). If
human capital investments also create spillovers, and if the returns to human capital are higher
outside of declining regions, then propping up those regions will cause a reduction in human
capital investment that must be weighed against any gains from social capital investment.


After presenting our model, we turn to the data. We first note that there is a substantial
difference between cities that are in decline and cities with large out-migration probabilities.
Many quickly growing places, like Austin, Texas and Charlotte, North Carolina, have higher
emigration rates than America’s declining cities (naturally, they also have much higher in-
migration rates). In these cases, high levels of emigration do not seem to be impeding whatever
is necessary for urban success.


We then turn to the cross-city evidence on the relationship between social capital and urban
decline. Across areas, there is little clear connection between low levels of social capital
investment and either population growth or out-migration rates. While the multiple equilibria
model may have an intuitive appeal, it is not true that declining areas are particularly short on
social capital. They are, however, particularly short on human capital.


We next consider the connection between social capital and geographic mobility. People who
are more mobile do seem to invest less in social capital, but there is more question about whether
reducing the out-migration rate from an area will increase its social capital investment. A simple
cross-sectional regression that looks at the connection between forms of social capital investment
and either area-level out-migration rates or area-level decline finds little connection. This makes


                                                  3
us question whether reducing area level decline or out-migration will, in fact, increase the level
of social capital in an area.


Finally, we turn to the connection between urban decline and human capital. There are
substantial differences across space in the returns to skill. For example, the returns to a college
degree are higher in denser places and in areas where more college graduates choose to live.
These facts suggest that the ability to move locations can increase the returns to becoming
educated in a less skilled city. It is also true that more skilled people are particularly likely to
leave declining urban areas. Propping up declining areas may reduce this exodus, which may
create positive externalities on the other residents of the declining area. However, this may also
have negative externalities on the areas that were attracting the high human capital workers. The
case for sorting policies to be efficient requires some evidence of non-linearities in human capital
externalities, and we know of no evidence supporting the existence of such non-linearities
(Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008).


We do know, however, that the probability of finishing high school is higher in areas with higher
levels of emigration. Moreover, people with more education are more likely to flee declining
areas. This may support the view that restricting mobility out of declining areas will reduce the
incentive to invest in human capital, which could even hurt declining areas. If we are confident
about the existence of human capital externalities, but not confident about local non-linearities,
then there is likely to be a social cost from reduced human capital investment if we try to induce
people to stay in areas with low returns to human capital.


    II.        People vs. Place; Social Capital vs. Human Capital


Urban and regional economists have long debated the relative merits of investment by the federal
government in people or places (e.g. Winnick, 1966). Economic logic typically suggests that
person-based policies, like subsidies to education or the Low Income Housing Tax Credit,
dominate place-based policies, such as the Model Cities Program and Empowerment Zones.
Place-based policies seem poorly targeted to help poorer people. After all, plenty of people in
poorer places aren’t poor and property owners tend to benefit significantly from policies that


                                                   4
make a particular locale more attractive. Moreover, there are many cases where place-based
thinking appears to have justified particularly wasteful infrastructure projects that yield little
social benefit to anyone.


The core theoretical tool of urban economics – the spatial equilibrium – pushes back against the
use of place-based policies as a tool for redistribution. The vital assumption of spatial
equilibrium models is that free migration across space and flexible housing prices ensure that
welfare levels are more or less equal in different areas. Central city Detroit may be poor, but it
also has low housing prices that offset that poverty. If welfare levels are more or less equal
across space, then there is no good equity rationale for redistributing income from richer places
to poorer places.


Admittedly, the distinction between place and people is often ambiguous. Many investments in
human capital, such as schools, are inherently rooted in a particular place. Moreover, even the
staunchest advocates of people-based policies accept that localities should invest in their own
places. However, the weight of economic writing has generally been against using federal
interventions to subsidize particular locations.


Roger Bolton is one of those rare economists who have intellectually defended place-making
policies. In many papers, Bolton has emphasized the enormous importance that places, or “sense
of place,” can have on people’s lives, and he is surely right to have done so. Figure 1 shows the
53 percent correlation between the share of people saying that they are either somewhat or very
happy in the General Social Survey and population growth in their metropolitan area in the
1990s. People in declining areas seem to be significantly less happy than people in areas that are
attracting new people. While this link seems to suggest the importance of place, that fact alone
does not suggest that growing areas should subsidize declining areas.


Bolton (1992) elegantly surveys the literature on people prosperity vs. place prosperity and then
offers three arguments for government policies to strengthen declining places.       Bolton’s first
argument is that people who do not currently live in a declining area may like to have the option



                                                   5
of migrating to a declining area. If the declining area is allowed to disappear, then that option
will disappear along with it.


On its own, this option value does not create a cross-jurisdictional externality. The fact that
outsiders may sometimes decide to move to an area will increase that area’s property values.
Local government policies that try to maximize those property values will make investments
recognizing the potential value of the area to outsiders. For centuries, local boosters have fought
for policies not only on the basis of their current need, but also because those policies may attract
more people to an area. There must be some added externality or coordination failure that turns
the option value of being able to move to an area into a reason to support it.


The second reason that Bolton gives for place-making policies is that there is a psychic
externality created by the economic health of a particular place. People outside that place may
have no desire to live in that place or even visit that location, but they are still better off knowing
that the place exists and is doing well. This type of argument is frequently made for subsidizing
national parks. This argument was also made for national subsidies of New Orleans after
Hurricane Katrina. It was alleged that the value of that historic city to the American national
consciousness made it reasonable to spend billions rebuilding it.


Bolton’s third argument is that taxpayers simply like supporting payments that build up
particular places. The third and second arguments are quite similar in that they both rely on
preferences for supporting particular places, and these preferences are inherently hard to observe.
Perhaps it is true that taxpayers like the idea of subsidizing inner cities and Appalachia for
immutable taste-based reasons, but this contention is obviously debatable and difficult to verify.
Moreover, it is also possible to take the view that such preferences are weak and malleable,
which makes them only moderately appropriate guides for public policy.


In this essay, we consider a fourth reason for place-based policies that is also based on Bolton’s
work: location-based externalities in human and social capital. These issues are particularly
appropriate in an essay written for Roger Bolton, since he has been a leader in bringing social
capital into regional economics (Bolton, 1992, 2003). Investments in social capital, which can


                                                   6
be thought of as social connections and institutions, are generally thought to have significant
externalities. Individuals who set up networks or invest in clubs are generally creating benefits
for the other members of those networks and clubs, as well as for themselves. The existence of
these externalities means that the private spatial equilibrium is unlikely to be optimal.


However, the mere presence of externalities, such as human capital spillovers or agglomeration
economies, does not lead to a clear spatial policy (Glaeser and Gottlieb, 2008). Moving skilled
people from one place to another may increase the productivity of the area where skilled people
are moving to, but it will correspondingly decrease the productivity of the area that is losing
skilled people. Without a clear non-linearity in these spillovers, government policies that favor
one region or another are as likely to cause harm as good.


The standard assumptions about social capital suggest that social capital externalities are more
likely to yield a strong spatial policy conclusion. We normally assume that most social capital
investments are linked to a specific place, and that the benefits of investment are more or less
lost with migration. As a result, high out-migration rates should reduce the level of investment
in local churches, hobby groups and political clubs. If we believe that there are significant
externalities associated with these investments, then high levels of mobility will create negative
externalities by destroying an area’s “sense of place” (Bolton, 1987).


In the next section of this paper, we present a model that gives conditions under which social
capital investment creates a case for subsidizing particular places. In the model, there is always
an advantage to propping up declining regions, because this reduces mobility and increases
social capital investment. However, subsidizing a declining region will in turn have negative
effects on human capital investment if the returns to human capital are higher in growing areas.
As such, the case for place-based policies pits social capital against human capital. In Section
IV, we turn to the question of whether the conditions for subsidizing declining places are likely
to be met in the real world.




                                                  7
     III. Multiple Equilibria and Mobility

We consider a two-period model, where individuals have a first period of investment and then
choose whether to stay in their initial location or move. They can invest in their human capital
level, h, and their social capital, s. Both social and physical capital enhance individual welfare,
and in both cases there are complementarities across people.

The primary difference in the two forms of investment is that social capital is location-specific
while human capital is not. An individual who gets a college degree can take the skills that he or
she learns everywhere. An individual who invests in social connections within a specific place
cannot. In the first period, investment occurs, individuals learn their match quality with a
specific locale, and they must then decide whether or not to move to someplace else.

Utility for person i in location j in period two equals U (hi , hˆ j ) + V ( sij , sˆ j ) + ε ij , where hi is the

human capital investment for person i and ĥ j is the average human capital investment for all

people in location j. An individual’s place-specific social capital sij equals si , person i’s

investment in social capital, if person i is staying in the same place that he or she grew up, or 0 if
person i has moved. The term ŝ j refers to the average social capital of individuals living in area

j. The final noise term ε ij reflects person i’s idiosyncratic taste for living in this specific

community. We assume that U1 (hi , hˆ j ) > 0 , U 2 (hi , hˆ j ) ≥ 0 , U12 (hi , hˆ j ) ≥ 0 and that

U ii (hi , hˆ j ) + U12 (hi , hˆ j ) < 0 , where U k (hi , hˆ j ) refers to the derivative of U (.,.) with respect to its

kth argument. The same four conditions apply for the V (.,.) function, and we also assume
V (0, sˆ j ) = 0 .

The decisions about human capital, social capital, and mobility are made in period one to
maximize the value of:

     (1) β (U (hi , hˆ j ) + V ( sij , sˆ j ) + ε ij ) − hi − si ,

where β represents the discount factor. We initially assume that individuals are homogeneous,
except for region-specific tastes.


                                                                     8
We first consider a particularly simple version of the model. All individuals start off in one
place, location “1,” and there is a single other location where they could move, location “2”.
Since no one begins in location 2, there is no social capital in that area. Individuals do not know
their value of ε i1 before they invest in either form of capital, but they learn the value of ε i1
before choosing whether or not to migrate. The expected value of the idiosyncratic taste for the
second area equals εˆ2 , but the realized value is not known before migration decisions are made.

The equilibrium of the model is determined by the following equations. First, individuals who
know that they are moving will not invest in social capital. Individuals who are staying will
invest in social capital to the point where: βπV1 ( s, s ) = 1 , where π denotes the endogenous

probability they assign to staying in location one. We let s ∗ (π ) denote the value of s that
satisfies this equation. The human capital investment equation is that β U1 (h, h) = 1 . We let

h∗ denote the value of h that satisfies that equation.

                                         ∂s ∗    ∂s ∗            V1 ( s, s )
Differentiation then gives us that π          =β      =−                             . This expression includes
                                         ∂π      ∂β      V11 ( s, s ) + V12 ( s, s )
the fact that changes in parameter values will have both a direct and an indirect effect on social
capital investment. When it is more likely that a person will choose not to migrate, holding
everyone else’s behavior constant, this increases the returns to investing in social capital.
However, there is also a social multiplier when everyone’s probability of staying in the area
increases. Since the person’s neighbors are also investing more in social capital, this further
increases the returns to investment. This effect is incorporated by the term V12 ( s, s ) , which
captures the interpersonal complementarity between the two types of social capital investment.
The assumption V11 ( s, s ) + V12 ( s, s ) < 0 ensures that the overall impact of permanence will still be
positive.

Given these two investment equations, individuals then decide whether or not to migrate when
their value of ε i1 is revealed. Specifically, there will be a marginal individual, with a value of

ε i1 denoted ε ∗ , who is indifferent between migrating and not migrating. If the expected value of

ε i 2 is εˆ2 , then the value of ε ∗ will satisfy V ( s∗ , s∗ ) − εˆ2 = −ε ∗ , and individuals will leave only if


                                                        9
they have a value of ε i1 below V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ) − εˆ2 . If the cumulative distribution of ε is F (.) , then

the ex ante probability of leaving location one is F (εˆ2 − V ( s ∗ , s ∗ )) , which equals 1 − π . The
equilibrium for the model can then be described by the complete investment equation for social
capital β V1 ( s ∗ , s ∗ )(1 − F (εˆ2 − V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ))) = 1 .

We next assume that V (.,.) and F (.) are continuously differentiable. If we also assume that
β (1 − F (εˆ2 ))V1 (0,0) > 1 , so that individuals will never choose to invest nothing in social capital,
and that for high enough values of s, β V1 ( s, s ) < 1 , then there exists at least one point where

βV1 ( s ∗ , s∗ )((1 − F (εˆ2 − V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ))) = 1 . This then implies that there will be an odd number of
equilibria of the model, ensuring that at least one will exist.

As in Spilimbergo and Ubeda (2004), there can be more than one equilibrium of the model. For
example, if there is an equilibrium where




                                                    f (εˆ2 − V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ))
     (2) (V1 ( s ∗ , s ∗ ) + V2 ( s ∗ , s ∗ ))                                + V12 ( s ∗ , s ∗ ) > −V11 ( s ∗ , s ∗ )
                                                 1 − F (εˆ2 − V ( s , s ))
                                                                      ∗     ∗




then there will exist multiple equilibria, some of which have higher levels of social capital and
mobility. For another example, suppose we assume the functional form
V ( sij , sˆ j ) = vsijσ ( s + sˆ j )1−σ . In this case, the equation becomes

   f (εˆ2 − V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ))   σ (1 − σ ) s
                             > ∗ 2            . If F (.) is an exponential distribution, 1 − e − λx , then this
1 − F (εˆ2 − V ( s , s )) ( s ) + σ s s
                     ∗     ∗                ∗



                            σ (1 − σ ) s
simplifies to λ >                             .
                           (s ∗ ) 2 + σ s s ∗

To illustrate the possibility of multiple equilibria, consider the following discrete example, where
the value of s can be either zero or one and the utility from social capital is given by α s + β sˆ for
parameters α and β . We specifically chose to assume no complementarity between individual
social capital investment and area social capital investments. We do not do this out of doubt that

                                                                            10
such complementarities exist (they surely do), but rather because the existence of such
complementarities is well known to create the potential for multiple equilibria. Our goal with
this example is to show that the potential for multiple equilibria exists even without those
complementarities, through a pure migration effect.

We ignore human capital and assume that ε i1 is uniformly distributed on the interval [0, 4], and

that εˆ2 = 2 . If an individual invests in social capital, that person will stay in the city if and only
if α + β sˆ + ε i1 > 2 . The ex ante probability that an investor will stay in their city equals

.5 + (α + β sˆ) / 4 , and the return to social capital investment equals α times that amount. If
α (.5 + α / 4 ) < 1 < α (.5 + (α + β ) / 4 ) , then there will be multiple equilibria. In one equilibrium,
the returns to investment in social capital are low because people expect to migrate. As a result,
people don’t invest in social capital and migration occurs. However, there is a second possible
equilibrium where everyone invests in social capital and mobility is low. People then stay in the
area because the level of social capital is high. This equilibrium is certainly preferable to the
high mobility, low investment equilibrium.

Figure 2 illustrates the model when α is 1.1 and β equals .9. The rising line illustrates the
return to investment in social capital, which increases with the share of the population also
investing in social capital. This increase occurs because as more people invest in social capital,
the probability of staying in the place rises, so the returns to investment also rises. The flat line
represents the cost of investment, which always equals one. The declining line shows the
decreasing share of the population who leave the area. When there is no investment, fifty
percent of the city departs; when everyone invests, everyone stays.

The figure illustrates that there is also a third equilibrium where only a portion of the population
invests and the returns to investment exactly equal the costs. This equilibrium will not be stable,
however, since if a small amount of people change their migration or investment behavior, then
the outcome will converge to one of the other two equilibria.

In general, where there are multiple equilibria, the higher the level of social capital investment,
the better the equilibrium. To see this, note that at the high investment, low mobility equilibrium
an individual is free to privately invest the amount that he would at either of the other equilibria.


                                                     11
Those alternative investment strategies would yield lower utility levels then the actual
investment level because the person is optimally investing. Yet at these lower investment levels,
the person will still be getting a higher level of utility than he does in the alternative equilibrium
because the investment of others is higher and each person’s welfare is strictly increasing in the
investment of other persons.

This model yields, for very similar reasons, the basic result of Spilimbergo and Ubeda (2004)
that suggests people may get caught in equilibria that have too much mobility. This model also
echoes the work of Bolton (1992), who argues that investing in places may make sense if
individuals care about community. To see this, we return to our more general model and
consider a place-specific tax that generates revenue from people in area 2 and gives to people in
area 1. We assume that the social planner simply adds up total welfare across areas, multiplies
by β , and subtracts the cost of investment to maximize:


       β ⎛⎜U (h∗ , h∗ ) + ∫                                          (ε i1 + V ( s ∗ , s ∗ )) f (ε i1 )dε i1 ⎞⎟ − h∗ − s ∗
                              ∞
(3)
         ⎝                ε i 1 = εˆ 2 − t 2 + t1 −V ( s ∗ , s ∗ )                                            ⎠




                                                                              1− π
The balanced budget constraint requires t1                                            = −t2 . If there was no change in migration or
                                                                                π
social capital investment, then the tax would have no effect, as it would just redistribute from
place 1 to place 2. If there was a migration effect, but no effect on social capital investment, then
a place specific tax would still have no effect on welfare, since on the margin individuals are
indifferent between the two locales. A place-based policy will, however, have an impact on
welfare if s ∗ changes.

Claim # 1: Starting from laissez-faire, a government policy that taxes region 2 and subsidizes
region 1 will increase welfare as long as there are positive spillovers from social capital
investment and migration behavior does not influence human capital investment.

Starting from the point of no intervention, the derivative of total welfare with respect to transfers
                                   ∂s ∗ ∂π
will equal β π V2 ( s ∗ , s ∗ )            . Investing in place is a means of subsidizing location-specific
                                    π ∂t 2


                                                                                     12
social capital, which yields positive externalities. Social capital could be directly subsidized, but
given the difficulty in measuring social capital it may be that subsidizing space is a reasonably
natural way to achieve that end.

One fairly important assumption is that all migration flows from region 1 to region 2. In a more
complex model where there is migration in both directions, the social welfare enhancing policy
is not to support one or the other region but rather to slow the rate of migration, at least as long
as social capital remains non-transferable. This provides one rationale for subsidizing home
ownership.

This rosy picture of place-based policies omits the many problems that can be associated with
place-based investments, but it does at least leave us with a clear rationale for investing in
particular locations. By increasing the odds that people will stay in a given place, the
government is increasing the degree to which people will invest in location-specific social capital
there. If that investment yields positive externalities, then this will be beneficial.

While this version of the model gives a clear prediction, it will be muted if we change other
assumptions in ways that look quite reasonable. For example, one very natural assumption is
that the returns to human capital might be higher outside of the first location. If the first locale is
a declining city with relatively low returns to knowledge, but the second locale is a growing city
with higher returns to new ideas, then we could certainly imagine human capital would be a
complement with migration.

To reflect this change, we assume that U (.,.) is multiplied by a constant, 1 + φ , in the second
locale, where φ > 0 . This constant is meant to reflect the possibility that the second locale is
innately more economically productive. In this case, the first order condition for human capital
becomes β U1 (h∗ , h∗ )(1 + φ (1 − π ) ) = 1 . The derivative of human capital investment with respect

                 ∂h∗                φU1 (h, h)
to mobility is       =                                          < 0 . When the probability of staying in
                 ∂π (1 + φ (1 − π ) )(U11 (h, h) + U12 (h, h) )
the first location (with its lower returns to human capital) increases, investment in human capital
falls.




                                                    13
In this case, a higher probability of moving decreases the incentive to invest in social capital and
increases the incentive to invest in human capital. Once this tradeoff is introduced, low mobility
equilibria are no longer necessarily Pareto superior to high mobility equilibria since investment
in human capital will be lower in the more immobile situations.

When we again consider government policies to support the first region, there are now two
offsetting effects, so subsidizing the first locale may or may not be efficient. The social gains
from subsidizing the first locale will be positive if and only if

                               ∂s ∗                                  ∂h∗
    (3) π β V2 ( s ∗ , s ∗ )        + (1 + φ )(1 − π )U 2 (h∗ , h∗ )     >0
                               ∂π                                    ∂π

We formalize this in the following claim.

Claim # 2: Starting from laissez-faire, when migration impacts both social and human capital
investment a government policy that taxes region 2 and subsidizes region 1 will increase welfare
                    − V1 ( s, s )V2 ( s, s )    − φU1 (h, h)U 2 (h, h)
if and only if                                >                        .
                   V11 ( s, s ) + V12 ( s, s ) U11 (h, h) + U12 (h, h)

This inequality compares the positive impact that decreased mobility has on social capital
investment with the negative effect that it has on human capital investment. The condition will
always hold when φ is sufficiently low, because in that case mobility has only a tiny impact on
the returns to human capital. The potential to improve social welfare by subsidizing the first
region becomes a comparison between the positive effect of mobility on investment in human
capital and the negative effect of mobility on investment in social capital. Reducing out-
migration by subsidizing the first location will be welfare-enhancing only if the gains from
increased social capital outweigh the gains from increased human capital. This will be the main
empirical question that we raise in section III; we first turn to the case where individuals are
heterogeneous.

As an aside, we also note that the tradeoff between social and human capital echoes the work of
Austen-Smith and Fryer (2005) on acting white. In their paper, African-Americans signal their
commitment to their community by investing more in social capital and less in portable human
capital; the choice to value community is seen as being somewhat deleterious because it crowds


                                                               14
out more beneficial investments in general skills. We also have a trade-off between human and
social capital, but the implication of this trade-off for policy is not obvious.




Heterogeneous Individuals

There are many different types of heterogeneity that can interact with both mobility and
investment in the two types of capital. Individuals with a low cost of investment in social capital
will be more likely to invest in it and to stay in the first locale. Individuals with a low cost of
investment in human capital will invest in that form of capital and will be more likely to move.
We will specifically focus on heterogeneity in the discount factor, β , which increases the
tendency to invest in both social and human capital. This heterogeneity will impact migration
behavior, but the direction of this impact is ambiguous. The tendency of high human capital
persons to invest more in social capital will make them less likely to migrate, while their
tendency to also invest more in human capital will make migration more likely if φ > 0 . The
overall effect is thus ambiguous.

Let π ( β ) denote the probability of moving as a function of patience. In Sjaastad (1962), moving
was itself an investment, so we would expect more patient people to move more. We could
incorporate that into this model by assuming that individuals pay a moving cost in the first
period, but we choose to keep the model simple. Instead, the impact of patience on mobility
comes only from investment behavior. We also assume that discount factors are orthogonal to
the idiosyncratic returns associated with different places.

Utility maximization requires that first stage investment behavior satisfy the conditions:
β ((1 − π ( β ))(1 + φ )U1 (hi , hˆ2 ) + π ( β )U1 (hi , hˆ1 )) = 1 and βπ ( β )V1 ( si , sˆ1 ) = 1 .

Migration to location 2 is optimal if and only if U (hi , hˆ1 ) + V ( si , sˆ1 ) + ε i1 is greater than

(1 + φ )U (hi , hˆ2 ) + εˆ2 . Higher patience, and higher human capital, will be associated with more

                                                     ∂h                  ∂s
mobility if ((1 + φ )U1 (hi , hˆ2 ) − U1 (hi , hˆ1 )) i > V1 ( si , sˆ1 ) i .
                                                     ∂β                  ∂β

                                                                 15
This condition may or may not hold. If (1 + φ )U1 (hi , hˆ2 ) − U1 (hi , hˆ1 ) is small, then the social
capital impact of patience will trump the human capital impact, and more patient people will stay
in the first locale. People with less patience will move to the other area, which means that the
                                                                                                   ∂s
term (1 + φ )U1 (hi , hˆ2 ) − U1 (hi , hˆ1 ) could even be negative. Alternatively, V1 ( si , sˆ1 ) i could be
                                                                                                   ∂β
small, so that the human capital effect dominates and more patient people will be more likely to
move to the second locale.

If the distribution of the discount factor is characterized by a density function g (.) , then social
welfare can be written:

    ⎛β⎛ ∞                            (                                               )
∫β ⎜⎝ ⎜⎝ ∫ε i1 =εˆ2 −t 2 +ti −V ( s ∗ , s ∗ ) ε i1 + U (h(β ), hˆ1 ) + V (s(β ), sˆ1 ) f (ε i1 )dε i1 ⎞⎟⎠ +
              β (1 − π )(1 + φ )U (h( β ), hˆ ) − h( β ) − s( β ) g ( β )dβ
                                                     2                         )
Taken from the point of no intervention, the derivative of social welfare with respect to the
location specific tax is β times:

        ⎛                           ∂h                                     ∂h                       ∂sˆ ⎞
(4)   ∫β ⎜⎜⎝ πU   2   (h( β ), hˆ1 ) 1 + (1 − π )(1 + φ )U 2 (h( β ), hˆ2 ) 2 + πV2 ( s ( β ), sˆ1 ) 1 ⎟⎟g ( β )dβ
                                    ∂t2                                    ∂t2                      ∂t2 ⎠


                                                                                                              ∂hˆ1 ∂hˆ2      ∂sˆ
This expression is quite similar to equation (3), but now the three terms                                         ,     , and 1 all
                                                                                                              ∂t2 ∂t2        ∂t2
include both investment and selection effects. For example, subsidizing the first location always
induces more investment in social capital among people of all types. However, the subsidy may
also induce more patient people to choose the first location, a second benefit of the subsidy.

In the case of social capital, it is always valuable to create incentives for people with more social
capital to stay in the first region. In the case of human capital, it is not obvious whether it is
beneficial to move skilled people from one region to another. This will depend on whether the
externalities vary in size across regions. As Glaeser and Gottlieb (2008) argue that it is
essentially impossible to determine whether human capital spillovers are higher in one place than
another, we will focus primarily on whether decline or out-migration is associated with higher
levels of human or social capital investment.

                                                                            16
One particularly interesting possibility occurs when out-migration reduces the average human
capital in both the first and second cities. This is akin to the case of the person who moved from
one university to another and reduced the average quality of both. While we don’t know whether
such cases exist, they at least raise the possibility of clear Pareto winning policies that raise the
average human capital everywhere by reducing the emigration of moderately skilled people from
low to high human capital areas. Of course, for these policies to be beneficial we must be sure
that human capital spillovers take the form specified in this paper of depending on the average
skill level, rather than some other aggregation of area skills.




   IV. Evidence on Decline, Out-Migration, Social and Human Capital



We now turn to cross-city evidence that is relevant for the model. We begin by looking at basic
facts about out-migration rates and urban decline. We then discuss the evidence suggesting that
rates of return to human capital might be higher in some areas than in others. We next explore
the cross-city differences in human capital investment. Finally, we turn to social capital
investment across space and its relationship to mobility.

The model emphasized the costs of out-migration for social capital investment, but most regional
policies focus on helping declining places. Declining places are not necessarily places with
particularly high levels of out-migration. It is certainly theoretically possible that net migration
rates (which determine decline) are not that closely correlated with the gross migration patterns
that should determine the willingness to invest in place-specific social capital.

In Figure 3, we show the correlation between metropolitan area population change between 1990
and 2000 and the out-migration rate in the area between 1995 and 2000. Population change is
defined as the difference in the logarithm of population between the two census years. The out-
migration rate is defined as the share of the population that lived in the area in 1995 and that has
moved somewhere else by 2000. In some cases, we have people who are coded as living in
different regions, but who claim not to have changed houses. We assume that those people did
not actually change region over the time period.



                                                  17
The figure shows a strongly significant 54 percent correlation. Places that are gaining population
also have the highest out-migration rate. The right view of urban growth is not that declining
places disproportionately lose people. Growing places lose people even more rapidly. The
difference between growing and declining places is that there are far fewer people coming into
declining areas.

The strong positive relationship between growth and emigration rates suggests that policies that
target declining areas are not targeting the areas with the highest levels of emigration. It also
suggests that declining places are not caught in a bad equilibrium where high expected out-
migration rates then create less investment in social capital. If anything, we would expect the
high out-migration rates to reduce social capital investment in high growth areas. Of course, if
we think that out-migration is particularly costly in declining areas, then it may still make sense
to target policies towards those areas that are in decline.

In our next figure, we turn to the overall relationship between decline and different forms of
capital investment. Figure 4 shows the well-known positive correlation between years of
schooling in 1970 and population growth between 1970 and 2000 among metropolitan areas with
more than 250,000 people in 1970. Skilled places have seen increases in population, income,
and housing prices relative to less skilled places over the last 30 years.

Skilled places have also generally become more skilled (Berry and Glaeser, 2005). Figure 5
shows the connection between the share of the population that has a college degree in 1970 and
the growth in that share between 1970 and 2000. As the share in the population with college
degrees in 1970 increases by 10 percentage points, the growth increases by 6 percentage points.
There is not only a connection between human capital and area population growth, but an
increasing tendency of high human capital people to move to high human capital places.

By contrast, the connection between area level social capital and growth is far less clear. We use
the General Social Survey (GSS), which contains survey data for years between 1972 and 2002,
to provide data on social capital. Our primary measure is group membership, which counts the
number of types of groups in which an individual is a member. This measure is quite standard in
the social capital literature (e.g. Glaeser, Sacerdote and Laibson, 2002), but its popularity owes
more to ease of use than any sort of inherent perfection. The measure does not include the


                                                  18
intensity of engagement, and fails to account for multiple memberships within a single category
of groups (e.g. hobby groups). However, it is widely available and correlates well with other
measures of social capital.

Figure 6 shows the 4.5 percent correlation between area level group membership and population
growth between 1970 and 2000, among metropolitan areas with more than 200 respondents in
the General Social Survey. There is essentially no correlation between social capital and growth
across metropolitan areas.

Our model emphasized the link between out-migration and social capital, where higher
propensities of leaving a place were associated with less investment in area-specific groups.
Figure 7 shows the correlation between group members and out-migration across metropolitan
areas. In this case, there is a 16 percent correlation. Contrary to the model’s suggestion, places
with more out-migration have slightly more social capital, but the effect is quite weak.

Figure 8 repeats Figure 6 but uses per capita income growth at the metropolitan level as our
measure of success. Per capita income growth will include both the increasing prosperity of
people in an area and the tendency of better paid people to move into the area. Both of these
changes can be seen as a type of success. In this case, there is a -4 percent correlation between
social capital and urban success.

Figures 6 and 8 suggest that social capital is not strongly associated with area growth. Social
capital may indeed create significant positive spillovers, and nothing we have shown contradicts
that view. However, the data does not seem to support the hypothesis that areas get locked into a
bad equilibrium where expected decline creates low levels of social capital investment, which
then in turn make that expected decline a reality. We now turn to individual level data on the
connection between geographic mobility, area decline, and social capital investment.

Social Capital, Geographic Mobility, and Urban Decline

We now turn to the link between mobility and social capital investment. At the individual level,
there is a tight link between length of time in a community and different forms of social capital.
Figure 9 shows the connection between years in a place and membership in organizations.
People who have lived in a place for a long time have, perhaps unsurprisingly, more group


                                                19
memberships than people who are new to a place. Figure 10 shows the connection between
years in a place and voting in the last election. We only have mobility data for a few years in the
1980s, so we have shown results for the 1984 election. Again, we have a significant positive
correlation between years in a community and political engagement. DiPasquale and Glaeser
(1999) show this relationship for a broader range of social capital variables, and estimate that
about one-half of the relationship between homeownership and social capital can be linked to
reduced geographic mobility of home owners.

However, this represents a backward-looking, rather than forward-looking, relationship between
mobility and social capital investment. The model, after all, emphasized that people who expect
to move will also be less likely to invest in social capital. We test this hypothesis by looking at
individual level data from the General Social Survey and regressing social capital outcomes on
area level out-migration rates and the population growth in the metropolitan area between 1970
and 1990. Because urban decline may be different than growth, we allow for a spline in the
urban growth variable so that the slope can be different for the most slowly growing quarter of
metropolitan areas.

We will use a series of social capital variables, including number of organization memberships,
voting in local elections, and self-reported answers to questions about working to solve local
problems. Our basic regression takes the form:

(5) Social Capital = Individual Characteristics + b*Area Growth + c*Out-Migration Rate

Our individual characteristics include age, race, income and, education. The GSS income
variables are somewhat problematic since income is only available in broad categories and some
people refuse to state their income levels. We assign people the mid-point of their reported
income range. We include those who refuse to give their income, and use a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one if the person refused to give their income. We also have a dummy
variable that takes on a value of one if the income variable was top coded.

Our core area characteristics are the out-migration rate, discussed above, and population growth
between 1970 and 1990. We restricted ourselves to this period to slightly reduce the possibility
that social capital is driving growth rather than the reverse. This is a serious concern and we will



                                                 20
return to it later. As discussed above, we use a spline so that the slope on area growth can be
different for declining and growing cities.

Table 1 shows our results. The first regression addresses membership in organizations. This
social capital variable increases mildly with income and strongly with education. These results
are all quite standard. Both area level characteristics are statistically insignificant. There is a
weak negative relationship between the out-migration probability and group membership, of no
statistical significance. Population growth is actually weakly negatively associated with group
membership for areas in relative decline. We have run such regressions for a number of different
group memberships and similarly found no significant correlations with out-migration or area
decline. There is little here to support the view that either out-migration or urban decline is
particularly bad for social capital investment.

We next look at two regressions suggesting knowledge of local events. Regression (2) looks at
whether the respondent can name his or her congressional representative. The area level
characteristics are not significantly correlated with this variable. Regression (3) looks at whether
the respondent knows the name of the local school head. In this case, growth is negatively
associated with knowledge for declining areas, but the effect is only marginally significant.

The next three regressions look at involvement in local affairs. Regression (4) looks at whether
the respondent has lobbied a local government official. Regression (5) looks at whether the
individual has started a local group. In both cases, neither out-migration nor growth are
significantly involved with local civic engagement. In regression (6), we turn to a very vague
question about whether the individual has tried to solve local problems. In this case, area level
characteristics do predict engagement. Out-migration positively predicts working to solve local
problems and more growth reduces the probability of working to solve local problems. Both of
these results go in the opposite direction from the theory discussed above.

The final regression examines voting in local elections. Neither out-migration nor growth
predicts voting. Overall, these social capital variables do not appear to be correlated with either
out-migration or growth, at least not in the manner suggested by the model. These results cast
doubt on the idea that reducing out-migration would significantly increase investment in social
capital.


                                                  21
One issue with these regressions is that out-migration may itself be a function of social capital
and as such is not a valid explanatory variable. There is no perfect way of handling this problem,
but one method is to look at younger respondents and control for the social capital investment of
older respondents in the sample. We divide the sample by year of birth and include only people
born after 1947 (the median year of birth) in our sample. We then use the older people in the
sample to form an area level average for each social capital variable and we control for that level
of social capital. This regression can then be seen as asking whether social capital went down
among younger people in places that were declining after 1970 or that have particularly high out-
migration rates.

Table 2 shows our results. In the first regression, we again show our findings for group
membership. There is a strong positive relationship between group membership in the previous
generation and group membership among the sample in the regressions. This fact can be
interpreted as suggesting spillovers from group membership or a positive complementarity
across people in social capital investment. Alternatively, this correlation may just reflect omitted
local characteristics that raise the returns to social capital investment in some places.

While the previous generation’s group membership is statistically significant, it does not alter the
relationship between area level characteristics and social capital. Neither out-migration nor area
decline has a significant impact on group membership. The other regressions in the table show a
similar pattern. Generally, the previous generation’s investments are positively correlated with
the younger generation’s civic engagement, but controlling for this investment does not alter the
basic lack of a relationship between area out-migration or decline and social capital.

Overall, our results do not support the view that there is strong connection between social capital
and either urban decline or out-migration. Of course, there are many reasons to be skeptical
about these findings. First, reverse causality and omitted city-level variables are real concerns
and our correlations do not imply causal relationships. Second, there is so much imprecision in
many of our estimates that it is hard to rule out negative effects of out-migration and urban
decline on social capital. Nonetheless, without further evidence it would be hard to take the view
that social capital provides a strong basis for place-based policies to support declining cities.




                                                  22
Human Capital, Income, and Urban Change

We now turn to the human capital aspects of the model, which suggested costs of subsidizing
declining places. We will do three things here. First, we will look at whether it is indeed true
that the skill premium is higher in cities that are growing. Second, we will look at the emigration
propensities of skilled and unskilled workers. Finally, we will look at the relationship between
human capital accumulation and both out-migration and urban decline.

The model assumed that skilled people would earn more in the second, growing locale. That
assumption was the basis of the prediction that out-migration would increase the returns to
investment in skills. In Table 3, we look at wage results using the 2000 Census. To avoid issues
of labor force participation, we look only at the wages of males between 25 and 55 years of age.
Our basic regression takes the form:

(6) Income=Personal Characteristics+MSA Fixed Effects+b*BA Grad*MSA Characteristics

We control for individual characteristics, including years of schooling, and an MSA fixed effect
that takes out any impact that the metropolitan area has on the level of wages. Our interest lies in
the interaction between different metropolitan area characteristics and being a college graduate.
Do some places pay their college graduates a greater skill premium?

We attempt to answer this question in three different ways. In Table 3, we look at total wages
rather than the logarithm of wages. This is the most natural way to determine whether wages are
higher in some areas. After all, the model assumed a proportional increase in skills in the
growing areas, so this would yield a zero value for “b” if we looked at the logarithm of wages.
Since it is standard to look at the logarithm of wages, in Table 4 we also look at the logarithm of
real wages, defined as the logarithm of income divided by the American Chamber of Commerce
Research Association (ACCRA) metropolitan area price level. Since these price indices don’t
differ by education group, nominal wage results will be essentially the same as real wage results
across areas.

In the first regression of Table 3, we focus on the share of the population with college degrees as
our metropolitan area characteristic. The first regression shows that the income of people with a
college degree goes up by about 5,900 dollars as the share of the population with college degrees


                                                23
increases by 10 percent. This should not be interpreted as a causal link. After all, a place may
be filled with college graduates because it is a good place to be a skilled worker. Nonetheless,
the table does suggest that the returns to skills seem to be higher in some places than in others,
which in turn suggests that the prospect of out-migration may increase the returns to investing in
skill.

The second regression looks at the interaction between the logarithm of area density and having
a college degree. The returns to skill are also higher in denser areas. As density doubles, skilled
workers earn 5,400 dollars more relative to the less well-educated. This effect is quite
statistically significant. One interpretation of this fact is that density and skills are complements;
this is also supported by the propensity of high human capital industries to locate at the center of
urban areas (Glaeser and Kahn, 2001).

The third and fourth regressions look at out-migration rates and urban decline. We address urban
decline with a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the metropolitan area is in the
bottom quartile of areas by population growth rate. In these cases, there is no significant
interaction with education. These variables may be correlated with the overall wage level in the
area, but the wages of the skilled do not seem to be particularly high or low relative to the less
skilled in places with big population changes. It therefore seems that the ability to emigrate from
declining places increases the potential returns to human capital by creating the option of moving
to denser or more skilled places, not by allowing exit from places in decline.

In Table 4, we repeat these regressions looking at the logarithm of wages. In the first regression,
we estimate a coefficient of .45 on the interaction between the share of the population with
college degrees and the individual’s own college degree. This suggests that as the share of the
population with college degrees increases by 10 percent, the wages of the skilled increase by 4.5
percent relative to the less skilled. In the second regression, we show that there is also a
significant interaction between area density and individual skills. As density doubles, the college
premium appears to rise by about 4.6 percent.

In the third regression, we find a weak negative relationship between urban decline and wages.
Areas in decline have a skill premium that is more than three percent lower than places that are
growing. In this case, the ability to leave declining areas would seem to increase the returns to


                                                  24
skill. In the fourth regression, we find no significant relationship between out-migration rates
and the skill premium.

We now turn to out-migration probabilities, which are defined as the share of people who move
metropolitan areas between 1995 and 2000. We have calculated the out-migration rates
separately for people with more than 16 years of education (college graduates), between 12 and
16 years of education (high school graduates) and less than 12 years of education (high school
dropouts). Across the U.S. as a whole, the probability of moving across metropolitan areas rises
substantially with education. Figure 11 graphs the out-migration rates for college graduates
against the out-migration rates for high school dropouts across metropolitan areas. In almost
every area, the out-migration rate is higher for college graduates than for high school dropouts.
In many cases, the difference is enormous.

We now look at whether the propensity of different skill groups to emigrate differs with
metropolitan area growth. Figure 12 graphs the difference between college and high school out-
migration rates against population growth in the 1990s. College graduates are much more likely
to exit from declining metropolitan areas, which supports the model. Figure 13 shows that
college graduates are also disproportionately likely to flee low income areas.

These facts suggest that out-migration is a double-edged sword. On one hand, the returns to
schooling are presumably higher for people in declining areas because of the option to migrate.
On the other hand, the exodus of the skilled leaves those declining places with less human
capital. Since human capital is itself such a strong correlate of area growth, this migration may
be hurting the city’s chances for success.

Our final empirical exercise is to look at whether people become more skilled in cities where
out-migration rates are higher. Because out-migration rates and urban decline are themselves a
function of the skill level of an area, we look only at people who were between 25 and 40 years
old in the 2000 Census. We then control for the average skill level of people who were between
40 and 55 in the same year. We hope that by controlling for the skills of older people we are
minimizing the problem of reverse causality, but we still believe that these results are likely to be
somewhat compromised by those concerns. Nonetheless, Table 5 reports our results, controlling
for age and race.


                                                 25
The first regression shows a weak positive relationship between out-migration and the share of
the population that have acquired a college degree. Urban growth is, if anything, negatively
associated with getting a college education, once we control for the skills of older people in the
city. In the second regression, we find a strong positive relationship between out-migration and
the share of the population getting a high school degree. Urban growth again predicts less skill
accumulation. This provides some weak support for the view that out-migration and skill
accumulation are positively associated, but it would be a mistake to take this too seriously.




    V. Conclusion


In this paper we present a model that can justify government support for declining areas. If
people are less likely to invest in social capital when they know an area is declining, then this
creates a negative externality from decline. Subsidizing the place can work against that
externality, but it also can reduce investment in human capital if the returns to skill are higher
outside of that area. The model suggests that there are situations when it could make sense to try
to keep people committed to declining areas.


The key empirical conditions needed to justify such policies are that out-migration and decline
are strongly associated with lower levels of social capital investment. We investigate this
possibility using the General Social Survey, and find little evidence that decline is accompanied
by lower social capital; across metropolitan areas there is little connection between out-migration
and social capital investment. People who live in declining areas, or places with high out-
migration rates, are not less likely to invest in social capital. To us, this suggests that it is unwise
to believe that stemming decline will result in more place-making social capital activities.


We also look at the connection between human capital investment and urban change. We find
that growing areas do indeed offer a higher human capital premium. More skilled people are
also particularly likely to leave declining places. These facts suggest that trying to subsidize
declining places and keep people there may reduce the incentive for individuals to invest in



                                                  26
human capital. On balance, it therefore seems unlikely to us that subsidies for declining areas are
likely to enhance social welfare.




                                                27
                                         References

Austen-Smith, David and Roland Fryer (2005). “An Economic Analysis of ‘Acting White,’”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(2): 551-583.
Bolton, Roger (1987). "An Economic Interpretation of a `Sense of Place': Speculations and
       Questions." Portland, OR: meeting of Association of American Geographers and
       Baltimore, MD: North American meeting of Regional Science Association International.
Bolton, Roger (1992). “Place Prosperity vs People Prosperity' Revisited: An Old Issue with a
       New Angle.” Urban Studies Journal, 29: 185-203.
Bolton, Roger (2003). “Local Social Capital and Entrepreneurship.” with Hans Westlund, Small
       Business Economics, 21(2): 77-113.
DiPasquale, Denise & Edward L. Glaeser (1999). “Incentives and Social Capital: Are
       Homeowners Better Citizens?," Journal of Urban Economics, 45(2): 354-384.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Christoper R. Berry (2005). "The Divergence of Human Capital Levels
       Across Cities." NBER Working Paper #11617.
Glaeser, Edward and Joshua Gottlieb (2008). “The Economics of Place-Making Policies,”
       mimeographed.
Glaeser, Edward L., David Laibson and Bruce Sacerdote (2002). “An Economic Approach to
       Social Capital." Economic Journal, Royal Economic Society 112(483): 437-458.
Sjaastad, Larry A. (1962). "The Costs and Returns of Human Migration." The Journal of
       Political Economy 70(5): 80-93.
Spilimbergo, Antonio & Ubeda, Luis (2004). "A model of multiple equilibria in geographic labor
       mobility." Journal of Development Economics, 73(1): 107-123.
Winnick, Louis (1966). “Place Prosperity vs. People Prosperity: Welfare Considerations in the
       Geographic Redistribution of Economic Activity.” pp. 273-283 in Real Estate Research
       Program, University of California at Los Angeles, Essay in Urban Land Economics in
       Honor of the Sixty Fifth Birthday of Leo Grebler. Los Angeles, CA: Real Estate Research
       Program.




                                             28
                     TABLE 1: SOCIAL CAPITAL, OUT-MIGRATION AND GROWTH

                                (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)

                                                                                         Has Helped    Has Helped        Usually
                           Number of                     Can Name       Has Lobbied         start         solve         votes in
                             group         Can Name       School           local           a local        Local           local
                          memberships      U.S. Rep.       Head         gov't official     group        problems        elections
Log(income)                  0.0497**       0.0948**       0.0651         -0.00748        -0.0109        0.00393         0.0314
                              (0.021)        (0.042)       (0.044)         (0.024)        (0.016)        (0.030)         (0.025)
Refused to give
income                        0.275          0.741*         0.475          0.0498         -0.0154         0.228           0.358
                              (0.20)         (0.42)         (0.46)         (0.25)          (0.18)         (0.26)          (0.27)
Income top coded             0.719***        0.889**        0.570         -0.0729          -0.163        0.0119           0.338
                              (0.21)          (0.41)        (0.41)         (0.23)          (0.16)        (0.26)           (0.24)
Finished HS                  0.667***        0.0845        -0.0764        0.194***        0.102**        0.137**        0.191***
                             (0.063)         (0.087)       (0.064)        (0.049)         (0.042)        (0.051)        (0.058)
Has a BA                     1.130***        -0.0424       0.0989         0.107***        0.0897**       0.0812*        0.109***
                             (0.090)         (0.050)       (0.069)        (0.037)          (0.035)       (0.043)        (0.036)
Out-migration
Probability                   -0.103          0.593         -0.286         0.411           0.502         0.884**         -0.689
                              (1.31)          (1.21)        (0.96)         (0.40)          (0.66)         (0.37)         (0.47)
Population Growth             -0.899         -0.491        -1.219*         0.0546          -0.224       -1.484***         0.129
(below 25th percentile)       (1.12)         (1.26)         (0.72)         (0.50)          (0.73)         (0.41)          (0.50)
Population Growth             0.282           0.229         0.127          0.153           0.0246         0.135          -0.163
(above 25th percentile)       (0.19)          (0.21)        (0.25)         (0.13)          (0.10)        (0.090)         (0.12)
West                         -0.0837         -0.185        0.0147         -0.0606         -0.0156        0.0211          0.0212
                              (0.13)         (0.19)        (0.14)         (0.076)          (0.11)        (0.073)         (0.080)
South                         0.0343        0.00539        0.00664        0.00819         0.0122         0.0700          0.0238
                              (0.15)         (0.16)         (0.10)        (0.056)         (0.075)        (0.049)         (0.074)
Midwest                      0.227**          0.143        0.0201          0.0604         0.0206        0.0954***        0.0877
                              (0.11)          (0.12)       (0.075)         (0.036)        (0.053)        (0.029)         (0.053)
Age, Gender and
Race Controls                  Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Constant                     -0.0637         -0.754         -0.231        -0.474**        -0.438*        -0.670**        -0.522*
                              (0.28)         (0.51)         (0.47)         (0.22)          (0.23)         (0.32)          (0.28)
Observations                   6366            248           184            666             666            666             663
R-squared                      0.12           0.14           0.12           0.07            0.06           0.10           0.17
                               Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
       Notes: Data is from the General Social Survey (GSS). Respondents were asked (1) how many types of social groups
       they belong to (2) to name their U.S. Representative, (3) to name the head of the local school system, (4) whether
       they have lobbied a local gov’t official, (5) whether they have helped start a local group, (6) whether they help solve
       local problems, and (7) whether they usually vote in local elections. Incomes were taken as the midpoint of intervals,
       and those who refused to give their income or had their income top coded were assigned a value of zero (and then
       assigned dummy variable values of 1 as appropriate). Out-migration probabilities for 1995-2000 were calculated
       using the variable for place of residence in 1995 in the 2000 Census.




                                                                   29
                    TABLE 2: SOCIAL CAPITAL AMONG YOUNGER RESPONDANTS

                                 (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)           (6)              (7)
                                                                                           Has helped    Has helped         Usually
                            Number of                       Can Name      Has lobbied         start         solve          votes in
                              group          Can Name        School          local           a local        local            local
                           memberships       U.S. Rep.        Head        gov't official     group        problems         elections
Log(income)                  -0.0126          0.156**         0.148*       -0.00540        -0.00267        0.00443         0.0101
                             (0.030)          (0.073)        (0.080)        (0.031)         (0.021)        (0.037)         (0.035)
Refused income               -0.601*            0.879         1.684*         -0.327          0.0538        -0.0187         -0.110
                              (0.32)           (0.74)         (0.90)         (0.29)          (0.26)         (0.36)          (0.45)
Income top coded              0.0618          1.474**          1.330        -0.0195         -0.0893        -0.0221          0.203
                              (0.30)           (0.70)         (0.82)         (0.28)          (0.20)         (0.32)          (0.34)
Finished HS                  0.473***         -0.0196         -0.137         0.117          0.00703        0.00799         0.0933
                             (0.082)           (0.12)        (0.094)        (0.075)         (0.053)        (0.062)         (0.078)
Has a BA                     1.070***         -0.0149        -0.0467       0.0977**        0.107***       0.0963**         0.125**
                             (0.092)          (0.088)         (0.16)        (0.046)         (0.037)        (0.047)         (0.055)
Out-migration                  0.710            1.753          0.947          0.452           0.498        0.999**         -0.820
Probability                   (1.16)           (1.64)         (1.95)         (0.55)          (0.62)         (0.37)          (0.64)
Population Growth             -1.041           -0.110         -2.731         -0.745          -0.224       -2.104***        -0.152
(below 25th percentile)       (1.23)           (1.31)         (1.63)         (0.61)          (0.76)         (0.59)          (0.64)
Population Growth              0.278          -0.0734          0.376        0.369**         -0.0451         0.134          -0.276
(above 25th percentile)       (0.26)           (0.36)         (0.45)         (0.16)         (0.090)         (0.10)          (0.17)
West                          -0.132           -0.218        0.0395          -0.117        0.000532        0.0696           0.122
                              (0.16)           (0.31)         (0.28)        (0.075)         (0.093)        (0.067)          (0.11)
South                         0.0862          0.0353         -0.0206        -0.0192         0.0513         0.0769          0.0850
                              (0.19)           (0.22)         (0.24)        (0.064)         (0.082)        (0.059)          (0.10)
Midwest                        0.154            0.108          0.128        0.103**         0.0348        0.141***         0.155**
                              (0.13)           (0.15)         (0.15)        (0.045)         (0.061)        (0.045)         (0.073)
Avg. Dependent
Variable among older
cohort                       0.401***          0.148         -0.0969         -0.204          0.284         -0.210*         -0.338*
                              (0.13)           (0.19)         (0.17)         (0.14)          (0.18)         (0.12)          (0.20)
Age, Gender and Race
Controls                        Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
Constant                     2.837***          -1.047         0.0166         0.155           0.874         1.444**          -0.723
                              (0.75)           (1.00)         (1.50)         (0.62)          (0.58)         (0.55)          (0.78)
Observations                   3094             114             80            400             400            400             398
R-squared                      0.10             0.25           0.19           0.09            0.08           0.10            0.11
                                Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        Notes: Data is from the General Social Survey (GSS). Respondents were asked (1) how many types of social groups
        they belong to (2) to name their U.S. Representative, (3) to name the head of the local school system, (4) whether
        they have lobbied a local gov’t official, (5) whether they have helped start a local group, (6) whether they help solve
        local problems, and (7) whether they usually vote in local elections. Incomes were taken as the midpoint of intervals,
        and those who refused to give their income or had their income top coded were assigned a value of zero (and then
        assigned dummy variable values of 1 as appropriate). Out-migration probabilities for 1995-2000 were calculated
        using the variable for place of residence in 1995 in the 2000 Census.




                                                                  30
                                     Table 3: Wages and Skill Interactions
                                                (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                           Wages, 2000    Wages, 2000          Wages, 2000         Wages, 2000
                                            12,976.48        13,029.15          12,963.47           13,371.04
Age in 30s                                 [370.7459]**    [376.2451]**        [369.7851]**        [412.5143]**
                                            22,954.86        23,023.68          22,903.91           23,574.17
Age in 40s                                 [528.1951]**    [525.2451]**        [528.1812]**        [559.1690]**
                                            26,130.59        26,213.71          26,049.30           27,053.51
Ages in 50s                                [528.3586]**    [520.3687]**        [532.2630]**        [665.0467]**
                                            13,549.03        13,235.89          13,441.46           14,238.06
High School Graduate                       [462.7623]**    [364.7086]**        [442.0417]**        [533.6823]**
                                            14,827.64         1,528.73          31,464.76           31,406.68
College graduate                          [2,446.0830]**   [2,233.7753]        [865.7874]**       [3,137.9842]**
                                            58,563.83
College grad X MSA BA %, 2000            [10,145.8779]**
                                                              5,384.85
College grad X log density, 2000                           [457.8116]**
                                                                                  -2,451.72
College grad X MSA in decline                                                   [2,151.0076]
                                                                                                     5,864.95
College grad X MSA out-migration                                                                  [23,530.1298]
                                           10,886.21           11,171.58           11,158.06        10,286.03
Constant                                  [827.7585]**       [675.8740]**        [858.1758]**      [938.9894]**
Individual controls                            Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes
MSA fixed effects                              Yes                 Yes                Yes              Yes
N                                           1599342             1591140            1599342            827024
R2                                           0.1603              0.1618             0.1592            0.1512
                            Robust standard errors in brackets, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05


     Note: Dependent variable is total individual wages for 2000, only including males ages 25 to 55.
     Individual-level data are from the Census Public Use Microdata Sample. Metropolitan area education is
     from the Census, calculated using microdata sample. Out-migration probabilities are also calculated from
     the 2000 microdata sample, using the variable for metro area of residence in 1995. Individual controls
     include sex, age, and education. Metropolitan Statistical Areas are as defined under the 1999 definitions.




                                                        31
                              Table 4: Log of Real Wages and Skill Interactions
                                           (1)              (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                                    Log real wages    Log real wages      Log real wages         Log real wages
                                         0.2737           0.2740               0.2735                0.2742
Age in 30s                             [0.0050]**       [0.0049]**           [0.0050]**            [0.0060]**
                                         0.4266           0.4272               0.4261                0.4295
Age in 40s                             [0.0067]**       [0.0065]**           [0.0068]**            [0.0093]**
                                         0.4731           0.4739               0.4725                0.4753
Age in 50s                             [0.0070]**       [0.0066]**           [0.0071]**            [0.0100]**
                                         0.4097           0.4072               0.4085                0.4313
High school graduate                   [0.0130]**       [0.0119]**           [0.0128]**            [0.0155]**
                                         0.3460           0.2187               0.4751                0.4452
College graduate                       [0.0249]**       [0.0206]**           [0.0091]**            [0.0317]**
                                         0.4488
College grad X MSA BA %, 2000          [0.0919]**
                                                          0.0458
College grad X log density 2000                         [0.0039]**
                                                                              -0.0332
College grad X MSA in decline                                                 [0.0222]
                                                                                                      0.3106
College grad X MSA outmigration                                                                      [0.2270]
                                         8.4119              8.4139                 8.4143            8.3687
Constant                               [0.0139]**          [0.0122]**             [0.0138]**        [0.0158]**
MSA fixed effects                         Yes                  Yes                   Yes               Yes
N                                       1296185             1294419                1296185           767962
R2                                       0.2726              0.2733                 0.2724            0.3065
                            Robust standard errors in brackets, ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05


    Note: Dependent variable is the logarithm of individual wages divided by ACCRA metro-area price
    indices for 2000, including only males ages 25 to 55. Individual-level data are from the Census Public
    Use Microdata Sample. Metropolitan area education is from the Census, calculated using microdata
    sample. Out-migration probabilities are also calculated from the 2000 microdata sample using the
    variable for metro area of residence in 1995. Individual controls include sex, age, and education.
    Metropolitan Statistical Areas are as defined under the 1999 definitions.




                                                        32
                             TABLE 5: Education and Out-Migration

                                                                   (1)                 (2)
                                                               Has a BA           Finished HS
         Age                                               -0.00196***          0.0000897
                                                           (0.00055)            (0.00036)
         Male                                              -0.0184***           -0.0288***
                                                           (0.0025)             (0.0017)
         Black                                             -0.184***            -0.0594***
                                                           (0.011)              (0.011)
         Asian                                             0.151***             0.00820
                                                           (0.019)              (0.017)
         Other Race                                        -0.223***            -0.267***
                                                           (0.011)              (0.011)
         % of those 40-55 in the MSA with a BA             1.003***
                                                           (0.053)
         Out-migration Probability                         0.168                0.330***
                                                           (0.13)               (0.060)
         Population Growth (below 25th percentile)         -0.203               -0.184**
                                                           (0.15)               (0.087)
         Population Growth (above 25th percentile)         -0.0594***           -0.0524***
                                                           (0.015)              (0.011)
         % of those 40-55 in the MSA that finished HS                           0.667***
                                                                                (0.049)
         Constant                                          0.111***             0.299***
                                                           (0.027)              (0.051)
         Observations                                      329561               329561
         R-squared                                         0.08                 0.08
                  Robust standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


Note: Dependent variables are binary indicators for highest educational attainment. Only people ages 25
to 40 are included. Individual-level data are from the 2000 Census Public Use Microdata Sample.
Metropolitan area education is from the Census, also calculated using microdata sample. Outmigration
probabilities also calculated from the 2000 microdata sample using the variable for metro area of
residence in 1995. Metropolitan Statistical Areas are as defined under the 1999 definitions.




                                                   33
FIGURE 1: Happiness and Urban Growth in the 1990s

                    Percent happy in MSA                                   .

       .95


                                                               Portland
                                               Richmond
                                                 Minneapo
                                                  Knoxvill Houston,
        .9                                             Tacoma,Nashvill       Atlanta,
                                      Allentow
                                         Norfolk-     Seattle-
                                                          Fresno, Charlott
                                            Kansas   C
                                                  Tampa-St           Dallas,       Phoenix-
                                                   Indianap
                                             San Dieg
                                    St. Baltimor
                                        Loui
                                         Charlest
                                            Fort Way
                                   New Orle
                                        San Fran
                                              Chicago,
                                                   Washingt
                                    Detroit,
                                Clevelan
                           Buffalo-    Los Ange
       .85                         Philadel                 Riversid
                           Pittsbur          Columbus
                                        New York




        .8
             -.2                0                   .2                                   .4   .6
                                       Population Growth in the 1990s

Note: Happiness refers to the share of population reporting being somewhat or very happy in the
General Social Survey between 1972 and 2002. Population growth is the change in the
logarithm of area population from the U.S. Census.




                                                          34
FIGURE 2: Multiple Equilibria and Social Capital




  1.2

    1
                                                         Cost of Investing
  0.8
                                                         Returns to Social
  0.6
                                                         Capital
  0.4                                                    Out-Migration Rate

  0.2

    0
        0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
            Share Investing in Social Capital


Note: Figure is a numerical example of a model described in the text.




                                                35
FIGURE 3: Out-migration and Population Change
                   Probability of Outmigration                                      Fitted values

        .3




                                                                          Austin-S
                                   San Fran              Charlott
        .2
                                   Charlest
                                          Columbus
                                                       Nashvill
                        Dayton-S Norfolk-        Tacoma,
                                          Richmond         Fort
                                                         Tucson,Orlando,
                                                                Lau
                                  Cincinna                    Dallas,
                                        San  Dieg
                                                Seattle- Portland Atlanta,
                                               Knoxvill
                                          Little R          West   Pal
                                Akron,  O Washingt
                                 Los Ange   Indianap
                                           Tampa-St     Riversid
                                                   Fresno,               Phoenix-
                                   New Jackson,
                                       Kansas    C
                                         York Columbia  Houston,
                             New
                       Syracuse    Orle     Minneapo
        .1                    Milwauke
                                     Fort Way
                                           Grand Ra
                                  LouiChicago,
                               St.Allentow
                              Detroit,
                           Clevelan
                       Buffalo-
                             Philadel
                                  Baltimor




                        Pittsbur


        0
             -.2             0                   .2               .4                                .6   .8
                                           Population Growth in the 1990s


Note: Out-migration probability is calculated using the variable for metro area of residence 5
years ago in the 2000 Census microdata sample, dividing the number of people who report living
in the MSA five years ago but now live somewhere else by the total number of people who
report living in the MSA five years ago. MSAs are as determined in the 1999 definitions.
Population growth is the change in the logarithm of area population from the U.S. Census.




                                                               36
FIGURE 4: Population Growth and Initial Skills

                         Population Growth 1970-2000                                   .
                                      Las Vega

       1.5


                                          Orlando- Phoenix-                 Austin-R
                                      Riversid
        1                                                      Raleigh-
                                                                             Tucson,
                                             Miami-Fo  Atlanta-
                                Tampa-St                       Houston-
                                                             Sacramen
                                                            Dallas-F
                                 Bakersfi                         San Dieg                                    Washingt
                          Stockton                      Oxnard-T
                                           Fresno,El Paso,             Salt Lak Albuquer
                                                                                Denver-A
                               JacksonvSan   Anto
                                       Charlott           Portland
                                      Nashvill
                                        Charlest                       Seattle-
        .5                            Greenvil
                                         Little
                                   Augusta-     R O
                                                             Columbia Salinas,
                                                                   Lexingto
                                                                                                San Jose
                           LancasteWinston-  Tulsa,
                                        Portland
                                        Virginia     Baton
                                              Richmond
                                       Greensbo           Oklahoma
                                                            Ro
                                                       Jackson,                          Santa Ba
                                                     Spokane,Los  Minneapo
                                                                 Ange                              Madison,
                    York-Han     Grand     RaKnoxvill
                                      Corpus    C     Poughkee
                                                       Columbus             Honolulu
                                Memphis,Indianap
                            Chattano              Des  Moin
                                                    Wichita,                       San Fran
                  Reading,  Birmingh
                        Mobile,
                         Allentow   Harrisbu    Kansas
                                              Omaha-Co  C
                                    Fort   Baltimor
                                           WayOrle
                                          Shrevepo
                                        Cincinna         Kalamazo
                       Evansvil Worceste
                            Rockford
                               Louisvil  New     Chicago-               Lansing-
                                                                   Trenton-
                            Providen
                              Beaumont
                               Columbus                  Albany-S
                                                   New New
                                                         Have      Boston-C
                                                              Hartford                 Bridgepo
                                 South
                                Erie,    Be
                                       St.
                                      PA   Loui Philadel
                                                 Milwauke    Rocheste
                                                              York
                    Canton-M                 Springfi
                     Huntingt       Detroit- Akron,
                                   Toledo,
                                   Peoria,            O
                                                Dayton,      Syracuse
        0              Flint,Charlest
                             MDavenpor
              Scranton                          Binghamt
                                 Duluth, Clevelan
                     Youngsto Utica-Ro
                                  Pittsbur
                                      Buffalo-




       -.5
             .05                          .1                      .15                                .2                  .25
                                                          Share with BAs 1970


Note: Population growth is the change in the logarithm of area population from the U.S. Census.
Share with BAs is the percentage of the adult population with a college degree in 1970,
calculated from the U.S. Census microdata sample for 1970.




                                                                     37
FIGURE 5: Initial Education Level and Growth in Education

                         Change in Share with BAs 1970-2                               .

      .25                                                  Raleigh-

                                                                Boston-C
                                                                                 San Bridgepo
                                                                                     Fran

                                                                                 Austin-R        San Jose
        .2                                                         Trenton-
                                        Portland
                                          Baltimor     Atlanta-   Minneapo
                                                                                                               Washingt
                                       Charlott
                                Worceste                               Seattle- Denver-A
                                                        New York
                                                 Chicago-
                                                              Hartford
                                                PhiladelC
                                                Kansas  Albany-S                                    Madison,
                                          IndianapDes Moin
                                              Omaha-Co    Portland
                                      NashvillRichmond
                                                   New Columbus
                                                         Have
                                                 Milwauke Dallas-F Lexingto
                                                                  San  Dieg
                            Providen Charlest
      .15                           Harrisbu
                                      St. Loui
                                        Cincinna            Rocheste
                                             Springfi Oxnard-T
                            Birmingh  Winston-
                                  Pittsbur
                                         Little
                                             Orlando-
                                                R        Kalamazo
                               Jacksonv
                         Allentow   Detroit-  Knoxvill Jackson,
                                 Grand  Virginia
                                      Buffalo-
                                          Ra
                                       Greensbo
                                      GreenvilAkron, O
                                             Miami-Fo
                                            Clevelan         Columbia Lansing-
                                                            Sacramen
                                Memphis,             Spokane,Los
                                                      Poughkee   AngeSalt Lak
                                                               Houston-
                                Tampa-St
                                 South BeNew    OrleWichita,
                                                         Phoenix-
                           Lancaste
                               Louisvil
                                      San    Anto            Syracuse      Honolulu
                  Reading,
              Scranton          Erie, PA Way
                                   Toledo,
                                    Fort     Tulsa, O
                                                Dayton,                          Albuquer
                                 Duluth,
                    York-Han Davenpor                     Oklahoma                        Santa Ba
                        Mobile,    Augusta-
                                   Peoria,
                            Chattano            Binghamt                    Tucson,
                    Canton-MRockford                 Baton Ro
        .1             Evansvil
                     Youngsto  Columbus
                       Flint,Charlest
                             MUtica-RoShrevepo
                      Huntingt     Corpus C
                                     Las Vega
                                       Fresno,                        Salinas,
                           Stockton Riversid
                              Beaumont
                                             El Paso,
      .05                       Bakersfi


             .05                          .1                      .15                                 .2                  .25
                                                          Share with BAs 1970


Note: Change in share with BAs is the share of the adult population in the MSA with a BA in
2000 minus the share of the adult population in the MSA with a BA in 1970. Share with BAs in
1970 is the share of the adult population in the MSA with a BA in 1970. Both variables are
calculated from the Census microdata samples (for 1970 and 2000).




                                                                      38
FIGURE 6: Group Membership and Population Growth

                          Group Membership                                           .

       2.5


                                Allentow                     Houston,

                               Fort Way



                                                Seattle-
                                     Columbus                             Riversid
                                                  Nashvill

              Pittsbur
        2
                                                 Tacoma,Washingt
                    Detroit,                                   Atlanta,
                       St. Loui
                Clevelan                  Norfolk-
                                         Minneapo
                                  Indianap    Charlest
                                Baltimor
                                                                              Phoenix-
             Buffalo-
                              San Fran
                                  Kansas C         Portland
                                          Knoxvill
                                                          Fresno,
                                                          San Dieg
                                     Los Ange
                              Chicago,             Charlott
                              New Orle
                         Philadel
                        New York                            Tampa-St
                                         Richmond            Dallas,
       1.5
                          0                                        1                     2
                                                  Population Growth 1970-2000


Note: Group membership is the average number of types of social groups a person in the MSA
belongs to, calculated from the GSS. Population growth is the change in the logarithm of area
population from the U.S. Census.




                                                                  39
FIGURE 7: Group Membership and Out-migration
                    Group Membership                                     Fitted values

        4


                                                                               Tucson,
                                                                                                               Austin-S
        3
                                                                  Akron, O

                                       Allentow          Houston,
                                                  Fort Way Gary
                                                              Riversid Seattle-        Columbus
                                                                                      Nashvill
                   Pittsbur                                                Cincinna
                                                                               Dayton-S
        2                                 Detroit,                Washingt
                                          St. Loui Minneapo Indianap
                                      Clevelan                                  Tacoma,
                                                                         Atlanta,
                                                                                Norfolk-       Charlest
                                    Baltimor
                                      Buffalo-Grand Ra   Columbia
                                                             Phoenix-
                                                         Kansas C        Portland
                                                                      Knoxvill
                                                                      Little R Orlando,                   San Fran
                                           Chicago,           Fresno,
                                                                Los    San
                                                                    Ange     Dieg                          Charlott
                                     Philadel      New Orle  Tampa-St
                                                        New York
                                                  Milwauke                    Dallas,
                                                                              Richmond

                                                         Jackson,
                                                                    West Pal
                                                                                Fort Lau
        1
                                                  Syracuse




        0
             0                                   .1                                                       .2
                                       Probability of Outmigration



Note: Group membership is the average number of types of social groups a person in the MSA
belongs to, calculated from the GSS. Out-migration probability is calculated using the variable
for metro area of residence 5 years ago in the 2000 Census microdata sample, dividing the
number of people who report living in the MSA five years ago but now live somewhere else by
the total number of people who report living in the MSA five years ago.




                                                      40
FIGURE 8: Group Membership and Area Income Growth
                     Group Membership                                                 .

      2.5


                                                Allentow
                                                Houston,

                                             Fort Way



                                                               Seattle-
                              Riversid                        Columbus
                                                                           Nashvill

                                                      Pittsbur
        2                                                      Washingt
                                                Tacoma,
                                                  Detroit,
                                         Clevelan             Norfolk- Atlanta,
                                                         St. Loui
                                                                  Minneapo
                                                     Indianap                        Charlest
                                                                  Baltimor
                                                         Phoenix-
                                          Buffalo-
                                                                                     San Fran
                                                    Portland
                                                      Kansas C
                                                                          Knoxvill
                         Fresno,                  San Dieg
                  Los Ange                     Chicago,                       Charlott
                                                    NewPhiladel
                                                        Orle
                                         New York           Tampa-St
                                                           Dallas,    Richmond
      1.5
            1.6                     1.8                      2                                  2.2   2.4
                                                  Income Growth 1970-2000


Note: Group membership is the average number of types of social groups a person in the MSA
belongs to, calculated from the GSS. Income growth is per capita income growth in the area,
calculated from the U.S. Census.




                                                                     41
FIGURE 9: Group Memberships and Length of Time in the Community
            2     1.5
   mean of memnum
         1  .5
            0




                        Less than 1 yr   1-3 years    4-10 years   More than 10 yrs


Note: Group membership reports the average number of social groups a person reports being a
member of in the GSS, broken down into four categories for how long they report having lived in
their current community (also from the GSS).




                                                     42
FIGURE 10: Voting and Length of Time in the Community
                       .8
   Percentage that voted in 1984 election
      .2            .4 0         .6




                                            Less than 1 yr   1-3 years   4-10 years   More than 10 yrs



Note: In this graph, respondents in the GSS are broken down by how long they report having
lived in their current community, and then by the percentage of those eligible to vote that did
vote in the 1984 election is reported. The 1984 election was chosen because the question on
length of residence in the community was only asked in the GSS for some years in the mid
1980s.




                                                                         43
FIGURE 11: College Graduate vs. HS Dropout Outmigration Probabilities
                     College Graduate's Outmigration                                Fitted values
                                                                                 Charlott
                                                                                 San Fran
       .25
                                                             Albuquer
                                                                      Charlest
                                                 San Anto      Columbus                                          Austin-S

                                                             Dayton-S           Pensacol
                                                    Knoxvill
                                                   Wichita,
                                               Richmond                  Cincinna
        .2                                        Toledo,             Akron, O
                                                                 Tucson,
                                                               Little Tacoma,
                                                                      R Fort Lau            Salt LakJose
                                                                                      Modesto, San
                                                             Dallas,
                                                         Norfolk-Fresno,               Nashvill
                                       Columbia                    Louisvil        Lakeland
                                                  Syracuse Indianap Atlanta,      Orlando,      Stockton
                                                                                                  Spokane,
                                            Youngsto                        Melbourn
                                                                        Portland              Bakersfi
                                            Harrisbu
                                               New     Jackson,
                                                    York      San Dieg
                                                 New  Orle
                                                  Washingt
                                                  Kansas Baton
                                              Houston,         Canton-M
                                                           CRiversid   Tampa-St
       .15                                    Greensbo         Fort
                                                                  RoWay
                                                                Los  Ange                             Las Vega
                               Buffalo-    St.McAllen-
                                               Loui         Milwauke West Pal          Seattle-
                                                            Phoenix-SacramenBoise Ci
                                         Clevelan MonmouthMinneapo
                               Baltimor Detroit,
                               Philadel   Chicago,
                                               Lancaste
                                           Grand  Ra                          Sarasota
                                                       Allentow

        .1                          Scranton




       .05
                    Pittsbur


             0                                               .1                                                             .2
                                               HS Dropout's Outmigration Prob.



Note: This figure graphs an area’s out-migration probability for its college graduates vs. its out-
migration probability for its high school dropouts. A person’s level of education is determined
from the U.S. Census microdata sample (we classify those who complete less than 12 years of
schooling as high school dropouts), and out-migration probabilities are also calculated using
geographic and migration variables in the Census microdata sample.




                                                                  44
FIGURE 12: Difference in BA and HS Migration Rates and Population Growth
                    BA Migration-HS Migration                                   Fitted values

        .1



                            Youngsto

                               Toledo,
                                     Akron, O              San Anto
                                                Wichita,
                           Syracuse
                            Buffalo-                     Knoxvill
                                         Harrisbu
                                          CincinnaColumbusColumbia
                             Dayton-SSt. Loui Fort Way
       .05                        Canton-M
                                    New Orle
                                 Clevelan
                                                            Pensacol
                                                    Little R Modesto,
                                                               Fresno,
                                           Charlest        Greensbo
                                     Milwauke      Baton   Ro     Salt Lak
                                         Baltimor
                                                Jackson, Albuquer
                                    Philadel Lancaste  Indianap
                                     Detroit,
                                         Allentow   Richmond
                                                   Monmouth
                                                 Kansas   C         Tucson,
                                           New York         Tacoma,     Charlott
                           Scranton        Louisvil
                                                Chicago,                Fort Lau
                                          San  Fran        Lakeland
                                                     Tampa-St
                                                      Grand Ra     Houston,
                                                                           Dallas,
                                                        Minneapo
                                                     Spokane,                      Atlanta,
                                                         Stockton Portland
                                            Norfolk- Washingt      Riversid
                            Pittsbur                           Bakersfi
                                         Los Ange          MelbournNashvill                 McAllen-
                                                                                            Austin-S
                                                                                          Boise Ci
                                                 San Dieg Sacramen            Orlando,                 Las Vega
                                                                         West Pal        Phoenix-
                                                 San JoseSeattle-
        0

                                                           Sarasota


             -.2                  0                     .2                                    .4         .6
                                          Population Growth in the 1990s



Note: This figure plots the difference in outmigration probabilities between those who finish
college and those who finish high school against an area’s population growth in the 1990s.
Population growth is calculated as the change in the logarithm of an area’s population between
2000 and 1990. Both variables are calculated using the Census microdata sample.




                                                              45
FIGURE 13: Difference in BA and HS Migration Rates and Income


                         BA Migration-HS Migration                             Fitted values

        .1



                                          Youngsto

                                                         Toledo,
                                          San Anto        Akron, O
                                                            Wichita,
                                                       Syracuse
                                                    Knoxvill
                                                      Buffalo-
                                                              Harrisbu
                                                             Columbus
                                                             Cincinna
                                                       Columbia
                                                          Dayton-S
                                                         Fort   St. Loui
                                                              Way
       .05                                   Pensacol
                                          Fresno,
                                                 Canton-M
                                           New Orle
                                                  Little R    Clevelan
                                                Modesto,
                                              Charlest      Greensbo
                                            Salt LakRo
                                             Baton             Milwauke
                                             Jackson,
                                                   Albuquer                Baltimor
                                                                Indianap
                                                           Lancaste       Philadel
                                                   Tucson, Allentow  Richmond
                                                                KansasDetroit,
                                                                         C           Monmouth
                                                                                New York
                                           ScrantonTacoma,
                                                       LouisvilCharlott      Fort Lau
                                                                           Chicago,
                                              Lakeland Tampa-St                                         San Fran
                                                       Grand RaHouston,   Dallas,
                                                 Spokane,                   Atlanta,
                                                                           Minneapo
                                                Stockton
                                                       Norfolk-  Portland
                                                          Riversid                                Washingt
                    McAllen-                 Bakersfi PittsburNashvill
                                                  Boise CiAustin-S
                                                                 Melbourn
                                                              Las Vega  Los Ange
                                                                         San Dieg
                                                                    Sacramen
                                                              Orlando,
                                                              Phoenix-                       West Pal
                                                                                   Seattle-    San Jose
        0

                                                                       Sarasota


             5000                 10000                 15000                             20000                    25000
                                                Income per Capita, 1990



Note: This figure plots the difference in outmigration probabilities between those who finish
college and those who finish high school against an area’s income per capita in 1990. Both the
outmigration proabilities and income per capita are calculated using the U.S. Census.




                                                             46
