                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MONOPOLY POWER AND ENDOGENOUS PRODUCT VARIETY:
                        DISTORTIONS AND REMEDIES

                                        Florin O. Bilbiie
                                         Fabio Ghironi
                                         Marc J. Melitz

                                      Working Paper 14383
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w14383


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2008




For helpful comments, we thank Sanjay Chugh, Ippei Fujiwara, Hugo Hopenhayn, Giammario
Impullitti, Henning Weber, Mirko Wiederholt, and participants in numerous seminars and
conferences. We are grateful to Nicholas Sim, Pinar Uysal, and Benjamin Chen for excellent
research assistance, and to Pablo Winant for computational help. Bilbiie gratefully acknowledges
without implicating the support of Banque de France via the eponymous Chair at PSE, and of
Institut Universitaire de France. Ghironi and Melitz thank the NSF for financial support through a
grant to the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2008 by Florin O. Bilbiie, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monopoly Power and Endogenous Product Variety: Distortions and Remedies
Florin O. Bilbiie, Fabio Ghironi, and Marc J. Melitz
NBER Working Paper No. 14383
October 2008, Revised June 2016
JEL No. D42,H32,L16

                                           ABSTRACT

The inefficiencies related to endogenous product creation and variety under monopolistic
competition are two-fold: one static—the misalignment between consumers and producers
regarding the value of a new variety; and one dynamic—time variation in markups.
Quantitatively, the welfare costs of the former are potentially very large relative to the latter. For
a calibrated version of our model with these distortions, their total cost amounts to 2 percent of
consumption. Appropriate taxation schemes can implement the optimum amount of entry and
variety. Elastic labor introduces a further distortion that should be corrected by subsidizing labor
at a rate equal to the markup for goods, in order to preserve profit margins and hence entry
incentives.

Florin O. Bilbiie                                 Marc J. Melitz
PSE, Sorbonne, CEPR                               Department of Economics
florin.bilbiie@gmail.com                          Harvard University
                                                  215 Littauer Center
Fabio Ghironi                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Department of Economics                           and NBER
University of Washington                          mmelitz@harvard.edu
Savery Hall, Box 353330
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
ghiro@uw.edu
1       Introduction

What are the consequences of monopoly power for the efficiency of business cycle fluctuations and
new product creation? If market power results in inefficiency, how large are the welfare costs of
inefficient entry and variety? How do they depend upon structural parameters, and what tools
can the policymaker employ to maximize social welfare and restore efficiency? We address these
questions in the context of the dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium (DSGE) model with mo-
nopolistic competition and endogenous product creation developed in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz
(2012 – henceforth, BGM). Specifically, we compare the competitive and planner equilibria, con-
trasting the market solution with the efficient responses to exogenous shocks yielding the optimum
amount of product variety when product creation is subject to sunk costs, a time-to-build lag, and
an obsolescence risk. We then quantify the welfare cost of those distortions in a calibrated version
of the model that has been used by BGM to study U.S. business cycle data on entry, product cre-
ation, and the cyclicality of profits and markups. Lastly, we outline some fiscal policies that ensure
implementation of the Pareto optimum as a competitive equilibrium when efficiency of the market
solution fails. The policy schemes that implement efficiency in our model fully specify the optimal
path of the relevant distortionary instruments over the business cycles triggered by unexpected
shocks to productivity and entry costs.1
        Our main theorem identifies two distortions as the sources of inefficient entry and product variety
in this dynamic model with general preferences over consumption varieties. The first distortion,
which we label “static,” pertains to the intratemporal misalignement between the benefit on an
extra variety to the consumer, and the profit incentive for an entrant to produce that extra variety.
The second distortion, which we label “dynamic,” is associated with the intertemporal variation
of markups. Both distortions disappear if and only if preferences are of the C.E.S. form originally
studied by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977)—case in which our dynamic market equilibrium is also efficient.
We quantify the welfare cost of these inefficiencies in a calibrated version of our model and find
that they can be sizable, in particular those due to the static distortion. For a calibration used
by BGM (2012) to replicate US business cycle moments regarding entry, profits, and markups, the
cost is very large: around 2 percentage points of consumption.
        The policymaker can use a variety of fiscal instruments (in conjunction with lump-sum taxes or
    1
    By studying the efficiency properties of our model, this paper contributes to the literature on the efficiency
properties of monopolistic competition started by the original work of Lerner (1934) and developed by Samuelson
(1947), Spence (1976), Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), and Grossman and Helpman (1991), among others. See also Mankiw
and Whinston (1986), Benassy (1996), Kim (2004), and Opp, Parlour and Walden (2014).


                                                        1
transfers) to alleviate these distortions and ensure implementation of the first-best equilibrium. We
study an example consisting of a combination of appropriately designed VAT and dividend/profit
taxes that can implement the first-best equilibrium. The dividend/profit tax aligns firms’ entry
incentives with consumers’ love for variety, while the VAT tax correct for the intertemporally
inefficient allocation of resources that is due to the intertemporal misalignment of markups.
       Efficiency also requires that markups be synchronized across all items that bring utility (or
disutility) to consumers. We show this by considering the case of endogenous labor supply, thereby
introducing a leisure good that is not subject to a markup; this opens a wedge between marginal
rates of substitution and transformation between consumption and leisure that distorts labor supply.
Efficiency is restored if the government taxes leisure (or subsidizes labor supply) at a rate equal
to the net markup in consumption goods prices, even if goods remain priced above marginal cost.
While this result also holds in a model with a fixed number of firms, an equivalent optimal policy
in that setup would have the markup removed by a proportional revenue subsidy. In our model,
such a policy of inducing marginal cost pricing – if financed with lump-sum taxation of firm profits
– would eliminate entry incentives, since the sunk entry cost could not be covered in the absence
of profits.2 Our results show that monopoly profits should in fact be preserved whenever product
variety is endogenously determined by firm entry, for they play a crucial role in generating the
welfare-maximizing level of product variety in equilibrium.3
       The framework and results developed herein provide the foundation for a number of applica-
tions and extensions that have appeared in subsequent normative analyses of different policies in
macroeconomic models. To give some examples, Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008) rely on results
in this paper when discussing optimal monetary policy in a sticky-price version of the model in
which policy can deliver the first-best outcome. Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2014) consider
the case of Ramsey-optimal monetary policy in a second-best environment. Bergin and Corsetti
(2008, 2014), Cooke (2015), Etro and Rossi (2015), Faia (2009, 2012), and Lewis (2013) also build
on the framework and insights developed herein—or use related frameworks—to provide results on
optimal monetary policy in a variety of scenarios.4 In fiscal policy analysis, Chugh and Ghironi
   2
     We are implicitly assuming that the government is not contemporaneously subsidizing the entire amount of the
entry cost. In Appendix E, we show that inducing marginal cost pricing can implement the efficient equilibrium
in our model only when the lump-sum taxation that finances the necessary sales subsidy is optimally split between
households and firms, and that this requires zero lump-sum taxation of firm profits when preferences are of the form
studied by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977).
   3
     Our results thus stand in sharp contrast to the common policy prescription of eliminating monopoly profits, found
in a large body of literature studying optimal monetary and fiscal policy in the presence of monopolistic competition.
   4
     Cacciatore, Fiori, and Ghironi (2016) and Cacciatore and Ghironi (2012) integrate results and intuitions in this
paper in their analyses of the interaction of optimal monetary policy with market reforms, such as reductions in entry


                                                          2
(2015) use our model to study Ramsey-optimal fiscal policy. Lewis and Wikler (2015) focus on
the consequences of oligopolistic competition in a model that is simplified by removing dynamic
features of our analysis, while Colciago (2015) introduces oligopolistic competition in our dynamic
framework. Bertoletti and Etro (2015, 2016) and Etro (2016) use a setup with more general (and
not necessarily homothetic) preferences, and also study normative implications. Epifani and Gancia
(2011) study misallocation resulting from heterogenous markups, and the welfare effects of trade
liberalization. Dhingra and Morrow (2013) look at optimum product variety with heterogenous
firms and variable elasticity of substitution. The results in the aforementioned (and other) studies
build upon or otherwise use the normative insights developed in this paper.
      The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the benchmark model with fixed
labor supply and characterizes the competitive equilibrium and (in subsection 2.6) the Pareto-
optimal allocation of the social planner. Section 3 states and proves our welfare theorem, and
discusses the intuition for it; the same section computes numerically the welfare costs of inefficient
variety in our model and studies optimal fiscal policies that implement the first-best allocation.
Section 4 extends the analysis to the case of endogenous labor supply, and section 5 concludes.


2     A Model of Endogenous Entry and Product Variety

This section outlines the model and solves for the monopolistically competitive market equilibrium
and for the Pareto-optimal planner equilibrium, respectively.


2.1     Household Preferences

The economy is populated by a unit mass of atomistic households. We begin by assuming that
the representative household supplies L units of labor inelastically in each period at the nominal
wage rate Wt . The household maximizes expected intertemporal utility from consumption (C):
Et ∞      s−t U (C ), where β ∈ (0, 1) is the subjective discount factor and U (C) is a period utility
  P
    s=t β         s

function with the standard properties. At time t, the household consumes the basket of goods Ct ,
defined as a homothetic aggregate over a continuum of goods Ω. At any given time t, only a subset
of goods Ωt ⊂ Ω is available. Let pt (ω) denote the nominal price of a good ω ∈ Ωt . Our model can
be solved for any parametrization of symmetric homothetic preferences. For any such preferences,
there exists a well defined homothetic consumption index Ct and an associated welfare-based price
barriers in a monetary union or trade integration.




                                                     3
index Pt . The demand for an individual variety, ct (ω), is then obtained as ct (ω)dω = Ct ∂Pt /∂pt (ω),
where we use the conventional notation for quantities with a continuum of goods as flow values.5
      Given the demand for an individual variety, ct (ω), the symmetric price elasticity of demand
is in general a function of the number Nt of goods/producers (where Nt is the mass of Ωt , and θ
measures the elasticity of substitution):

                                       ∂ct (ω) pt (ω)
                          θ(Nt ) ≡ −                  ,    for any symmetric variety ω.
                                       ∂pt (ω) ct (ω)

The benefit of additional product variety is captured by the relative price ρ:

                                               pt (ω)
                          ρt (ω) = ρ(Nt ) ≡           ,    for any symmetric variety ω,
                                                 Pt

or, in elasticity form:
                                                           ρ0 (Nt )
                                                (Nt ) ≡            Nt .
                                                           ρ(Nt )

Together, θ(Nt ) and ρ(Nt ) completely characterize the choice of symmetric homothetic preferences
in our model; explicit expressions can be obtained for these objects upon specifying functional
forms for preferences, as will become clear in the discussion below.


2.2     Firms

There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms, each producing a different variety
ω ∈ Ω. Production requires only one factor, labor. Aggregate labor productivity is indexed by
Zt , which represents the effectiveness of one unit of labor. Zt is exogenous and follows an AR(1)
process (in logarithms). Output supplied by firm ω is yt (ω) = Zt lt (ω), where lt (ω) is the firm’s
labor demand for productive purposes. The unit cost of production, in units of the consumption
good Ct , is wt /Zt , where wt ≡ Wt /Pt is the real wage.6
      Prior to entry, firms face a sunk entry cost of fE,t effective labor units, equal to wt fE,t /Zt units
of the consumption basket. fE,t is exogenous and follows an AR(1) process (in logarithms). There
are no fixed production costs. Hence, all firms that enter the economy produce in every period,
until they are hit with a “death” shock, which occurs with probability δ ∈ (0, 1) in every period.7
   5
     See the appendix for more details. Since this is a real model, the price of the final good is not determined; we
use the final good as the numeraire.
   6
     Consistent with standard real business cycle theory, aggregate productivity Zt affects all firms uniformly.
   7
     For simplicity, we do not consider endogenous exit. As we show in BGM, appropriate calibration of δ makes it
possible for our model to match several important features of the data.



                                                           4
   Given our modeling assumption relating each firm to an individual variety, we think of a firm as
a production line for that variety, and the entry cost as the development and setup cost associated
with the latter (potentially influenced by market regulation). The exogenous “death” shock also
takes place at the individual variety level. Empirically, a firm may comprise more than one of these
production lines, but – for simplicity – our model does not address the determination of product
variety within firms.
   Firms set prices in a flexible fashion as markups over marginal costs. In units of consumption,
firm ω’s price is ρt (ω) = µt wt /Zt , where the markup µt is in general a function of the number of
producers: µt = µ (Nt ) ≡ θ(Nt )/ (θ(Nt ) − 1) . The firm’s profit in units of consumption, returned
                                                       
to households as dividend, is dt (ω) = 1 − µ (Nt )−1 YtC /Nt , where YtC is total output of the
consumption basket and will in equilibrium be equal to total consumption demand Ct .


Preference Specifications and Markups

We consider four alternative preference specifications as special cases for illustrative purposes below.
The first preference specification features a constant elasticity of substitution between goods as in
Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). For these C.E.S. preferences (henceforth, C.E.S.-DS), the consumption
                   R                   θ/(θ−1)
aggregator is Ct = ω∈Ω ct (ω)(θ−1)/θ dω          , where θ > 1 is the symmetric elasticity of substi-
                                                                        R                 1/(1−θ)
tution across goods. The consumption-based price index is then Pt = ω∈Ωt pt (ω)1−θ dω               ,
and the household’s demand for each individual good ω is ct (ω) = (pt (ω) /Pt )−θ Ct . It follows that
the markup and the benefit of variety are independent of the number of goods: µ (Nt )−1 =  (Nt ) =
 = 1/ (θ − 1). The second specification a variant of C.E.S. with generalized love of variety intro-
duced by the working paper version of Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) and used also by Benassy (1996).
This variant disentangles monopoly power (measured by the net markup 1/ (θ − 1)) and consumer
love for variety, captured by a constant parameter ξ > 0. With this specification (labelled “general
                                                             1
                                                               R                     θ/(θ−1)
C.E.S.” henceforth), the consumption basket is Ct = (Nt )ξ− θ−1 ω∈Ω ct (ω)(θ−1)/θ dω           . The
third preference specification uses the translog expenditure function proposed by Feenstra (2003).
For this specification, the symmetric price elasticity of demand is θ (Nt ) = 1+σNt , where σ > 0 is a
free parameter. The expression for relative price ρ (Nt ) is given in Table 1, where Ñ is the measure
of all possible varieties, Ñ ≡ M ass (Ω). As Nt increases, goods become closer substitutes, and the
elasticity of substitution increases. If goods are closer substitutes, then both the markup µ (Nt )




                                                   5
and the benefit of additional varieties in elasticity form ( (Nt )) must decrease;8 for this specific
functional form, the change in  (Nt ) is only half the change in the net markup generated by an
increase in the number of producers. Finally, the fourth preference specification features exponen-
tial love-of-variety (we call it “exponential” for short) and is in some sense just the opposite of the
General C.E.S. specification: the elasticity of substitution is not constant (because of demand-side
pricing complementarities), but the benefit of variety is equal to the net markup.9 Specifically,
the symmetric elasticity of substitution is of the same form as under translog θ (Nt ) = 1 + αNt ,
where α > 0 is a free parameter. However, differently from translog, the relative price is given by
                 1
              − αN
ρ (Nt ) = e      t   : it follows that the benefit of variety is equal to the markup (and profit incentive
for entry):  (Nt ) = µ (Nt ) − 1 = 1/αNt . Table 1 summarizes the expressions for markup, relative
price, and benefit of variety in elasticity form for each preference specification.
       Table 1. Four Preference Specifications: Markup, relative price and benefit of variety


       C.E.S.-D.S.               General C.E.S.        Translog                                   Exponential
                            θ                     θ                 θ(Nt )                   1                 θ(Nt )            1
       µ (Nt ) = µ =       θ−1   µ (Nt ) = µ =   θ−1   µ (Nt ) =   θ(Nt )−1       =1+       σNt   µ (Nt ) =   θ(Nt )−1    =1+   αNt
                       1                                                    Ñ −Nt
                                                                     − 21                                         1
                                                                                                               − αN
       ρ (Nt ) = Ntθ−1           ρ (Nt ) = Ntξ         ρ (Nt ) = e          σ Ñ Nt               ρ (Nt ) = e         t

                                                                     1           µ(Nt )−1                      1
        (Nt ) = µ − 1            (Nt ) = ξ            (Nt ) =   2σNt      =      2              (Nt ) =   αNt   = µ (Nt ) − 1




Firm Entry and Exit

In every period, there is a mass Nt of firms producing in the economy and an unbounded mass of
prospective entrants. These entrants are forward looking, and correctly anticipate their expected
future profits ds (ω) in every period s ≥ t + 1 as well as the probability δ (in every period) of
incurring the exit-inducing shock. Entrants at time t only start producing at time t + 1, which
introduces a one-period time-to-build lag in the model. The exogenous exit shock occurs at the
very end of the time period (after production and entry). A proportion δ of new entrants will
therefore never produce. Prospective entrants in period t compute their expected post-entry value
   8
      This property for the markup occurs whenever the price elasticity of residual demand decreases with quantity
consumed along the residual demand curve.
    9
      The exponential specification eliminates entry inefficiency but introduces markup misalignment over time, whereas
the general C.E.S. specification features inefficient entry but with constant markups; in this sense, we refer to
them as being ”opposite”. Both distortions operate under translog preferences. It should be noted that the utility
representation for both general C.E.S. and exponential preferences would involve the number of goods available, even
if not consumed.




                                                           6
(vt (ω)) given by the present discounted value of their expected stream of profits {ds (ω)}∞
                                                                                           s=t+1 :

                                              ∞
                                              X                       U 0 (Cs )
                               vt (ω) = Et           [β (1 − δ)]s−t             ds (ω) .                        (1)
                                                                      U 0 (Ct )
                                             s=t+1


This also represents the value of incumbent firms after production has occurred (since both new
entrants and incumbents then face the same probability 1 − δ of survival and production in the
subsequent period). Entry occurs until firm value is equalized with the entry cost, leading to the
free entry condition vt (ω) = wt fE,t /Zt . This condition holds so long as the mass NE,t of entrants
is positive. We assume that macroeconomic shocks are small enough for this condition to hold in
every period.10 Finally, the timing of entry and production is such that the number of producing
firms during period t is given by Nt = (1 − δ) (Nt−1 + NE,t−1 ). The number of producing firms
represents the capital stock of the economy. It is an endogenous state variable that behaves much
like physical capital in a benchmark real business cycle (RBC) model.


Symmetric Firm Equilibrium

All firms face the same marginal cost. Hence, equilibrium prices, quantities, and firm values are
identical across firms: pt (ω) = pt , ρt (ω) = ρt , lt (ω) = lt , yt (ω) = yt , dt (ω) = dt , vt (ω) = vt . In
turn, equality of prices across firms implies that the consumption-based price index Pt and the firm-
level price pt are such that pt /Pt ≡ ρt = ρ (Nt ). An increase in the number of firms is associated
with an increase in this relative price: ρ0 (Nt ) > 0, capturing the love of variety utility gain. The
aggregate consumption output of the economy is YtC = Nt ρt yt = Ct .
       Importantly, in the symmetric firm equilibrium, the value of waiting to enter is zero, despite the
entry decision being subject to sunk costs and exit risk; i.e., there are no option-value considerations
pertaining to the entry decision. This happens because all uncertainty in our model (including the
“death” shock) is aggregate.11


2.3      Household Budget Constraint and Intertemporal Decisions

We assume without loss of generality that households hold only shares in a mutual fund of firms.
Let xt be the share in the mutual fund of firms held by the representative household entering period
  10
     Periods with zero entry (NE,t = 0) may occur as a consequence of large enough (adverse) exogenous shocks. In
these periods, the free entry condition would hold as a strict inequality: vt (ω) < wt fE,t /Zt .
  11
     See the appendix for the proof. In this paper, we assume that the exogenous shocks are small enough to rule out
this possibility.



                                                          7
t. The mutual fund pays a total profit in each period (in units of currency) equal to the total profit
of all firms that produce in that period, Pt Nt dt . During period t, the representative household buys
xt+1 shares in a mutual fund of NH,t ≡ Nt + NE,t firms (those already operating at time t and the
new entrants). Only Nt+1 = (1 − δ) NH,t firms will produce and pay dividends at time t + 1. Since
the household does not know which firms will be hit by the exogenous exit shock δ at the very
end of period t, it finances the continuing operation of all pre-existing firms and all new entrants
during period t. The date t price (in units of currency) of a claim to the future profit stream of the
mutual fund of NH,t firms is equal to the nominal price of claims to future firm profits, Pt vt .
      The household enters period t with mutual fund share holdings xt and receives dividend income
and the value of selling its initial share position, and labor income. The household allocates these
resources between purchases of shares to be carried into next period, consumption, and lump-sum
taxes Tt levied by the government. The period budget constraint (in units of consumption) is:


                                 vt NH,t xt+1 + Ct + Tt = (dt + vt ) Nt xt + wt L.                  (2)


      The household maximizes its expected intertemporal utility subject to (2). The Euler equation
for share holdings is:
                                                          U 0 (Ct+1 )
                                                                                   
                                  vt = β (1 − δ) Et                   (vt+1 + dt+1 ) .
                                                           U 0 (Ct )

As expected, forward iteration of this equation and absence of speculative bubbles yield the asset
price solution in equation (1).12


2.4     Aggregate Accounting and Equilibrium

Aggregating the budget constraint (2) across households and imposing the equilibrium condition
xt+1 = xt = 1 ∀t yields the aggregate accounting identity Ct + NE,t vt = wt L + Nt dt : Total
consumption plus investment (in new firms) must be equal to total income (labor income plus
dividend income).
      Different from the benchmark, one-sector, RBC model, our model economy is a two-sector
economy in which one sector employs part of the labor endowment to produce consumption and
the other sector employs the rest of the labor endowment to produce new firms. The economy’s
GDP, Yt , is equal to total income, wt L + Nt dt . In turn, Yt is also the total output of the economy,
given by consumption output, YtC (= Ct ), plus investment output, NE,t vt . With this in mind, vt is
 12
      We omit the transversality condition that must be satisfied to ensure optimality.


                                                             8
the relative price of the investment “good” in terms of consumption.
      Labor market equilibrium requires that the total amount of labor used in production and to set
up the new entrants’ plants must equal aggregate labor supply: LC    E             C
                                                                t + Lt = L, where Lt = Nt lt

is the total amount of labor used in production of consumption, and LE
                                                                     t = NE,t fE,t /Zt is labor

used to build new firms. In the benchmark RBC model, physical capital is accumulated by using
as investment part of the output of the same good used for consumption. In other words, all labor
is allocated to the only productive sector of the economy. When labor supply is fixed, there are no
labor market dynamics in the model, other than the determination of the equilibrium wage along
a vertical supply curve. In our model, even when labor supply is fixed, labor market dynamics
arise in the allocation of labor between production of consumption and creation of new plants.
The allocation is determined jointly by the entry decision of prospective entrants and the portfolio
decision of households who finance that entry. The value of firms, or the relative price of investment
in terms of consumption vt , plays a crucial role in determining this allocation.13


2.5     The Competitive Equilibrium

The model with general homothetic preferences is summarized in Table 2 in the Appendix C; as
shown there, the model can be reduced to a system of two equations in two variables, Nt and Ct .
In particular, the reduced-form Euler equation linking consumption and the number of goods is:

                                   U 0 (Ct+1 )
                                                                                                     
                                                                   µ (Nt )   Ct+1                 1
 fE,t ρ (Nt ) = β (1 − δ) Et                     fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )          +      µ (Nt ) 1 −               .
                                    U 0 (Ct )                     µ (Nt+1 ) Nt+1              µ (Nt+1 )
                                                                                                           (3)
      The number of new entrants as a function of consumption and number of firms is NE,t =
Zt L/fE,t − Ct / (fE,t ρ (Nt )). Substituting this into the law of motion for Nt (scrolled forward one
period) yields:                                                                 
                                                         Zt L       Ct
                                   Nt+1   = (1 − δ) Nt +      −                      .                             (4)
                                                         fE,t   fE,t ρ (Nt )

      We are now in a position to define a competitive equilibrium of our economy.14

      Definition 1: A Competitive Equilibrium (CE) consists of a 2-tuple {Ct , Nt+1 } satisfying (3)
and (4) for a given initial value N0 and a transversality condition for investment in shares.
   13
      When labor supply is elastic, labor market dynamics operate along two margins as the interaction of household
and firm decisions determines jointly the total amount of labor and its allocation to the two sectors of the economy.
   14
      It is understood that we use ‘competitive equilibrium’ to refer to the equilibrium of the market economy in which
firms compete in the assumed monopolistically competitive fashion with no intervention of the policymaker in the
economy. Thus, the use of the word ‘competitive’ implies no reference to perfect competition.


                                                          9
    The system of stochastic difference equations (3) and (4) has a unique stationary equilibrium
under the following conditions. A steady-state CE satisfies:


                                                                             
                                                               C
                            fE ρ (N ) = β (1 − δ) fE ρ (N ) +     (µ (N ) − 1) ,
                                                              N
                                                                δ
                                   C = Zρ (N ) L − ρ (N ) fE        N.
                                                              1−δ

After eliminating C, this system reduces to:

                                                     ZL (1 − δ)
                                     H CE (N ) ≡                  = N,
                                                        r+δ
                                                   fE µ(N )−1 + δ


where r ≡ (1 − β) /β.15
    The steady-state number of firms in the CE, N CE , is a fixed point of H CE (N ) . We assume that
limN →0 µ (N ) = ∞ and limN →∞ µ (N ) = 1. Since H CE (N ) is continuous, limN →0 H CE (N ) = ∞,
                                                                                      0
and limN →∞ H CE (N ) = 0, H CE (N ) has a unique fixed point if and only if H CE (N ) ≤ 0. Given
                                                                            


                                          0         (1 − δ) (r + δ) ZL
                                      (N ) = µ0 (N )
                                  CE
                                  H                                     ,
                                                      (r + δµ (N ))2 fE

this will hold if and only if µ0 (N ) ≤ 0.
    The intuition for the uniqueness condition is that more product variety leads to a “crowding in”
of the product space and goods becoming closer substitutes (with C.E.S. a limiting case). This is a
very reasonable condition: If goods were to become more differentiated as product variety increases,
then the motivation for multiple equilibria would be apparent: There could be one equilibrium with
many firms charging high markups and producing little, and another with few firms charging low
markups and producing relatively more.
    In BGM, we study the business cycle properties of the competitive equilibrium. In the present
paper, we compare this with the planning optimum.
  15
     Allowing households to hold bonds in our model would simply pin down the real interest rate as a function of
the expected path of consumption determined by the system in Table 2. In steady state, the real interest rate would
be such that β (1 + r) = 1. For notational convenience, we thus replace the expression (1 − β) /β with r when the
equations in Table 2 imply the presence of such term.




                                                        10
2.6      The Planning (Pareto) Optimum

Given the model just outlined, we now study a hypothetical scenario in which a benevolent planner
maximizes lifetime utility of the representative household by choosing quantities directly (including
the number of goods produced via the number of entrants).
       The “production function” for aggregate consumption output is Ct = Zt ρ (Nt ) LC
                                                                                      t . Hence, the

problem solved by the planner can be written as:

                                                                     ∞
                                                                     X
                                                                           β s−t U Zs ρ (Ns ) LC
                                                                                                 
                                                      max
                                                        ∞
                                                          Et                                   s ,
                                                     {LC
                                                       s }s=t        s=t
                                                                            L − LC
                                                                                    
                                                                                 t Zt
                                    s.t. Nt+1        = (1 − δ) Nt + (1 − δ)           ,
                                                                               fE,t

or, substituting the constraint into the utility function and treating next period’s state as the choice
variable:
                                    ∞                                                                   
                                    X
                                              s−t                                1 fE,s         fE,s
                    max        Et         β         U Zs ρ (Ns ) L −                     Ns+1 +      Ns        .   (5)
                  {Ns+1 }∞
                         s=t        s=t
                                                                              (1 − δ) Zs         Zs

       As we show in Appendix C, the first-order condition for this problem can be written as:
                                                                                                         
              0                                                  0                           Ct+1
             U (Ct ) ρ (Nt ) fE,t = β (1 − δ) Et                U (Ct+1 ) fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 ) +       (Nt+1 ) .      (6)
                                                                                             Nt+1

This equation, together with the dynamic constraint (4) (which is the same under the competitive
and planner equilibria) leads to the following definition.

       Definition 2: A Planning Equilibrium (PE) consists of a 2-tuple {Ct , Nt+1 } satisfying (4) and
(6) for a given initial value N0 .

       The conditions for uniqueness of the stationary PE are similar to those for the CE found in the
previous section. The steady-state number of firms N P E is the fixed point of a function similar to
H CE (N ) , where the variety effect  (N ) replaces the net markup:

                                                                       ZL (1 − δ)
                                                    H P E (N ) ≡                  .
                                                                          r+δ
                                                                      fE (N ) + δ

Therefore, the system of stochastic difference equations (4) and (6) has a unique stationary equi-
librium if and only if limN →0  (N ) = ∞, limN →∞  (N ) = 0, and 0 (N ) ≤ 0.16 The intuition for
  16
    Note that the solution for the stationary PE can be obtained by replacing the net markup function µ (N ) in the
stationary CE solution with the benefit of variety function  (N ) .


                                                                      11
these uniqueness conditions is analogous to the one for the competitive equilibrium: more product
variety leads to a “crowding in” of product space and goods become closer substitutes (with C.E.S.
a limiting case). In the PE case, this requires decreasing returns to increased product variety
(very similar to the condition that goods become closer substitutes). C.E.S. is again a limiting
case where there are “constant elasticity returns” to increased product variety: Doubling product
variety, holding spending constant, always increases welfare by the same percentage.


3        A Welfare Theorem

We now state our main theorem, which provides the conditions under which the competitive (CE)
and planner (PE) equilibria coincide with strictly positive entry costs.17

Theorem 1 The Competitive and Planner equilibria are equivalent – i.e., CE ⇔ P E – if and only
if the following two conditions are jointly satisfied:
         (i) µ (Nt ) = µ (Nt+1 ) = µ and
         (ii) the elasticity of product variety and the markup functions are such that  (x) = µ (x) − 1.

         Proof. See Appendix.
         The conditions of Theorem 1 basically imply that, for efficiency to obtain, preferences must be
of the C.E.S. form studied by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977) – a special, knife-edge case of the general
homothetic preferences for variety that we consider.


3.1        Sources of Inefficiency in Entry and Product Variety

Inefficiency occurs in our dynamic model of endogenous entry and variety through two distortions,
associated with the failure of the conditions outlined in Theorem 1.
         Static Distortion: When the welfare benefit of variety  (Nt ) and the net markup µ (Nt ) − 1
(which measures the profit incentive for firms to enter the market) are not aligned within a given
period, entry is inefficient from a social standpoint. When, for instance, the benefit of variety is
low compared to the desired markup ( (N t) < µ (Nt ) − 1), the consumer surplus of creating a
new variety is lower than the profit signal received by a potential entrant; equilibrium entry is
therefore too high (with the size of the distortion being governed by the difference between the two
objects). The opposite holds when  (N t) > µ (Nt ) − 1. Inefficiency occurs, through this channel, if
    17
    We focus on situations where a strictly positive sunk cost (related to technology or regulation) is associated with
creating new firms.


                                                          12
new entrants ignore on the one hand the positive effect of a new variety on consumer surplus and
on the other the negative effect on other firms’ profits. We refer to this distortion as the “static
entry distortion”, to highlight that it still operates in a static model, or in the steady state of our
dynamic stochastic model.18 With C.E.S.-DS preferences, these two contrasting forces perfectly
balance each other and the resulting equilibrium is efficient.19
    Dynamic Distortion: Variations in desired markups over time (induced by changes in Nt )
introduce an additional discrepancy—equal to the ratio µ (Nt ) /µ (Nt+1 )—between the “private”
(competitive equilibrium) and “social” (Pareto optimum) return to a new variety. When there
is entry, the future markup is lower than the current one, and this ratio increases, generating an
additional inefficient reallocation of resources to entry in the current period. Just like differences
in markups across goods imply inefficiencies (more resources should be allocated to the production
of the high markup goods – a point we illustrate below in the case of endogenous labor supply),
differences in markups over time/across states also imply inefficiencies: More resources should be
allocated to production in periods/states with high markups. For example, if the social planner
knew that productivity would be lower in the future (resulting in less entry and a higher markup),
the optimal plan would be to develop additional varieties now, so that more labor can be used
for production during low productivity periods. We label this the “dynamic entry distortion”
below, making explicit that it operates only with preferences that allow for time-varying desired
markups, such as the translog and exponential preferences we introduced.20 Finally, notice that
both distortions are operative for translog preferences.
   18
      Under general C.E.S. preferences (the second column of Table 1) the static distortion is the only one operating.
A feature of this preference specification that is important for its welfare implications is that consumers derive utility
from goods that they never consume, and they are worse off when a good disappears even if consumption of that
good was zero.
   19
      See also Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), Judd (1985a), and Grossman and Helpman (1991) for a discussion of these
issues.
   20
      The point that efficiency occurs with synchronized markups can be traced back to Lerner (1934) and Samuelson
(1947). Lerner (1934, p. 172) first noted that the allocation of resources is efficient when markups are equal in the
pricing of all goods: “The conditions for that optimum distribution of resources between different commodities that
we designate the absence of monopoly are satisfied if prices are all proportional to marginal cost.” Samuelson (1947,
p. 239-240) also makes this point clearly: “If all factors of production were indifferent between different uses and
completely fixed in amount – the pure Austrian case –, then [...] proportionality of prices and marginal cost would
be sufficient.” This makes it clear that equality of prices to marginal cost is not necessary for achieving an optimal
allocation, contrary to an argument often found in the macroeconomic policy literature. This point is equally true
in a model with a fixed number of firms N , where the planner merely solves a static allocation problem, allocating
labor to the symmetric individual goods evenly.




                                                           13
3.2     The Welfare Costs of Inefficient Entry and Variety

What are the welfare costs of the distortions associated with entry and variety identified above?
We answer this question in a calibrated version of our model, using the same calibration used by
BGM to reproduce business cycle facts. In particular, a discount factor β = 0.99 (implying that the
steady-state interest rate is r = 0.01), an exogenous destruction rate δ = 0.025, a labor elasticity
set to 4 (ϕ = 0.25) and an elasticity of substitution between goods θ = 3.8. The sunk entry cost
parameter fE is normalized to 1, and productivity follows an AR(1) process with persistence 0.979
and standard deviation of innovations of 0.0072.
      We solve the dynamic stochastic model using nonlinear methods and evaluate welfare under
the planner solution and under the competitive equilibrium.21 Each panel of Figure 1 plots the
“compensating variation” in the tradition of Lucas (1983), namely the percentage points of con-
sumption required to make the representative household indifferent between the Pareto optimum
and the competitive equilibrium. This is how much a household living in the CE world would be
willing to pay in order to have a benevolent planner make the entry decisions. For each of the three
preference specifications that imply inefficiency, this measure of inefficiency is plotted as a function
of the relevant parameter: ξ for general C.E.S., α/fE for exponential, and σ/fE for translog.
      In the general C.E.S. case, in which only the “static” distortion operates, the welfare loss is
reassuringly zero in the case corresponding to C.E.S.-DS, namely ξ = 1/ (θ − 1) = 0.357. Otherwise,
the welfare loss is sizable. To take two rather extreme examples, when the benefit of variety ξ is
equal to half the net markup, the loss is about 3.5 percentage points of consumption, while when
the benefit of variety is twice as large as the net markup, the loss is around 8 percentage points of
consumption.
      Under translog preferences, the relevant parameter governing both the steady-state desired
markup and the benefit of variety is σ (recall that for translog preferences for instance, µ (N ) =
1+(σN )−1 and  (N ) = 1/2σN ); similarly, under exponential preferences the parameter α plays the
same role. Furthermore, because both the steady-state markup and the benefit of variety depend
on the number of firms, the value of the sunk entry cost fE now matters. To understand the role
of these parameters in shaping the welfare properties, notice that the steady-state number of firms
 21
      The codes were developed by Pablo Winant, to whom we are grateful, and are available upon request.




                                                        14
under translog is (see also BGM, Appendix A):
                                                          q
                                                   −δ +       δ 2 + 4 fσE L (r + δ) (1 − δ)
                                    translog
                                N              =                                              .
                                                                  2σ (r + δ)

Intuitively, the steady-state number of firms is decreasing with the level of regulation, i.e., with the
sunk entry cost fE . It follows that the elasticity of substitution between goods is:
                                                                q
                                                      −δ +           δ 2 + 4 fσE L (r + δ) (1 − δ)
                                    translog
                          1 + σN               =1+                                                   .               (7)
                                                                         2 (r + δ)

       Evidence on the elasticity of substitution between goods can therefore only be used to pin down
the ratio σ/fE (given the values of L, r and δ), but not the individual values of σ and fE ; in other
words, σ and fE individually affect the scale of the economy (the steady-state number of firms),
but only their ratio affects the elasticity of substitution and the steady-state markup. Therefore, in
the remainder of the paper, we treat σ/fE as the relevant parameter under translog (by the same
reasoning, the relevant parameter under exponential preferences is α/fE ).22
       The second panel of Figure 1 plots the case of exponential preferences, where only the dynamic
distortion operates. The welfare loss is rather small: at most 0.07 percentage points when the
distortion is at its largest (α/fE close to 0). This illustrates that the dynamic distortion, by itself,
is likely to be quantitatively insignificant.23
       The third panel plots the translog preference specification shown by BGM to fit business cycle
facts pertaining to entry, markup, and profit dynamics. For these preferences, both distortions
combine to generate significant welfare losses. For the value of σ/fE = 0.35 calibrated by BGM
to fit data moments with this model, the welfare cost associated with inefficient entry and variety
is about 2 percentage points—most of it being due to the static entry distortion. The size of
the distortion is decreasing in σ/fE , because the elasticity of substitution is increasing in that
parameter. It follows that the gap between the net markup and the benefit of variety, which
  22
     Note also that steady-state ratios that could be conceived as allowing to calibrate the sunk cost independently
are also a function of the steady-state markup, hence of the elasticity of substitution and finally only of the ratio
σ/fE . Thus, the share of labor used to pay for the sunk cost into total labor is LE /L = fE NE /L = δfE N/ [(1 − δ) L] ,
which, using the expression for N , is only a function of σ/fE ; under the baseline calibration with σ/fE = 0.354 and
L = 1/3, we have LE /L = 0.325. The output value of resources used for the sunk cost as a share of GDP is wLE /Y
= Q/(1 + Q), where Q = δ (µ − 1) / [µ(r + δ)] , which is again only a function of σ/fE . Under the baseline calibration,
wLE /Y = 0.16.
  23
     The results of Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2014) further illustrate this finding: they show that a Ramsey
planner does not use a costly, distortionary instrument (inflation) over the cycle in order to correct this dynamic
distortion: in other words, the distortion itself is “small.”



                                                                15
governs the static distortion, is decreasing in σ/fE –thus it is increasing with the regulation cost
fE . Intuitively, more regulation (higher fE ) leads ceteris paribus to a lower number of firms in
steady-state, and hence higher desired markups. Since the benefit of variety is half the desired
(net) markup, it also increases proportionally.
       Evidence on entry costs (see Ebell and Haefke, 2009) points to large heterogeneity across coun-
tries: while it “costs” 8.6 days or 1 percent of annual per capita GDP to start a firm in the United
States (with similar numbers for Australia, the UK, and Scandinavian countries), the costs are an
order of magnitude higher in most continental European countries (at the extreme, a whopping
84.5 days in Spain and 48 percent of annual per capita GDP for Greece). The preference parameter
σ is less likely to vary as much across countries. Thus, the model identifies the degree of entry
regulation as a key determinant of the inefficiencies pertaining to entry and product creation.24
       Our model also has stark implications regarding the optimality of deregulation. If preferences
take the general C.E.S. form, deregulation, by promoting entry, is only optimal if the CE does not
feature enough entry, that is if the benefit of variety is higher than the steady-state markup. In
the opposite case, there is too much entry and more regulation is in fact optimal.


3.3      Optimal Fiscal Policy

Fiscal policies can implement the Pareto optimal PE as a competitive equilibrium (or alternatively,
can decentralize the planning optimum) when the CE is otherwise inefficient. We assume that
lump-sum instruments are available to finance whatever taxation scheme ensures implementation
of the optimum, and give one example of such a taxation scheme here. Several recent studies use
our model to study optimal taxation in second-best environments (Bilbiie, Fujiwara and Ghironi,
2014; Chugh and Ghironi, 2012; Lewis and Winkler, 2015).
       Since in the competitive equilibrium there are two distortions generating inefficiencies, it is
natural to look at an implementation scheme that uses two tax instruments. One intuitive example
consists of a combination of consumption taxes (or VAT) and profit or dividend taxes. In particular,
assume that τtC is a proportional tax on the consumption good, and τtD the rate of dividend
(profits) proportional taxation. It is immediate to show that the Euler equation in the competitive
  24
    In a model with nominal rigidities, this further implies that the degree of regulation is a key determinant of the
optimal inflation rate, as noted by Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2014),




                                                         16
equilibrium becomes, under this taxation scheme,


fE,t ρ (Nt ) U 0 (Ct )
                   (                                                                                    )
                                        C µ (N )
                                                   
                                  1 + τ       t                         C t+1
                     U 0 (Ct+1 )       t                                           D
                                                                                       
 = β (1 − δ) Et                        C µ (N
                                                     fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 ) +       1 − τt+1   (µ (Nt+1 ) − 1)   .
                                 1 + τt+1    t+1 )                      Nt+1
                                                                                                         (8)

Direct comparison with the Euler equation under the Pareto optimum delivers the state-contigent
paths for the optimal taxes:



                                                           (Nt )
                                            1 − τtD∗ =
                                                        µ (Nt ) − 1
                                           1 + τtC∗     µ (Nt+1 )
                                                C∗
                                                      =
                                           1 + τt+1      µ (Nt )

   The dividend tax corrects the static distortion, bringing the entry incentives in line with the
benefit of variety, within the period. Intuitively, when the benefit of variety is lower than the net
markup,  (Nt ) < µ (Nt )−1, it is optimal to tax profits because the competitive equilibrium features
too much entry (the market provides “too much” incentive to enter).
   The VAT tax corrects the dynamic distortion by providing the ”right” intertemporal price for
                                                                                     C∗ > τ C∗ )
consumption: intuitively, it is optimal to increase future VAT relative to present (τt+1   t

when entry is ”too low” today, inducing higher markups today than tomorrow (Nt < Nt+1 →
µ (Nt ) > µ (Nt+1 )). This makes the consumption good relatively more expensive today; optimal
policy corrects this intertemporal markup misalignment by making today’s consumption relatively
less expensive.
   Finally, we note that the implementation of the Pareto optimum with a single tax instrument
is generally not possible, because there are two distortions to address. In particular, focusing on
the taxes considered above, a dividend tax by itself does not affect the dynamic distortion and
hence cannot provide the right intertemporal price; whereas a VAT tax does not affect the static
distortion, and cannot provide the right within-period entry incentives. This “impossibility” result
generalizes to a large menu of taxes, such as sales or entry subsidies—even though appropriate
combinations of such instruments can also lead to implementation of the social optimum.




                                                      17
4        Endogenous Labor Supply and the Importance of Monopoly Profits

As an example of the inefficiency associated with the lack of markup synchronization across goods,
we now introduce an endogenous labor/leisure choice. With a perfectly competitive labor market,
this provides a specific example of the inefficiencies implied by differences in markups across the
items that bring utility to households. The only modification with respect to the model of Section
2 is that households now choose how much labor effort to supply in every period. Consequently, the
period utility function features an additional term measuring the disutility of hours worked. We
specify a general, non-separable utility function over consumption and effort: U (Ct , Lt ) and employ
standard assumptions on its partial derivatives ensuring that the marginal utility of consumption
is positive, UC > 0,        the marginal utility of effort is negative UL < 0, and utility is concave:
UCC ≤ 0; ULL ≤ 0 and UCC ULL − (UCL )2 ≥ 0.25
         As we show in the Appendix, optimal labor supply in the CE and PE is determined by the
equations that govern intratemporal substitution between consumption and leisure. These are,
respectively:
                               −UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt ) = Zt ρ (Nt ) /µ (Nt ) ,                  (9)

in the CE, and
                                   −UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt ) = Zt ρ (Nt ) ,                      (10)

in the PE.
         Except for the change in notation for the marginal utility of consumption and the fact that L
is now time-varying, the only difference (with respect to the fixed-labor case) between the CE and
PE is captured in equations (9) and (10). At the Pareto optimum, the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and leisure (−UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt )) is equal to the marginal rate at which
hours and consumption can be transformed into each other (Zt ρ (Nt )). In the competitive equilib-
rium this is no longer the case. There is a wedge between these two objects equal to the reciprocal
of the gross price markup, (µ (Nt ))−1 . Since consumption goods are priced at a markup while
leisure is not, demand for the latter is sub-optimally high (hence, hours worked and consumption
are sub-optimally low). Clearly, this distortion is independent of those emphasized in Theorem 1
(even if preferences were C.E.S.-DS, a wedge equal to (θ − 1) /θ would still exist, and the CE would
be inefficient). As we shall see below, taxing leisure at a rate equal to the net markup in the pricing
    25
   Note that an utility function that is separable in consumption and effort occurs as a special case when
UCL (= ULC ) = 0.



                                                        18
of goods removes this distortion by ensuring effective markup synchronization across arguments of
the utility function.26


4.1     A Labor Subsidy versus a Revenue Subsidy

Suppose the government subsidizes labor at the rate τtL , financing this policy with lump-sum taxes
on household income. Combining the first-order condition for the household’s optimal choice of
labor supply with the wage schedule wt = Zt ρ (Nt ) /µ (Nt ) now yields:


                          −UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt ) = 1 + τtL Zt ρ (Nt ) /µ (Nt ) .
                                                                 



Comparing this equation to (10) shows that a rate of taxation of leisure equal to the net markup
of price over marginal cost,
                                                1 + τtL∗ = µ (Nt ) ,                                            (11)

restores efficiency of the market equilibrium. This policy ensures synchronization of markups,
consistent with intuitions that can be traced back to Lerner (1934) and Samuelson (1947). The
optimal labor subsidy is countercyclical, since markups in this model are countercyclical (µ0 (x) ≤
0): Stronger incentives to work are used in periods/states with a low number of producers.
      When product variety is exogenously fixed, this optimal labor subsidy is equivalent to a revenue
subsidy that induces marginal cost pricing of consumption goods (again synchronizing relative prices
between consumption and leisure) and financing this subsidy with a lump-sum tax on firm profits.
This is another option to restore efficiency studied by virtually every paper addressing the possible
distortions associated with monopoly ever since Robinson (1933, pp. 163-165).
      However, this equivalence no longer holds in our framework with producer entry: A revenue
subsidy financed with lump-sum taxation of firm profits would remove the wedge from equation
(9), but no firm would find it profitable to enter (in the absence of an additional entry subsidy)
since there would be no profit with which to cover the entry cost. While in the C.E.S.-DS case
with elastic labor a sales subsidy restores the optimum when financed by lump-sum taxes on the
consumer, this is a special case. When even a small fraction of the subsidy is financed by taxing
the firm (as is implicitly or explicitly assumed in much of the literature), the optimum is no longer
restored, as taxation of the firm affects the entry decision. In fact, in the C.E.S.-DS case, the
  26
     Thus, our results conform with the argument in Lerner (1934, p. 172) that “If the ‘social’ degree of monopoly is
the same for all final products [including leisure] there is no monopolistic alteration from the optimum at all.”



                                                         19
optimal split of financing a revenue subsidy between lump-sum taxation of consumer income versus
firm profits requires exactly zero taxation of firm profits. We demonstrate this point formally by
studying the effect of a policy inducing marginal cost pricing in the fully general case in Appendix
E. This highlights once more that monopoly power in itself is not a distortion and should in fact
be preserved if firm entry is subject to costs that cannot be entirely subsidized.


5   Conclusions

This paper contributes to the literature on the efficiency properties of models with monopolistic
competition that can be traced back to at least Robinson (1933) and Lerner (1934). We studied
the efficiency properties of a DSGE macroeconomic model with monopolistic competition and firm
entry subject to sunk costs, a time-to-build lag, and exogenous risk of firm destruction.
    Our main theoretical result is a theorem stating that, unless preferences for variety follow the
knife-edge C.E.S. form studied by Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), the market equilibrium is inefficient
because of two distortions: A static one, pertaining to the difference between the consumer surplus
of a new variety, and the market incentive to create that variety; And a dynamic one, coming from
the inefficiency of markup variations over time. A quantification of the welfare costs associated
with these distortions in a calibrated version of the model reveals that the former is likely to
be more relevant quantitatively: for a calibration with translog preferences that can match U.S.
business cycle facts regarding markups, profits and entry, the welfare costs are very large: around
2 percentage points of consumption. Properly designed taxes can eliminate these costs by inducing
markup synchronization across time and states, and aligning the consumer surplus and profit
destruction effects of firm entry; one example we provide consists of a combination of VAT and
dividend/profit taxes.
    When labor supply is elastic, heterogeneity in markups across consumption and leisure intro-
duces an additional distortion. Efficiency is then restored by subsidizing labor at a rate equal
to the markup in the market for goods, thus removing the effect of markup heterogeneity on the
competitive equilibrium. Our results highlight the importance of preserving the optimal amount of
monopoly profits in economies in which firm entry is costly. Inducing marginal cost pricing restores
efficiency only when the required sales subsidies are financed with an optimal split of lump-sum
taxation between households and firms. With the Dixit-Stiglitz preferences that are popular in the
literature, this requires zero lump-sum taxation of firm profits. Our findings thus caution against
interpretations of statements in recent literature on the “distortionary” consequences of monopoly

                                                 20
power and the required remedies.


References

 [1] Adão, B., I. Correia, and P. Teles (2003): “Gaps and Triangles,” Review of Economic Studies
    70: 699-713.

 [2] Benassy, J.-P. (1996): “Taste for Variety and Optimum Production Patterns in Monopolistic
    Competition,” Economics Letters 52: 41-47.

 [3] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2008): “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy,” Journal
    of Monetary Economics 55: 1222-1237.

 [4] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2014): “International Competitiveness and Monetary Policy,”
    mimeo, Cambridge University and University of California, Davis.

 [5] Bertoletti, P. and F. Etro (2015): “Preferences, Entry and Market Structure”, forthcoming
    RAND Journal of Economics

 [6] Bertoletti, P. and F. Etro (2016): “Monopolistic Competition when Income Matters”, forth-
    coming The Economic Journal

 [7] Bilbiie, F. O., I. Fujiwara, and F. Ghironi (2014): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous
    Entry and Product Variety,” Journal of Monetary Economics 64: 1-20.

 [8] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2008a): “Monetary Policy and Business Cycles
    with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety,” in Acemoğlu, D., K. S. Rogoff, and M. Wood-
    ford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp.
    299-353.

 [9] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2012): “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety, and
    Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy.

[10] Blanchard, O. J., and N. Kiyotaki (1987): “Monopolistic Competition and the Effects of
    Aggregate Demand,” American Economic Review 77: 647-666.

[11] Cacciatore, M., G. Fiori, and F. Ghironi (2016): “Market Deregulation and Optimal Monetary
    Policy in a Monetary Union,” Journal of International Economics 99: 120-137.


                                               21
[12] Cacciatore, M., and F. Ghironi (2012): “Trade, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy,” mimeo,
    HEC Montréal and University of Washington.

[13] Chugh, S. K., and F. Ghironi (2015): “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Endogenous Product Vari-
    ety,” CEPR DP 10674.

[14] Colciago, A. and Etro, F. (2010): ”Endogenous Market Structures and Business Cycles”, The
    Economic Journal

[15] Colciago, A. (2015): “Endogenous Market Structures and Optimal Taxation,” The Economic
    Journal, forthcoming.

[16] Cooke, D. (2015): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous Export Participation,” Review
    of Economic Dynamics, forthcoming.

[17] Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
    Diversity,” American Economic Review 67: 297-308.

[18] Dhingra, S. and J. Morrow (2013), “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diver-
    sity under Firm Heterogeneity,” Mimeo London School of Economics

[19] Epifani, P. and G. Gancia, (2011), “Trade, Markup Heterogeneity and Misallocations,”, Jour-
    nal of International Economics

[20] Etro, F., 2016: “The Ramsey Model with Imperfect Competition and General Preferences,”
    Economic Letters, Forthcoming

[21] Etro, F., and L. Rossi (2015): “New-Keynesian Phillips Curve with Bertrand Competition and
    Endogenous Entry,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 51: 318-340.

[22] Faia, E. (2009): “Ramsey Monetary Policy with Labor Market Frictions,” Journal of Monetary
    Economics 56: 570-581.

[23] Faia, E. (2012): “Oligopolistic Competition and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Journal of Eco-
    nomic Dynamics and Control 36: 1760-1774.

[24] Feenstra, R. C. (2003): “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models,
    without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters 78: 79-86.



                                              22
[25] Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman (1991): Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
    MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

[26] Hopenhayn, H. (1992): “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,” Econo-
    metrica 60: 1127–1150.

[27] Khan, A., R. G. King, and A. L. Wolman (2003): “Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of
    Economic Studies 70: 825-860.

[28] Kim, J. (2004): “What Determines Aggregate Returns to Scale?” Journal of Economic Dy-
    namics and Control 28: 1577-1594.

[29] Lerner, A. (1934): “The Concept Monopoly and the Measurement of Monopoly Power,” Review
    of Economic Studies 2: 157-175.

[30] Lewis, V. (2013): “Optimal Monetary Policy and Firm Entry,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 17:
    1687-1710.

[31] Lewis, V., and R. Winkler (2015): “Product Diversity, Market Structure, and Optimal Taxa-
    tion,” Economic Inquiry 53: 979-1003.

[32] Mankiw, N. G., and M. D. Whinston (1986): “Free Entry and Social Inefficiency,” RAND
    Journal of Economics 17: 48-58.

[33] Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica 71: 1695-1725.

[34] Opp, M., C. Parlour and J. Walden, (2014) “Markup cycles, dynamic misallocation, and
    amplification,” Journal of Economic Theory, 154, 126-161.

[35] Robinson, J. (1933): The Economics of Imperfect Competition, Cambridge University Press,
    Cambridge, UK.

[36] Samuelson, P. (1947): Foundations of Economic Analysis, Harvard University Press, Cam-
    bridge, MA.

[37] Spence, M. (1976): “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition,” Review
    of Economic Studies 43: 217-235.



                                              23
                                 30              General C.E.S.

                                 25

                                 20



             Welfare gains (%)
                                 15

                                 10

                                  5

                                  0
                                  0.0      0.2    0.4          0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                           ξ
                         0.07                     Exponential

                         0.06

                         0.05
     Welfare gains (%)




                         0.04

                         0.03

                         0.02

                         0.01

                         0.00
                                       0   2      4            6     8     10
                                                        α/fE
                                 4.5                Translog
                              4.0
                                 3.5
                                 3.0
          Welfare gains (%)




                                 2.5
                                 2.0
                                 1.5
                                 1.0
                                 0.5
                              0.0
                                       0   2      4            6     8     10
                                                        σ/fE

Figure 1: Efficiency Gains Relative to Competitive Equilibrium
                                                      24
                                                  Appendix


A      Homothetic Consumption Preferences

Consider an arbitrary set of homothetic preferences over a continuum of goods Ω. Let p(ω) and
c(ω) denote the prices and consumption level (quantity) of an individual good ω ∈ Ω. These
preferences are uniquely represented by a price index function P ≡ h(p), p ≡ [p(ω)]ω∈Ω , such that
the optimal expenditure function is given by P C, where C is the consumption index (the utility
level attained for a monotonic transformation of the utility function that is homogeneous of degree
1). Any function h(p) that is non-negative, non-decreasing, homogeneous of degree 1, and concave,
uniquely represents a set of homothetic preferences. Using the conventional notation for quantities
with a continuum of goods as flow values, the derived Marshallian demand for any variety ω is then
given by:
                                                             ∂P
                                              c(ω)dω = C          .
                                                            ∂p(ω)

B      No Option Value of Waiting to Enter

Let the option value of waiting to enter for firm ω be Λt (ω) ≥ 0. In all periods t, Λt (ω) =
max [vt (ω) − wt fE,t /Zt , βΛt+1 (ω)] ,where the first term is the payoff of undertaking the investment
and the second term is the discounted payoff of waiting. If firms are identical (there is no idiosyn-
cratic uncertainty) and exit is exogenous (uncertainty related to firm death is also aggregate), this
becomes: Λt = max [vt − wt fE,t /Zt , βΛt+1 ]. Because of free entry, the first term is always zero, so
the option value obeys: Λt = βΛt+1 . This is a contraction mapping because of discounting, and by
forward iteration, under the assumption limT →∞ β T Λt+T = 0 (i.e., there is a zero value of waiting
when reaching the terminal period), the only stable solution for the option value is Λt = 0.


C      Derivations for Competitive Equilibrium and Planner Problem

The competitive equilibrium is summarized by the following table:27
  27
    The labor market equilibrium condition is redundant once the variety effect equation is included in the system
in Table 2.




                                                      A-1
     Table 2. Model Summary


     Pricing                   ρt = µ t wt
                                        Zt

     Variety effect            ρt = ρ (Nt )
     Markup                    µt = µ (Nt )
                                           
                                              Ct
     Profits                   dt = 1 − µ1t N  t
                                          fE,t
     Free entry                v t = wt    Zt

     Number of firms           Nt = (1 − δ) (Nt−1 + NE,t−1 )
                                                h 0                         i
     Euler equation            vt = β (1 − δ) Et UU(C  t+1 )
                                                    0 (C )
                                                        t
                                                             (vt+1 + dt+1 )
     Aggregate accounting      Ct + NE,t vt = wt L + Nt dt


   We can reduce the system in Table 2 to a system of two equations in two variables, Nt and Ct .
To see this, write firm value as a function of the endogenous state Nt and the exogenous state fE,t
by combining free entry, pricing, variety, and markup equations:

                                                             ρ (Nt )
                                                 vt = fE,t           .                                            (12)
                                                             µ (Nt )

Substituting this, together with the profits’ definition, in the Euler equation, we obtain (3) in text.
   The first-order condition for the planner’s problem (5) is:

                        1 fE,t
 U 0 (Ct ) Zt ρ (Nt )
                      1 − δ Zt
                                                                                                                
                                                    1 fE,t+1         fE,t+1        fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )
     = βEt U 0 (Ct+1 ) Zt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 ) L −                    Nt+2 +        Nt+1 +                                     .
                                                 (1 − δ) Zt+1         Zt+1          Zt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )

The term in square brackets in the right-hand side of this equation is:

                  1 fE,t+1         fE,t+1        fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )          fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )
        L−                  Nt+2 +        Nt+1 +         0
                                                                  = LC
                                                                     t+1 +                  .
               (1 − δ) Zt+1         Zt+1          Zt+1 ρ (Nt+1 )            Zt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )

Hence, the first-order condition becomes:
                                                                                                       
        0                                        0                  0                 fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )
      U (Ct ) ρ (Nt ) fE,t = β (1 − δ) Et U (Ct+1 ) Zt+1 ρ (Nt+1 )           LC
                                                                              t+1   +                         ,
                                                                                       Zt+1 ρ0 (Nt+1 )

leading to (6).



                                                       A-2
D     Proof of Theorem 1

Sufficiency (‘if’) is directly verified by plugging conditions (i) and (ii) into (3) and (6).
     Necessity (‘only if’) requires that, whenever both (3) and (6) are satisfied, then (i) and (ii) hold.
We prove this by contradiction. We first look at the simpler perfect-foresight case (where we can
drop the expectations operator) and then extend our proof to the stochastic case.
     Suppose by reductio ad absurdum that there exists a 2-tuple {Ct , Nt+1 } that is both a CE and
a PE, with µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ) or  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1 or both. We examine each case separately.
     (A) µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ) and  (x) = µ (x) − 1:
     Substituting  (Nt+1 ) in the planner’s Euler equation, µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ) and  (x) = µ (x) − 1
imply that
                                                                                                    
 0                         µ (Nt+1 ) − µ (Nt )      0        Ct+1                             1
U (Ct+1 ) fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 )                       = U (Ct+1 )      (µ (Nt+1 ) − µ (Nt ))             −1 .
                               µ (Nt+1 )                     Nt+1                         µ (Nt+1 )
                                                                                                    (13)
After further simplification, using µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ) and U 0 (Ct+1 ) 6= 0, this yields:

                                            fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 ) Nt+1
                          1 − µ (Nt+1 ) =                         ≤ 0, since µ (Nt+1 ) ≥ 1.           (14)
                                                     Ct+1

But this is a contradiction, since all terms on the right-hand side are strictly positive.
     For the stochastic case:
                                                                                          
                      0        µ (Nt+1 ) − µ (Nt )                      Ct+1
            Et       U (Ct+1 )                       fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 ) +      (µ (Nt+1 ) − 1)   = 0,
                                   µ (Nt+1 )                            Nt+1

which is a contradiction since µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ), U 0 (Ct+1 ) 6= 0, and the term in square brackets is
strictly greater than zero (µ (Nt+1 ) ≥ 1).
     (B) µ (Nt ) = µ (Nt+1 ) = µ and  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1:
     Using Theorem 1, µ (Nt ) = µ (Nt+1 ) = µ and  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1 imply that

                                                  Ct+1
                                    U 0 (Ct+1 )        [ (Nt+1 ) − (µ − 1)] = 0.                     (15)
                                                  Nt+1

This would further imply that either U 0 (Ct+1 ) = 0 or Ct+1 = 0 or  (Nt+1 ) = µ − 1, which are all
contradictions.
     (C) µ (Nt ) 6= µ (Nt+1 ) and  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1:
     In this case, a steady state is still defined by Nt = Nt+1 , so µ (Nt ) = µ (Nt+1 ) = µ (N ) in steady


                                                          A-3
state. If the CE and PE equilibria are identical, then (evaluating the Euler equations at the steady
state)  (N ) = µ (N ) − 1, which contradicts the assumption  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1. This holds for the
stochastic case too (note that the same argument can be used in part (B), including the stochastic
case).


E    Endogenous Labor Supply

From inspection of Table 2, the two modifications to the CE conditions implied by endogeneity
of labor supply are that L in the aggregate accounting identity now features a time index t, and
the marginal utility of consumption, now denoted by UC (Ct , Lt ) , depends on hours worked. The
new variable Lt is then determined in standard fashion by adding to the equilibrium conditions the
intratemporal first-order condition of the household governing the choice of labor effort:


                                                 −UL (Ct , Lt ) = wt UC (Ct , Lt ) .


Combining this with the wage schedule wt = Zt ρ (Nt ) /µ (Nt ), which holds also with endogenous
labor supply, yields the condition:


                                  −UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt ) = Zt ρ (Nt ) /µ (Nt ) .


This, in turn, can be solved to obtain hours worked as a function of consumption, the number of
firms, and productivity.
    The PE when labor supply is endogenous is found by solving:

                                 ∞                                                            
                                 X
                                           s−t                        1 fE,s         fE,s
               max          Et         β         U Zs ρ (Ns ) Ls −            Ns+1 +      Ns , Ls .
           {Ls ,Ns+1 }∞
                      s=t        s=t
                                                                   (1 − δ) Zs         Zs

The Euler equation for the planner’s optimal choice of Nt+1 and the law of motion for the number
of firms are identical to the case of fixed labor supply, up to the addition of a time index for labor
and to recognizing the dependence of the marginal utility of consumption upon the level of effort.
The additional intratemporal condition for the planning optimum is:


                                           −UL (Ct , Lt ) /UC (Ct , Lt ) = Zt ρ (Nt ) .




                                                                A-4
E.1         Labor or Revenue Subsidy

This Appendix contains the details of the analysis underlying our discussion of optimal policy
under elastic labor. Suppose the planner subsidizes or taxes sales at rate τt and each firm is taxed
lump-sum TtF for a possibly time-varying fraction γt of this expenditure. The following proposition
holds.

Proposition 1 A sales subsidy that induces marginal cost pricing, financed by lump-sum taxes
on both firms and consumers, restores efficiency of the competitive equilibrium if and only if the
fraction of taxes paid by the firm, γt , satisfies:

                                                                  (Nt )
                                                  γt∗ = 1 −                .
                                                               µ (Nt ) − 1

      Proof. The profit function becomes: dt = (1 + τt ) ρt yt − wt lt − TtF or (under optimal pricing
        µ(Nt ) wt                             (1+τt )
ρt =    1+τt Zt ),   dt = (1 + τt ) ρt yt −   µ(Nt ) ρt yt   − TtF . Balanced budget implies that total taxes are
τt ρt Nt yt , so the fraction of taxes paid by a firm is TtF = γt τt ρt yt . It follows that profits are finally
given by                                                                              
                                             1 + τt                               1 + τt Ct
                     dt = 1 + (1 − γt ) τt −           ρt yt = 1 + (1 − γt ) τt −            .
                                             µ (Nt )                              µ (Nt ) Nt

To eliminate the wedge between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal rate of trans-
formation between consumption and leisure, we know that the optimal value of τt is such that
                                                         Ct
1 + τt = µ (Nt ) , implying dt = (1 − γt ) (µ (Nt ) − 1) N t
                                                             . The value of a firm is given by vt =
     fE,t
wt    Zt    = ρ (Nt ) fE,t . Substituting these expressions in the CE Euler equation for shares yields:

                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                              Ct+1
UC (Ct , Lt ) ρ (Nt ) fE,t    = β (1 − δ) Et UC (Ct+1 , Lt+1 ) fE,t+1 ρ (Nt+1 ) + (1 − γt+1 ) (µ (Nt+1 ) − 1)         .
                                                                                                              Nt+1

Comparing this with the planner’s Euler equation (6) written for the case of endogenous labor (and
hence replacing U 0 (C) with UC (C, L)), we obtain the optimal fraction of taxes paid by the firm,
γt∗ , as in the Proposition.
      A policy inducing marginal cost pricing can restore efficiency only if an optimal division of lump-
sum taxes between consumers and firms is also ensured. Recall that for C.E.S.-DS preferences (the
most common case in the literature)  = µ − 1. It follows that efficiency is restored by inducing
marginal cost pricing if and only if γt = 0, i.e., if all the subsidy for firm sales is paid for by
consumers, and none by firms. Otherwise, taxation of firms affects the relationship between firm


                                                              A-5
profits and total sales, and therefore affects the entry decision. In the extreme case where all
of the subsidy is financed by lump-sum taxes on firms, γt = 1, it is clear that equilibrium firm
profits become zero, and no firm will have incentives to enter. Clearly, γt∗ is non-zero only when
the markup and benefit from variety are not aligned,  (x) 6= µ (x) − 1, as for Benassy or translog
preferences. Note that, for the latter, the optimal division of taxes between consumers and firms
is an equal split (since  (x) = (µ (x) − 1) /2).




                                                    A-6
