NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TRANSMISSION OF WOMEN'S FERTILITY, HUMAN CAPITAL AND WORK
ORIENTATION ACROSS IMMIGRANT GENERATIONS
Francine D. Blau
Lawrence M. Kahn
Albert Yung-Hsu Liu
Kerry L. Papps
Working Paper 14388
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14388
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We are indebted for helpful comments and suggestions to Susan Dynarski, Klaus Zimmermann, two
anonymous referees and participants at the Society of Labor Economists meetings in Boston, May
2009; the Midwest Economics Association Meetings in St Louis, March 2011; the Centre of Equality,
Social Organization, and Performance (ESOP) Workshop on Gender and Households in Oslo, May
2011; the IZA/CEPR 13th European Summer Symposium in Labour Economics in Buch, Ammersee,
September 2011; and seminars at the Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA) and Yale Law School.
We thank Peter Brummund for excellent research assistance, and the Russell Sage Foundation for
financial support. Portions of the research for this paper were completed while Blau and Kahn were
Visiting Fellows in the Economics Department of Princeton University, supported by the Industrial
Relations Section. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Transmission of Women's Fertility, Human Capital and Work Orientation Across Immigrant
Generations
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps
NBER Working Paper No. 14388
October 2008, Revised January 2012
JEL No. J1,J16,J22,J24,J61
ABSTRACT
Using 1995–2011 Current Population Survey and 1970–2000 Census data, we find that the fertility,
education and labor supply of second generation women (US-born women with at least one foreign-born
parent) are significantly positively affected by the immigrant generation’s levels of these variables,
with the effect of the fertility and labor supply of women from the mother’s source country generally
larger than that of women from the father’s source country and the effect of the education of men from
the father’s source country larger than that of women from the mother’s source country. We present
some evidence that suggests our findings for fertility and labor supply are due to at least in part to
intergenerational transmission of gender roles. Transmission rates for immigrant fertility and labor
supply between generations are higher than for education, but there is considerable intergenerational
assimilation toward native levels for all three of these outcomes.
Francine D. Blau
ILR School
Cornell University
268 Ives Hall
Ithaca, New York 14853-3901
and NBER
fdb4@cornell.edu
Lawrence M. Kahn
ILR School
Cornell University
258 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
lmk12@cornell.edu

Albert Yung-Hsu Liu
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
505 14th St., Suite 800
Oakland, CA 94612-1475
aliu@mathematica-mpr.com
Kerry L. Papps
Department of Economics
University of Bath
Bath, BA2 7AY
UNITED KINGDOM
k.l.papps@bath.ac.uk

I. Introduction
A steady flow of new immigration has resulted in an increase in the foreign-born share of
the US population from 4.8 percent in 1970 to 12.5 percent in 2009. Perhaps more dramatically,
the composition of the foreign-born population has changed markedly. In 1970, 70.4 percent of
the foreign born came from Europe or North America; by 2009, 80.8 percent were from Asia and
Latin America (US Bureau of the Census: http://www.census.gov). An additional feature of this
shift that is less frequently noted is that the immigrant population increasingly comes from
countries with a more traditional division of labor by gender (i.e., relatively lower female
participation rates) than the United States, and this tends to be reflected in their US labor supply
behavior (Antecol 2000; Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011; Blau and Kahn 2011). Immigrant women
also tend to have more children than native-born women, mirroring their countries of origin
(Blau 1992), although the immigrant-native difference has declined among the most recent
immigrants as fertility levels have fallen around the world (Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011). As the
share of the US population that is foreign born has risen, an increasing fraction of the population
consists of second generation immigrants—native-born individuals with at least one foreign-born
parent. 1
These trends highlight the fact that the assimilation process of immigrants has an
important intergenerational component. If a traditional division of labor by gender among
immigrants is transmitted to their children, the growing immigrant share in the population and
the shift toward a more traditional division of labor among immigrants (relative to natives) can
have substantial effects on the future labor supply and fertility behavior of women born in the

1

In 1990, 13 percent of U.S. children (ages 0-17) had at least one immigrant parent; this had increased to nearly one
quarter (23 percent) by 2008 (Fortuny 2010).

United States. Alternatively, however, the children of immigrants may assimilate toward native
levels of labor supply and fertility as they become acculturated to work and family size norms in
the United States or as they respond to labor market opportunities here. If so, the current
immigrant-native gaps in these outcomes will not have large long-term effects.
In this paper, we use data on second-generation women from the March Current
Population Surveys (CPS) from 1995 to 2011 linked to data on immigrants in the parental
generation from the 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses to study the transmission of firstgeneration immigrants’ education, fertility, and labor supply to second-generation women. We
focus particularly on women’s labor supply and fertility due to the salience of the gender role
issue and the smaller amount of previous research on this subject. The study of the
intergenerational transmission of values and behavior among immigrants is also relevant to a
broader literature examining the impact of “culture,” or preferences and beliefs developed in a
different time or place on current economic behavior (Fernández 2008).
Our research design estimates the outcome of three related processes. First, immigrant
parents, like parents in general, may directly pass on their own characteristics and behavioral
traits to their children. Second, they may pass on their ethnic or cultural characteristics. Third,
both these effects may be moderated as immigrants and their descendants experience some level
of assimilation toward US native behavior. While we cannot distinguish between these three
types of effects, it might be argued that their combined effect is the most relevant “bottom line”
assessment of the extent of intergenerational transmission.
Unlike earlier work on the descendants of immigrants, we examine the impact of the
characteristics of both mothers and fathers in the immigrant generation on second generation
women. We also investigate differences across “family types,” that is second generation women

2

who had two foreign born parents, only a foreign-born mother, and only a foreign-born father.
This disaggregation, made possible by the richness of the CPS data, potentially yields a richer set
of hypothesis tests about culture and assimilation than more aggregated approaches. For
example, data on women from the mother’s source country may proxy for both the effects of
mothers as role models and source country culture, while, controlling for the effect of mother’s
parental characteristics, data on women from the father’s source country may reflect the
incremental effect of source country culture. With regard to family type, it may be that coming
from a family with two immigrant parents represents a larger “treatment” than coming from a
family with only one.

II. Relationship to Previous Literature and Contribution of the Study

Our analysis builds on some recent papers that have studied the impact of source country
or parental characteristics on the education, fertility or labor supply of immigrants’ descendants
in the United States. Using 1970 Census data on US-born women with foreign-born fathers,
Fernández and Fogli (2009) found that source country female labor supply and fertility each had
a positive effect on the corresponding outcome of second-generation women. Two other studies
have found evidence of positive effect of source country labor force participation (Antecol 2000)
and fertility (Fernández and Fogli 2006) on the these outcomes for US-born women based on the
respondent’s self-reported ancestry. Finally, using 1994-2003 CPS data, Blau and Kahn (2007)
found that current Mexican immigrant women had far lower levels of schooling and labor
supply, as well as higher fertility levels, than native non-Hispanic whites. However, gaps were

3

much smaller in the second-generation, suggesting assimilation but also some persistence. 2
Also relevant to our work are two papers that study intergenerational transmission using a
similar methodology to ours, although neither explicitly examined gender roles. First, Borjas
(1993) found evidence of intergenerational transmission correlating the wages of 1940
immigrant generation fathers with second-generation sons in the 1970 Census. Card, DiNardo
and Estes (2000) expanded on these findings, examining the intergenerational transmission of
earnings, education and marital assimilation, for two cohorts of second generation respondents
(identified as individuals with foreign-born fathers) matched to characteristics of their immigrant
fathers in earlier Censuses. The second-generation from the 1970 Census was matched to 1940
data on immigrant men; and the second-generation from the 1994–1996 CPS was matched to
1970 Census data on immigrant men. The authors found that there was significant
intergenerational transmission of education and wages, with a roughly similar rate of
intergenerational transmission for each cohort.
We contribute to the literature on gender and intergenerational transmission of immigrant
behavior in several ways. First, as discussed above, the CPS has information on the country-ofbirth of both parents, permitting us to gauge the relative importance of the characteristics of
immigrant mothers versus immigrant women from the fathers’ source country, as well as the
strength of intergenerational transmission for individuals with two foreign-born parents
compared to those with only one. In contrast, Card, DiNardo, and Estes (2000), Borjas (1993),
and Fernández and Fogli (2009) are only able to match second-generation individuals with their

2

In a recent paper, Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2011) test the hypothesis that traditional agricultural practices,
namely the utilization of plough agriculture, influenced the development of this culture across societies. In one
application they find evidence of cultural transmission, based on the use of the plough in the source country, for
second-generation immigrants in the United States.

4

fathers, due to the incomplete Census data on the birthplace of foreign-born mothers. 3 In
addition to being unable to examine the differential effect of immigrant mothers compared to
fathers on the second generation, work that uses data only on the respondent’s father misses
about one quarter of the second generation sample (Table A1). If gender role transmission from
mother to daughter is especially strong, this omission could be particularly important for a study
of the transmission of gender roles. The CPS information on the actual birthplaces of the
respondent’s parents is also an improvement on the data on self-reported ancestry of US-born
respondents used by Antecol (2000) and Fernández and Fogli (2006). Data on self-reported
ancestry are less precise in that they include information on second and higher order generations.
Further, Duncan and Trejo’s (2007) study of Mexican-Americans suggests that the more
successfully-assimilated native born are less likely to report a foreign ancestry.
Our comparison of the impact of mother’s and father’s country-of-birth also contributes
to the literature on intergenerational transmission of immigrant education, where previous results
have been mixed. Gang and Zimmermann (2000) find no effect of parental education for second
generation immigrants in Germany, 4 while Van Ours and Veenman (2003) and Bauer and
Riphahn (2007) find that mother’s and father’s education had similar effects on second
generation individuals’ educational attainment in the Netherlands and Switzerland, respectively.
In contrast, studies of the general issue of intergenerational transmission of education usually
find larger effects for fathers than mothers (for a review, see Pronzato 2012).
Second, while Fernández and Fogli (2009) also looked at the second generation, they
focused on the impact of source country characteristics on the behavior of second generation
3

When both parents were foreign-born, the 1970 Census reported only the father’s country of birth. While Card,
DiNardo and Estes (2000) used the same CPS data we do for their recent cohort (although for fewer years), they
used information only on the father’s country of birth in order to make their analysis of 1970 to 1994–1996
assimilation consistent with their 1940 to 1970 analysis.
4
However, Gang and Zimmerman found that parental education did matter for native-born Germans and that
fathers’ education had a larger effect than mothers’.

5

immigrants. In contrast, we examine the process by which source country culture gets
transmitted to future generations in the host country by looking explicitly at intergenerational
transmission from immigrants to their children born in the United States, although we also
examine the impact of source country characteristics. One of the purposes of our paper is to shed
light on the rate of assimilation across generations and we provide estimates of transmission
rates. In addition, our current data on the second generation from the 1995–2011 CPS provides
an updated consideration of the issues of gender and culture compared to the 1970 Census data
employed by Fernández and Fogli (2009). (The 1970 Census was the last Census to collect data
on foreign parentage.) Since 1970, there have been considerable changes in the composition of
immigrant parents by source country, as well as in aggregate female labor force participation and
fertility rates in the United States that might affect the findings. Gender roles in the 1990s and
2000s were considerably different from what they were in 1970, with far higher levels of female
labor force participation now, as well as lower fertility rates (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 2010).
And, as mentioned earlier, immigration to the United States has shifted from being a largely
North American and European phenomenon to a largely Asian and Latin American one. Further,
there is a growing gap between the labor supply of US-born and immigrant women today than in
earlier years (Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011). Thus, the process of assimilation of second
generation women into the US labor market may very well have changed since 1970.
Third, we include three tests of intergenerational transmission that may shed light on the
potential role of the intergenerational transmission of gender roles compared to other
unobservables. In the first test, we estimate our basic models for second-generation men. An
effect of immigrant women’s labor supply behavior that is unique to or stronger for secondgeneration women than men suggests that the effect for women reflects parental or cultural

6

gender roles rather than other unmeasured factors that may be expected to have a similar effect
for both men and women. 5 Of particular interest is that we may contrast our finding for female
and male transmission for labor supply, a potentially gender-linked variable, to those for
education, a plausibly more gender neutral variable. (We are not able to meaningfully examine
fertility for men in our data sets because it is measured by number of children present, and
women generally retain custody of children when a marriage breaks up or children are born out
of wedlock.) Second, we expand our basic specification, which controls only for parental
generation characteristics and respondent’s age (as well as CPS survey year), to include controls
for other individual characteristics like education, location and marital status (this is similar to
the specification employed by, e.g. Antecol 2000 and Fernández and Fogli 2009). Our preferred,
parsimonious specification excludes these potentially endogenous controls and allows parental
generation characteristics to influence respondent’s outcomes both directly and indirectly
through their effects on respondent’s education, location, and marital status. However, finding
an effect of parental characteristics even with controls for these individual characteristics
provides suggestive evidence that they do affect individuals’ preferences. Third, again similar to
Antecol 2000 and Fernández and Fogli 2009, we examine the impact of source country
characteristics (rather than the characteristics of parental generation immigrants) on second
generation behavior. This more directly tests the hypothesis that source country characteristics
influence the behavior of second generation immigrants in the United States.
Finally, while our study is methodologically similar to Card, DiNardo and Estes (2000),
they did not examine the variables of primary interest here, fertility and labor supply. Moreover,
they used a single year to compute parental characteristics, e.g., matching their second
5

In a working paper version of Fernández and Fogli (2009), the authors examined the impact of their source country
variables for men’s hours worked and presence of children and did not find an effect (see, Fernández and Fogli
2005).

7

generation CPS sample to immigrants in the 1970 Census. In contrast, we use information on the
age of second-generation individuals in the 1995–2011 CPS to match them to the parent
generation in the appropriate Census.

III. Data and Descriptive Patterns

The 1995–2011 March CPS files comprise our basic data source on second generation
women (i.e., US-born women with at least one foreign parent). The CPS sample is restricted to
ages 25–49: age 25 was selected to focus on individuals who have generally completed their
education; age 49 to focus on individuals still potentially in their prime working years and for
whom children present is likely to be a good estimate of fertility. 6 We match second generation
women to their parents’ generation by calculating the year the respondent would have been 10
years old, a likely formative age. 7 We then use 1970-2000 Census data to simulate the
immigrant parents’ behavior, linearly interpolating across adjacent Censuses if needed; these
Census-based outcomes are themselves age-adjusted to age 40 to take into account compositional
effects among immigrants (see the Appendix). 8 (If immigrants from a particular country in a
Census year are especially young or old; their current labor supply may not be representative of
their lifetime behavior.) We go back only to the 1970 Census in collecting immigrant
characteristics because the 1960 Census data are relatively poor for matching source countries
compared to later Censuses. Respondents who turn 10 prior to 1970 are matched to the 1970
Census. We are able to construct 69 country groups, far larger than Card, DiNardo and Estes’
6

To the extent that the number of children present differs from fertility—e.g., older children may have left home,
our control for age addresses this issue, since older women are more likely than younger women to have had
children that are no longer in the household.
7
Results were similar when we used age 14.
8
Card, DiNardo and Estes (2000) also age-adjusted immigrant and second generation outcomes.

8

(2000) sample of 33 countries. 9
Table 1 provides some motivation for the study by comparing the outcomes of interest
adjusted to age 40 for immigrant and native women in 1980 (when many immigrant parents
would have been surveyed) based on Census data, and for immigrant, native, and second
generation women in 2000 based on CPS data. 10 As may be seen, immigrants had a substantial
education deficit in 1980 of 1.4 years (11 percent), and also worked 75 (7.3 percent) fewer hours
and had on average 0.14 (8.3) percent more children than natives. One motivation for our study
is to find out how persistent such differences are across generations. Table 1 shows that, while
immigrants’ educational deficit remained roughly constant over time, immigrant-native labor
supply and fertility differences increased—to 113 hours (14.3 percent) for hours and 0.2 (15.9
percent) for number of children. Thus, traditional work and family patterns have become more
pronounced among immigrants (relative to natives). This highlights the importance of learning
the extent to which these patterns will be transmitted by immigrants to their children.
Table 1 also shows that, on average, second generation women currently have very
similar levels of schooling, labor supply, and fertility to those of natives with native parents (see
also Table A1); in fact, second generation women’s education and labor supply are actually
slightly higher and their fertility is slightly lower than those of natives. 11 Thus, in the aggregate,
all of the 1980 immigrant-native differences have been erased in one generation. However, there
is considerable variability in education, labor supply and fertility across immigrants and second
generation women from different countries. These differences provide us with an opportunity to
9

In addition to having fewer years of the CPS available, Card, DiNardo and Estes were also limited by the need to
maintain comparability with the 1940 Census data. Note that, although Puerto Rico is a US territory, it is treated as
a foreign birth place for the purposes of our analyses.
10
In order to make the CPS and Census data comparable, natives are defined as all US-born women regardless of
parental birthplace in Table 1. However, the means for natives with native parents for 2000 from the CPS data
(results not shown) are virtually identical to the means for all natives for 2000.
11
Second generation men’s schooling and labor supply levels are also very similar to natives (Table A1).

9

test the impact of source country culture on the behavior of future generations. Table 2
illustrates this variability by showing data on immigrant and second generation outcomes for
three major source regions: (i) Europe and Canada; (ii) Latin America and the Caribbean; and
(iii) Asia. 12 In 1980, immigrants from Europe and Canada were quite similar to natives in their
education, fertility and labor supply, while immigrants from Latin America and the Caribbean
were a less educated group, with low annual work hours and high fertility, and immigrants from
Asia had high levels of education and labor supply (although their fertility is somewhat higher
than that of natives). Data on immigrants in 2000 suggest broadly similar differences across
immigrant groups. Comparing second generation women in 2000 to immigrants in 1980 to get a
rough idea of intergenerational persistence, we see that, while there has been considerable
intergenerational assimilation, second generation women from Latin American and the
Caribbean still lag behind natives in education and have higher fertility, while second generation
women from Asia, like their immigrant parents, are more highly educated and have higher
annual hours than natives.
Appendix Table A1 provides further descriptive information for natives with native
parents and second-generation women and men. As noted earlier, the incidence of secondgeneration women and men with both parents foreign born is slightly under half, with the
remainder divided between mother-only and father-only foreign-born. Thus, previous work
which focuses on individuals with foreign-born fathers misses over a quarter (26-27 percent) of
second-generation individuals. Among second-generation women and men with both parents
foreign-born, the parents come from the same source country in the vast majority (87–88
percent) of the cases. Tabulations of the source countries of the immigrant parents of the second

12

The Middle East, which is located partially in Asia and partially in the Northern Africa, is not included in Asia.
With only 578 second generation women from the Middle East we do not include it as a separate region in Table 2.

10

generation in our 1995–2011 CPS data (results not shown) highlight the shifting composition of
the second generation over time. Compared to the 1970 Census data analyzed by Fernández and
Fogli (2009), in which 71 percent had fathers born in Europe, this was true of only 30 percent of
contemporary second-generation women. 13

IV. Empirical Procedures and Regression Results
A. Empirical Procedures
We analyze intergenerational transmission of fertility, labor supply and education for
second-generation women from the 1995–2011 March CPS files by estimating models of the
following form:
(1)

𝑦𝑖𝑡 = 𝐵′𝑍𝑖𝑡 + ∑𝑐 𝑎𝑐 𝑋𝑐𝑖𝑡 + 𝑢𝑖𝑡

where for each individual 𝑖 in year 𝑡, 𝑦 is an outcome variable including education (years of

schooling), fertility (number of children present), or labor supply (annual work hours including
zero hours); 𝑍 is a vector of controls to be discussed shortly, 𝑋 is a vector of immigrant parent
characteristics with 𝑐 indexing each characteristic (for example, average labor supply of
immigrant women from the mother’s country), and u is a disturbance term.

The vector 𝑋 includes age-adjusted characteristics of immigrants in the parents’

generation, including education (years of schooling) of women from the mother’s source country
and of men from the father’s source country, 14 and measures of fertility (number of children
present) and labor supply (annual hours including zeroes) for women from the mother’s source
country and women from the father’s source country. Fertility and labor supply are included to
13

Fernández and Fogli (2009) excluded women with fathers born in Russia or countries that became centrally
planned around World War II, as well as countries with fewer than 15 observations.
14
Beginning in 1994, the CPS coded education in categories, as did the 2000 Census. We mapped these into years
of schooling attained by using Jaeger’s (1997) suggested algorithm.

11

measure the effects both of the home environment and cultural gender role attitudes. For this
reason we focus on female behavior and include the fertility and labor supply of immigrant
women from both the source country of the respondent’s mother and the source country of the
respondent’s father. Labor supply of women, in particular, is perhaps the key indicator of gender
roles. In contrast male labor supply is less variable across groups and expected to be less
informative about gender roles. We include education of women from the mother’s source
country and of men from the father’s source country as proxies for the home environment and the
socio-economic status of the respondent’s family. There is a large literature documenting the
positive correlation between parental and children’s education, with possible causal mechanisms
including the effect of parents’ education on parental time allocation and parental productivity in
activities that enhance child quality, as well as its effect on the socioeconomic status of the
family (Black and Devereux 2010). Educational differences in the parental generation may also
be correlated with cultural preferences for education. 15 Our parental education variables broadly
measure the impact of such effects.
These six parental characteristics variables are designed to capture the most important
and relevant characteristics of the parental immigrant generation. It would be possible to include
some additional parental characteristics for immigrants from mothers’ and fathers’ source
countries. However, the very high correlation between the education of women and men from
the mother’s (father’s) source country make it difficult to include additional education variables
and obtain meaningful results. 16 And, as expected, we did not find parental generation male
labor supply informative for female labor supply and fertility, but we do discuss some results for

15

Chiswick (1988) and Gang and Zimmerman (2000) postulate that parental cultural differences in preferences may
play a role in ethnic differences in outcomes.
16
Among respondents who have an immigrant mother, the correlation between immigrant men and women from the
mother’s source country is .98; for respondents with an immigrant father, the comparable correlation is also .98.

12

specifications including this variable. We note that we already include more controls than is
standard in this literature, which has previously focused only on the father’s source country and
the matching variable—e.g., source country female labor supply in a female labor supply
regression (see, Antecol 2000; Fernández and Fogli 2009). 17
As previously noted, we locate the Census (Censuses) nearest to the time the respondent
was age 10, interpolating between Censuses where necessary. Thus, second-generation CPS
respondents from the same origin country can have different values for these variables depending
on their age: older respondents are matched with immigrants from earlier Censuses. The
relevant parental characteristics variables are set to 0 for respondents with a native-born mother
or father. Because we include variables for family type (described below), we interpret the
parental characteristics variables as interactions between the indicated characteristic and having a
foreign father (mother). Standard errors are clustered based on the parents’ birthplace and the
years of the Census used to match parents with second generation respondents. Suppose, for
example that the mother was born in Mexico, and the Censuses used for computing her
characteristics are 1970 and 1980. Then this country-Census combination would form one
cluster. If the mother was born in the United States, we use the father’s birth country and Census
years.
In the results presented below, the vector 𝑋 generally includes all three types of

immigrant behavior for which we have measures—schooling, fertility, and labor supply—or
what we term the “full specification.” This specification may be appropriate in that it reduces
the likelihood of spurious correlation. So, for example, a positive association between first- and
second-generation fertility might be due to lower education levels of women in both generations
rather than to intergenerational transmission of fertility per se. On the other hand, immigrant
17

Note that these studies do include extensive controls for the respondent’s individual characteristics.

13

fertility (or plans for family size) may be the fundamental cause of immigrant schooling and
immigrant labor supply levels. If so, including immigrant labor supply and schooling in the
fertility equation could lead us to underestimate the full impact of immigrant fertility on the
second generation. Therefore, we also present some results for the “matching specification,”
models with only the matching behavior on the right hand side (e.g., immigrant fertility in the
second-generation fertility equation).
The vector 𝑍 includes two dummy variables among the three possible parent

combinations in our regression sample: (i) immigrant father and native mother and (ii)
immigrant mother and native father (the omitted category is both parents immigrants); it also
includes age, age squared, and year dummies. We do not include in our main specification the
respondent’s marital status, education or location variables. Part of the assimilation process
involves children’s marriage, education and location decisions; therefore, by excluding these
variables, we are allowing the full effects of parental behavior to be observed. For example,
more assimilated second-generation individuals may be less likely to live in ethnic enclaves.
Nonetheless, since these channels are of interest, we also discuss some results with these
controls. We also do not include controls for race and ethnicity. We believe that this is
appropriate because race and ethnicity may be proxies for “regional” ethnic capital (for example
the Latin American region). On the other hand, minority individuals may face discrimination or
other barriers in labor markets or in education that could affect their decisions about schooling,
fertility, or labor supply. Since minority immigrants tend to come from particular source country
areas, failure to control for race and ethnicity could induce a spurious correlation between
parental and child behavior that could instead be due to the common treatment in the United
States of members of minority groups. Thus, we also discuss results from a model that includes

14

race and ethnicity measured by dummies for black, non-Hispanic; Asian or Pacific Islander, nonHispanic; and Hispanic of any race (the omitted category is white non-Hispanic). 18
Our main approach estimates equation (1) on the full sample of second generation
women, which pools all second-generation family types. These yield the average effects of
parental behavior. Later, we stratify by second-generation family type, another departure from
earlier work. We also provide results for the three additional specifications, described earlier,
designed to test whether our findings are consistent with a role for culture.
B. Basic Regression Results
Our basic results for the impact of parental generation behavior on second generation
women’s outcomes are shown in Table 3, Panel A for all women and Panel B for married
women. The table presents regression coefficients and hypothesis tests for two specifications.
The matching specification examines the impact of only the matching parental characteristics on
the dependent variable (e.g., fertility of immigrants from the mother’s and father’s source
country on the respondent’s fertility). The full specification includes measures of all three types
of parental characteristics.
We first consider the results for all women beginning with parental education in columns
(1) and (2). In both specifications there is strong evidence of intergenerational transmission of
education, with stronger effects through immigrant fathers than immigrant mothers. In the
matching models, both parental effects are significantly positive, but the coefficient on father’s
schooling (.29) is nearly twice as large as the coefficient on mother’s schooling (.17). When
additional parental variables are added, the coefficient on mother’s schooling becomes small and
insignificant, whereas the coefficient on father’s schooling is not appreciably changed. In both
specifications, the difference between the coefficients on father’s and mother’s education is
18

A small number of non-Hispanic individuals of other races (0.46 per cent of the sample) were omitted.

15

highly significant. The larger effect of father’s education may be because it better captures the
socio-economic status of the family than mother’s education and it is the family’s socioeconomic status that is the source of the intergenerational effect. As we have seen, this finding
of a larger effect of fathers’ than of mothers’ education is consistent with the broader literature
on intergenerational transmission of education.
The sum of the education effects for fathers and mothers is an estimate of the impact of
one additional year of education for each parent in the first generation on the educational
attainment of second-generation for women with both parents foreign born; this sum is highly
significant in both specifications. The larger estimated transmission rate, .46, is obtained for this
sum in the matching specification (column 1). This effect implies that a three year difference in
parental education between immigrants and natives, approximately the difference in schooling
between native women and immigrant women from Latin America and the Caribbean in 2000
(see Tables 1 and 2) and almost twice the overall immigrant-native difference in Table 1, results
in a second-generation difference of 1.4 years.

19

When additional parental characteristics are added (Table 3a, column 2), an interesting
finding that emerges is that higher levels of fertility of immigrant mothers lead to lower levels of
second-generation education. Effects for the fertility of immigrant women from the father’s
source country are smaller in magnitude and insignificant, although the difference in coefficients
for mothers and fathers is not significant. The negative impact of immigrant family size on
second-generation education is consistent with a quality-quantity tradeoff in fertility (Becker
1991) and a comparison of the results for columns (1) and (2) suggests that a mechanism for
intergenerational transmission of immigrant mother’s education is through family size.
19

Our summed transmission effects in the matching specification for women and men (see Table 4 for men) of
0.45-0.46 are similar to the effects obtained by Card, DiNardo and Estes (2000) of about 0.4 for educational
transmission, although they used information only on the father.

16

The magnitude of the effect of parental generation family size on second generation
education is large. To illustrate its magnitude, we computed the mean and standard deviation of
the number of children of immigrant mothers aged 35–45 in the 1980 Census (an age group
centered around the 40 year figure used to construct the parental generation explanatory
variables and a Census year in which many of the immigrant parents would have been surveyed).
We find that, among this group, fertility averaged 2.32 children with a standard deviation of
1.26. Since about half of our sample consists of second generation women both of whose parents
were foreign born, it is of interest to estimate the impact of immigrant fertility for this group.
When we add the mother’s fertility effect to that for immigrant women from the father’s country,
we find that a one standard deviation increase in immigrant women’s fertility from both the
mother’s and father’s country lowers second-generation women and men’s education by about
1.47 years. This is an economically important effect that is highly statistically significant.
Previous research (Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011) has found falling immigrant fertility levels for
recent cohorts, as fertility has been declining sharply around the world. If this lower level
continues or further decreases occur, our results predict important increases in the education
levels of second-generation immigrants.
Finally, there is some suggestive evidence of a positive effect of mother’s working on
education for women; however the effect of hours worked of women from the father’s source
country is negative, though not significant. Adding the employment effects for both parents
leads to an insignificantly positive impact on schooling.
Turning now to the results for fertility in columns (3) and (4), we again find considerable
evidence of intergenerational transmission. In the matching specification, the fertility of female
immigrants from both the mother’s and father’s source countries significantly positively affects

17

second-generation fertility. When we control for other parental characteristics, the effect of
mother’s fertility remains significant but of decreased magnitude, while the effect of the fertility
of women from the father’s source country is greatly reduced and loses statistical significance.
In both specifications, however, the sum of the effects of fertility from the mother’s and father’s
source countries is highly significant. We also find that in both specifications mother’s fertility
has a stronger effect than the fertility of immigrant women from the father’s source country,
although the difference is not statistically significant in either specification. The reduction in the
magnitude of the coefficients on fertility in the immigrant generation between the matching and
full specification appears related to the inclusion of work hours of women from the mother’s
source county and years of schooling of men from the father’s source country, both of which are
negatively related to second generation fertility. The sum of the two fertility effects is
considerably larger in the matching specification (.731) than in the full specification (.403).
Finally, we consider the results for annual work hours. We again see considerable
evidence of intergenerational transmission in both specifications (columns 5 and 6), with
statistically significant positive effects for the sum of the coefficients on work hours of mothers
and women from the father’s source country that are only slightly larger in the matching model
(0.50) than in the full specification (.47). In addition, the impact of mother’s labor supply
behavior is larger than the effect of women from the father’s source country, nearly significantly
so in the full specification. The results also indicate a highly significant positive effect of years
of schooling of men from the father’s source country on second generation women’s labor
supply.
Returning to the magnitude of the labor supply transmission rates, Table 1 shows that
immigrant women’s labor supply fell relative to natives between 1980 and 2000. Specifically, in

18

1980, evaluated at age 40, native women worked about 7 percent more than immigrants; by
2000, this had risen to 14 percent higher work hours for natives. 20 Suppose instead that
immigrant women had closed the work hour gap with natives over this period. To do so they
would have had to work 213 additional hours in 2000. Our results suggest that this would raise
(future) second-generation women’s labor supply by 107 hours (using our transmission rate of
about .5), or by about 10 percent of the 1497 hour mean for native women. Put differently, we
expect the disparity in labor supply between immigrants and natives in 2000 to have only minor
consequences for future second-generation women’s relative labor supply.
Table 3b shows results for married women. They are very similar to those for the full
sample of second generation women. Results for the intergenerational transmission of education
are about the same for married women, although the quality-quantity tradeoff effect on education
is somewhat larger for married women. In the full specification, the intergenerational
transmission effect for fertility and labor supply is larger for married women, although this is not
the case in the matching specification and the differences are not large for labor supply. These
comparisons of married and all women are weakly consistent with more persistence of cultural
norms among those who have married.
C. Intergenerational Transmission and Culture
Our findings for the impact of immigrant women’s labor supply on second-generation
women’s annual hours may be due to the impact of culture, i.e., the intergenerational
transmission of women’s roles, but they may alternatively be due to other unobservables, such as
unmeasured human capital. In this section, we consider additional specifications designed to test
whether our results are consistent with culture playing a role.

20

Blau, Kahn and Papps (2011) show the native-immigrant labor supply gap increased 32 percent among married
women.

19

First, we examine results from estimating our basic specification on men. Arguably,
gender-neutral parental characteristics would be expected to affect both sexes similarly, while
those associated with gender roles should have a larger effect or women. Table 4a shows
intergenerational transmission regressions for men for years of schooling, which plausibly fall in
the first category, and annual hours, which plausibly fall in the second. The specifications are
the same as for women. For years of schooling, as expected, we see a strikingly similar level and
pattern of intergenerational transmission for men as for women, with positive intergenerational
transmission and larger effects for men’s than for women’s education in the immigrant
generation. We also find strong evidence consistent with a quality-quantity tradeoff. These
findings are consistent with a pattern of intergenerational transmission that is not related to
gender roles. The results for labor supply are somewhat ambiguous in that we do find a positive
effect of the labor supply of women in the mother’s generation on second-generation men in the
matching specification. There are however three important differences in the results for women
and men that suggest that at least part of the impact of labor supply of women in the immigrant
generation for women reflects gender-specific cultural factors. One is that the transmission rate
for men in the matching specification, 0.33, is smaller than the transmission rate for women of
0.5. The second is that, in this specification, the impact of mother’s labor supply is roughly the
same as the effect of women from the father’s source country, whereas for women the effect of
mother’s labor supply is larger, though the difference is not statistically significant—this gender
difference is suggestive of a “role model” effect for women. Third, and most importantly, in the
full specification, the female labor supply coefficients and their sum become small and
insignificant for men, while, for women, the transmission effects remain highly significant
individually and summed.

20

The inference that our results for males are supportive of the notion that intergenerational
transmission of immigrant female labor supply is related to gender roles is reinforced by the
results for women and men presented in Table 4b, which add variables measuring parental
generation work hours of men from both the mother’s and father’s source countries. Our
findings for educational transmission remain quite similar to those presented in Tables 3a and 4a,
excluding these variables, although there is some evidence for both groups of a positive and
significant effect of male work hours and their sum on second generation education. This may
operate through the effect of male employment on the socio-economic status of the family. In
strong contrast however, male work hours are insignificant, both individually and jointly, in the
female hours regressions, but positive and significant, both individually and jointly, in the male
regressions. For women, we continue to find positive and significant effects for the annual hours
of women from the mother’s and father’s source countries and their sum, while these variables
are insignificant in the male regression. The finding of an impact of immigrant male labor
supply on second generation men’s labor supply is intriguing; it may represent the transmission
of unmeasured human capital or work orientation, or some combination of the two.
The contrasting findings for men and women in the labor supply transmission equations
are consistent with female annual hours capturing cultural factors associated with gender roles of
women. We also investigated fertility transmission for women including male labor supply in
the immigrant generation as an explanatory variable. As in the case of annual hours, male labor
supply was not significant and its inclusion did not affect the results for the other variables.
Based on these findings and our interest in the transmission of female labor supply and fertility
as two variables particularly related to gender roles, we focus our subsequent analyses on the
transmission of these variables for second generation women and continue to employ the basic

21

specification used in Table 3a.
Second, in Table 5, we present fertility and labor supply models for all women and for
married women that control for the potentially endogenous variables of the individual’s
education and location of residence (i.e., state). The findings for the key variables are similar to
Tables 3a and b. Evaluating the transmission coefficients as the sum of the coefficients for
mother’s and father’s parental characteristics, we find that the transmission coefficients reported
in Table 5 are only slightly lower than those reported in Table 3a for all women and actually
somewhat higher than those reported in Table 3b for married women.
Third, in Table 6, we look directly at the impact of source country characteristics on the
fertility and labor supply behavior of second generation women in the United States. We report
results for the fertility rate and the labor force participation rate ratio (women’s labor force
participation rate divided by men’s labor force participation rate) in the parental countries of
origin. The regressions also control for source country GDP per capita and female primary and
secondary enrollment rates, as well as the respondent’s age (quadratic), family type and year
fixed effects. (See the Appendix and Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011 for more information about the
source country variables.) As in the case of our analysis of parental characteristics, respondents
are matched to source country characteristics at the time they are 10 years old. For number of
children, when the labor force participation rate ratio is not included, we find a statistically
significant positive effect of fertility rates in the mother’s source country on second generation
women; the sum of the coefficients on fertility in the mother’s and father’s source country is also
positive and significant. When the labor force participation rate ratio, which has a significantly
negative effect on fertility, is included, however, the coefficient on mother’s source country
fertility is reduced and is no longer significant, nor is the sum of coefficients on the mother’s and

22

father’s source country fertility rate. For annual hours, the coefficient on the labor force
participation rate ratio from the mother’s source country is positive and significant in both
specifications, as is the sum of the coefficients on mother’s and father’s source country activity
ratios. This is suggestive evidence that source country characteristics do indeed influence the
behavior of second generation immigrants. We note too, that there is stronger evidence of source
country effects for both variables for mother’s than for father’s source country, although the
differences are not significant. 21
D. Results by Family Type
The regression results presented above pool all family types, and may be interpreted as
representing the overall average effects of the parental variables. However it is also of interest to
explore these relationships within each family type. Thus, in Tables 7, we present results for
fertility (Panel A) and labor supply (Panel B) in the matching and full specification separately by
family type: both parents immigrants (both parents); mother only immigrant (mother only); and
father only immigrant (father only). Before discussing the results we note that, in the
specification that is limited to both parents foreign born, there is a very high correlation between
the mother and father variables that measure the same characteristic (i.e., education, fertility, and
labor supply) due to the very high proportion of such families (87 percent) in which both mother
and father come from the same source country (see Table A1). 22 This is particularly problematic
in the full specification, where we thus focus our discussion the sum of the mother’s and father’s
coefficients.
21

We also examined the impact of contemporary (2000) source country characteristics on these outcomes. We
found statistically significant positive effects for both mother’s and father’s activity rate ratios on respondent’s
annual hours, and for their sum. The effects of mother’s and father’s source country fertility were positive, but not
statistically significant; the sum of the coefficients on these variables was also insignificant.
22
Specifically, for second generation women with both parents foreign born, the correlation between mom_f_edn
and dad_m_edn is .924; between mom_f_nchild and dad_f_nchild .942; and between mom_f_hours and
dad_f_hours .956 .

23

Looking first at the matching specification, the results are broadly consistent with those
we presented earlier. We see statistically significant evidence of positive transmission of fertility
and labor supply for all family types, with the mother’s and father’s coefficients all individually
significant, and, for the both parent immigrant family type, their sum is significant as well. In
addition, for both dependent variables, the sum of mother’s and father’s coefficients in the both
parent immigrant family type is greater than the corresponding coefficients for mother only and
father only families. So, for example, the fertility transmission effect in families where both
parents are immigrants is .688 (=.389+.299) compared to .475 for mother only families and .444
for father only families, with the former difference significant at the 10% level, although the
latter is not statistically significant. Similarly, the labor supply transmission effect in families
where both parents are immigrants is .542 compared to .188 for mother only families and .255
for father only families, with both differences highly statistically significant. This accords with
the intuitive notion that the “treatment” is stronger in families where both parents are immigrants
than in families where just one parent is foreign born. Finally, there is some evidence for a
stronger effect of mothers’ than of fathers’ characteristics on second generation women for
fertility: in families where both parents are immigrants, the coefficient on mother’s fertility is
larger than the coefficient on the fertility of women from the father’s source country (although
not significantly so), and the coefficient on immigrant generation fertility is somewhat higher in
mother only than in father only families (although again the difference is not significant).
However, in the labor supply regressions there is no evidence of larger transmission from
mothers than fathers.
Moving on to the full specification, for fertility, we find evidence of positive transmission
of number of children in the immigrant generation to the second generation for all three family

24

types, although among women with both parents foreign-born, the sum of the parental fertility
effects (.233) is significant at only the 12 percent level. In line with our previous results, we find
that the transmission of fertility is stronger for the mother-only than for the father-only families,
although not significantly so. In fact, the transmission effect is larger for the mother-only and
the father-only families than it is for those with both parents foreign-born (i.e., the sum of the
effects for women from the mother’s and father’s source countries), although these differences
are not statistically significant. For labor supply, in the both-parent sample, we find statistically
significant evidence of positive transmission of labor supply from women from the mothers’ and
the fathers’ source countries (the sum) on second generation labor supply, with a fairly
substantial transmission rate (0.59). However, in the mother-only and father-only foreign born
samples, we find no evidence of an effect of the labor supply of mothers or of women from the
fathers’ source country on the labor supply of second-generation women. The differences in the
transmission effects between the both parent and other two family types are highly significant.
Thus, in the case of labor supply, both the matching and full specifications suggest that having
two immigrant parents is a stronger treatment than having only one.
E. Alternative Specifications
We attempted several types of robustness checks for our basic sample of all second
generation women. First, we experimented with the age at which second generation respondents
in the CPS were matched to their immigrant generation parents in the Census, changing the age
from 10 to 14. The results were similar to the findings shown in Table 3a. Second, we estimated
models including controls for race and ethnicity, again obtaining results that were similar to our
basic findings.
Third, our basic results may reflect the impact of parental generation control variables,

25

however, alternatively they could be due to unmeasured country-specific factors that are
correlated with these variables. To probe this issue further, in one specification, we included
mother’s and father’s country dummies (recall there are 69 source countries), in effect relying on
within-country variation in parental behavior to identify intergenerational transmission effects.
While we continue to obtain positive and significant transmission of mother’s generation work
hours in the labor supply regression, the schooling and fertility results are weaker and even in
instances wrong-signed. This suggests that there is insufficient variation within countries to
successfully identify such effects and that between-country variation in parental fertility and
education is what drives second generation education and fertility decisions. On the other hand,
in another specification, we included mother’s and father’s dummies for five regions: i) Europe,
Canada, New Zealand and Australia; ii) Asia, except the Middle East; iii) Latin America and the
Caribbean region; iv) Sub-Saharan Africa; v) Middle East, including North Africa. The results
for each of the parental characteristics in this specification were qualitatively similar to those in
Table 3a. Evidently, within regions, there is enough variation across countries to identify the key
transmission effects from the parents’ to the children’s generation. These results give us more
confidence that our basic results do not reflect the impact of unmeasured factors, at least at the
regional level.

V. Conclusions

In this paper, we have studied the transmission of first generation immigrant women’s
education, fertility, and labor supply behavior to the second generation, defined as US-born
women with at least one foreign-born parent. Our research design used the March Current

26

Population Surveys (CPS) from 1995 to 2011, which contain information on each woman’s
country of birth and the country of birth of each of her parents. We then used Census data from
1970, 1980, 1990 or 2000 to attach information on labor supply, fertility and schooling of
immigrants from the relevant source country(ies) when the second generation respondent was 10
years old. Using this information on immigrants as explanatory variables, we estimated
regression models of the schooling, fertility, and labor supply of second-generation women.
Overall, we found that second-generation women’s education, fertility and labor supply
are significantly positively affected by the immigrant generation’s levels of these variables, with
the effect of mother’s source country fertility and labor supply generally larger than that of
women from the father’s source country and the effect of the education of men from the father’s
source country larger than that of women from the mother’s source country. Moreover, secondgeneration women’s schooling levels are negatively affected by immigrant mother’s fertility,
suggesting a quality-quantity tradeoff for immigrant families.
We present a number of pieces of evidence that suggest our findings for fertility and
labor supply are due at least in part to intergenerational transmission of gender roles, rather than
other unobservables. First, for education and labor supply, we compare our female results to
analogous results for men. For immigrant generation education, a plausibly gender neutral
variable, we find strikingly similar results for second-generation men and women. For
immigrant women’s labor supply, a potentially gender-linked variable, we find evidence of a
stronger effect on labor supply for second-generation women than for second-generation men,
and for immigrant men’s labor supply we find evidence of an effect on second-generation men’s
labor supply and no evidence of such an effect for second-generation women. Second, we
expand our basic specification, which controls only for parental generation characteristics and

27

respondent’s age (as well as CPS survey year), to include controls for other individual
respondent’s characteristics like education, location and marital status. We continue to find
strong, statistically significant evidence of the parental characteristics variables, suggestive
evidence that these variables do affect individual preferences. Finally, we find statistically
significant evidence of the impact of source country characteristics (rather than the
characteristics of parental generation immigrants) on second generation behavior. This more
directly tests the hypothesis that source country characteristics influence the behavior of second
generation immigrants in the United States.
While our results suggest an important role for intergenerational transmission, they also
indicate considerable convergence of immigrants to native levels of schooling, fertility, and labor
supply across generations. In our “full” specification, which controls for all parental
characteristics simultaneously, we find intergenerational transmission rates for those with both
parents foreign born of 0.30 for education, 0.40 for fertility, and 0.47 for work hours. At these
transmission rates, half or more of any difference in the immigrant generation has been
eliminated by the second generation. Moreover, since the fertility of immigrant women is
rapidly falling relative to natives in the most recent immigrant cohorts due to world-wide fertility
declines (Blau, Kahn and Papps 2011), little future excess fertility in the second generation is
anticipated. And, even though immigrant women’s labor supply has decreased relative to
natives, our relatively low estimates of intergenerational transmission suggest that this reduction
will not have major consequences for the second and subsequent generations of the future.

28

Data Appendix
Immigrant parent characteristics by source country are estimated using the 1970, 1980,
1990, and 2000 Census public use microdata samples obtained from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series. The 1970 data is a combination of the 1 percent Form 1 state sample, the 1
percent Form 1 metropolitan area sample, the Form 2 state sample, and the Form 2 metropolitan
area sample; the 1980, 1990, and 2000 data are the 5 percent state samples. We take a 1 percent
random sample of households where all members are white and native-born and retain the full
sample of all other respondents. Means of parent characteristics for each source country and
Census year are adjusted to age 40 based on a model including source country fixed effects, age,
age squared, the interaction of immigrant and age, and the interaction of immigrant and age
squared. The regression sample for mothers (fathers) consists of women (men) between ages 18
and 64, excluding people of other race, with an allocated source country, or from a country that
does not correspond to the set of countries available in the CPS. 23
Second-generation immigrants in the CPS are matched to their immigrant “parents” in the
Census by source country based on the year when the respondent was 10 years old. If this year is
exactly a Census year (1970, 1980, 1990, or 2000), we use data from that Census. If it is an
interior year, we use linear interpolation to compute a weighted average between the two nearest
Censuses. For example, if the respondent was 10 years old in 1984, the parent characteristics
would be a weighted average of the estimates from 1980 (.6 weight) and 1990 (.4 weight). If the
respondent was 10 years old before 1970, we use immigrant parent characteristics from 1970.
Since we use an age range of 25-49 for our second generation sample, every respondent turned
10 years old before 2000.
The source of the source country variables used in Table 7 were: fertility: total fertility
rate from United Nations Statistics Division, Series 13700 (2006); GDP per capita: GDP data
from World Bank, World Development Indicators, accessed May 16th, 2007, population data
from United Nations Population Division, Annual Estimates and Projections, accessed May 16,
2007; female/male labor force participation rate: economic activity rate for ages 15 and up
from United Nations Statistics Division, Series 4270 and 4230 (2006); and primary and
secondary female school enrollment rates from World Bank World Development Indicators
CD-Rom, Series SE.PRM.ENRR.FE (2002). GDP per capita was collected annually, the
remaining variables were collected at five or ten year intervals and interpolated annually; see
also Blau, Kahn, and Papps (2011).

23

The 1994 CPS is not included because fewer source countries are listed than in later years. U.S. citizens who
were born abroad to native parents are not included since they may have lived abroad during their formative years.

References
Alesina, Alberto F., Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn, “On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough,” NBER Working Paper No. 17098 (May 2011).
Antecol, Heather, “An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in Labor
Force Participation Rates,” Labour Economics 7, no. 4 (July 2000): 409-426.
Bauer, Philipp and Regina T. Riphahn, “Heterogeneity in the Intergenerational Transmission of
Educational Attainment: Evidence from Switzerland on Natives and Second-Generation
Immigrants,” Journal of Population Economics 20, No. 1 (February 2007): 121-148.
Becker, Gary S., A Treatise on the Family (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1991).
Black, Sandra E and Paul Devereux, “Recent Developments in Intergenerational Mobility,” in
Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4b
(Amsterdam: North Holland Press, 2010), Ch. 16, pp. 1487-1541.
Blau, Francine D., "The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High-Fertility Source
Countries," in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work
Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas (Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 93-133.
Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber, and Anne E. Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men,
and Work, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education, 2010).
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Gender and Assimilation among Mexican
Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United States
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), pp. 57-106.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Substitution Between Individual and Cultural
Capital: Pre-Migration Labor Supply, Culture and US Labor Market Outcomes Among
Immigrant Women,” NBER Working Paper No. 17275 (August 2011).
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn and Kerry L. Papps, “Gender, Source Country
Characteristics and Labor Market Assimilation Among Immigrants: 1980-2000,” Review
of Economics and Statistics 93, No. 1 (February 2011): 43-58.
Borjas, George J., “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants,” Journal of Labor Economics
11, No. 1 (January 1993): 113-135.
Card, David, John DiNardo and Eugena Estes, “The More Things Change: Immigrants and the
Children of Immigrants in the 1940s, the 1970s, and the 1990s,” in George J. Borjas, ed.,
Issues in the Economics of Immigration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000),
pp. 227-269.

Chiswick, Barry R, "Differences in Education and Earnings across Racial and Ethnic
Groups:Tastes, Discriminationation, and Investments in Child Quality,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 103, No. 3 (August 1988): 571-97.
Duncan, Brian and Stephen J. Trejo, “Ethnic Identification, Intermarriage, and Unmeasured
Progress by Mexican Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the
United States (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), pp. 229-267.
Fernández, Raquel , "Culture and Economics," in the New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
2nd edition, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume (Basingstoke and New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), pp. 333-340.
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work,
and Fertility,” NBER Working Paper 11268 (April 2005).
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family
Experience,” Journal of the European Economic Association 4, Nos. 2-3 (April-May
2006): 552-561.
Fernández, Racquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (January 2009):
146-177.
Fortuny, Karina, “Children of Immigrants: 2008 State Trends Update,” The Urban Institute,
Brief 17, September 2010.
Gang, Ira N. and Klaus F. Zimmermann, “Is Child like Parent? Educational Attainment and
Ethnic Origin,” Journal of Human Resources 35, No. 3 (Summer 2000): 550-569.
Jaeger, David A., “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15, issue
3 (July 1997): 300-309.
Pronzato, Chiara, “An Examination of Paternal and Maternal Intergenerational Transmission of
Schooling,” Journal of Population Economics 25, no. 2 (January 2012): 591-608.
van Ours, Jan C. and Justus Veenman, “The Educational Attainment of Second-Generation
Immigrants in the Netherlands,” Journal of Population Economics 16, No. 4 (November
2003): 739-753.

31

Table 1: Age Adjusted Means for Immigrant, Native and Second Generation Women
(Evaluated at Age 40)

Variable

Natives

Immigrants

Second
Generation
Immigrants

1980a
Years of Schooling
Number of Children
Annual Work Hours (including 0's)

12.4
1.68
1025.2

11.0
1.82
950.7

----

2000b
Years of Schooling
Number of Children
Annual Work Hours (including 0's)

13.6
1.36
1496.6

11.9
1.57
1283.2

13.8
1.33
1518.2

a

Based on 1980 Census data. Age adjusted based on separate native and immigrant
regressions that include age, and age squared, evaluated for 40 year olds.
b

Based on 1995-2011 CPS data. Age adjusted based on separate regressions for each column,
that include age, age squared, and year fixed effects, evaluated for 40 year olds in 2000. CPS
sampling weights are employed in the regressions, adjusted so that each year receives equal
weight.
Note: Census and CPS samples consist of women age 25 to 49, excluding those with allocated
or unmatched birthplace; natives are US-born; immigrants are foreign-born; second-generation
immigrants are US-born with at least one immigrant parent. See the text and other table notes
for additional information on the CPS sample.

Table 2: Age Adjusted Means for Immigrant, Native and
Second Generation Women by Region (Evaluated at Age 40)
Second
Immigrants Immigrants Generation
2000
1980
2000
Europe and Canada
Years of Schooling
Number of Children
Annual Work Hours

11.9
1.65
913.2

13.9
1.31
1,382.0

14.2
1.27
1,490.4

Latin America and the Caribbean
Years of Schooling
9.2
Number of Children
2.03
Annual Work Hours
886.7

10.4
1.71
1,210.9

13.0
1.47
1,497.5

Asia
Years of Schooling
Number of Children
Annual Work Hours

13.7
1.40
1,405.4

15.0
1.05
1,695.7

12.9
1.76
1,155.0

Notes: For the second generation, respondents are included in the
region if either parent immigrated from a country in that region.
Means for immigrants are based on the respondent's own source
country. Means are calculated in a similar manner as Table 1, just
restricted by region.

Table 3: Results for the Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics on Second Generation Education,Fertility, and Annual
Hours (All Women and Married Women)
Years of Schooling
(1)
(2)
A. All Women
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)

-0.908***
(0.251)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
0.168***
0.031
(0.016)
(0.035)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)
0.050*
(0.030)
Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
-0.258
(0.350)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
0.287*** 0.265***
(0.018)
(0.033)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)
-0.016
(0.038)
r squared
0.122
0.128
N
34,141
34,141
p(mom_f_nchild-dad_f_nchild=0)
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
p(mom_f_edn-dad_m_edn=0)
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
p(mom_f_hours-dad_f_hours=0)
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
B. Married Women
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)

0.000
0.000

0.165
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.116
0.533

-1.094***
(0.246)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
0.177***
0.023
(0.020)
(0.034)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)
0.050*
(0.028)
Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
-0.278
(0.310)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
0.288*** 0.268***
(0.020)
(0.031)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)
-0.033
(0.034)
r squared
0.139
0.146
N
19,870
19,870

Number of Children
(3)
(4)

0.428***
(0.065)

Annual Hours
(5)
(6)

0.324**
(0.132)
0.013
(0.016)
-0.035***
(0.013)

-27.652
(81.023)
-9.163
(9.657)
0.305*** 0.314***
(0.056)
(0.077)

0.079
(0.130)
-0.041***
(0.014)
0.005
(0.014)
0.091
0.093
34,141
34,141

0.193***
(0.048)
0.007
34,141

88.788
(67.338)
22.582***
(7.690)
0.157**
(0.063)
0.008
34,141

0.142
0.000

0.279
0.554
0.014
0.257
0.122
0.000

0.303***
(0.094)

0.353
0.000

0.254
0.008
0.033
0.104
0.026
0.006

0.392*** 0.413***
(0.075)
(0.153)
0.027
(0.019)
-0.027**
(0.014)
0.250***
(0.091)

0.100
19,870

0.146
(0.139)
-0.028*
(0.017)
0.015
(0.014)
0.101
19,870

-24.826
(105.369)
-17.966
(13.418)
0.275*** 0.353***
(0.078)
(0.094)

0.149**
(0.070)
0.005
19,870

133.419
(97.715)
21.827**
(10.673)
0.177*
(0.102)
0.006
19,870

p(mom_f_nchild-dad_f_nchild=0)
0.063
0.320
0.267
0.299
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.421
p(mom_f_edn-dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
0.000
0.060
0.028
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
0.000
0.947
0.812
p(mom_f_hours-dad_f_hours=0)
0.062
0.035
0.216
0.196
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
0.709
0.046
0.000
0.000
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.
Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country (mother then father)
crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of women age 25-49 excluding those with
allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race. Regressions
are weighted using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight. Regressions include
controls for age (quadratic), family type, and year fixed effects.

Table 4a: Results for the Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics on Second Generation
Education and Annual Hours (All Second-Generation Men)

Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)

Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)

r squared
N

Years of Schooling
(1)
(2)

Annual Hours
(5)
(6)

-1.222***
(0.248)
0.146***
0.005
(0.021)
(0.033)
-0.003
(0.029)

-166.278**
(81.106)
1.118
(10.431)
0.194**
-0.007
(0.080)
(0.084)

0.146
(0.350)
0.302*** 0.302***
(0.020)
(0.032)
0.027
(0.036)

0.132*
(0.074)

11.318
(88.165)
10.319
(8.086)
0.055
(0.094)

0.034
31,160

0.037
31,160

0.542
0.005

0.210
0.097
0.542
0.298
0.582
0.725

0.121
31,160

0.126
31,160

p(mom_f_nchild-dad_f_nchild=0)
0.002
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
0.011
p(mom_f_edn-dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
0.000
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
0.000
p(mom_f_hours-dad_f_hours=0)
0.442
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
0.645
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country
(mother then father) crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of
women age 25-49 excluding those with allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or
unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race. Regressions are weighted using CPS
sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight. Regressions include controls
for age (quadratic), family type, and year fixed effects.

Table 4b: Results for the Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics on Second Generation Education and Annual
Hours, Adding Immigrant Generation Male Labor Supply (All Second-Generation Women and Men)

Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)
Male Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_m_hours)

Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)
Male Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_m_hours)

r squared
N

Years of Schooling
(1)
(2)
Women
Men

Annual Hours
(3)
(4)
Women
Men

-0.929*** -1.250***
(0.239)
(0.220)
0.028
-0.006
(0.034)
(0.030)
0.037
-0.019
(0.027)
(0.024)
0.038
0.079**
(0.031)
(0.032)

-27.728-181.414**
(81.191) (74.932)
-9.792
-5.071
(10.047)
(9.461)
0.323***
-0.087
(0.078)
(0.072)
-0.006 0.405***
(0.082)
(0.094)

-0.300
0.119
(0.309)
(0.310)
0.256*** 0.295***
(0.032)
(0.032)
-0.034
0.011
(0.031)
(0.030)
0.071** 0.072**
(0.031)
(0.028)

94.422
0.273
(67.126) (74.130)
24.045***
7.840
(7.684)
(7.588)
0.177***
-0.018
(0.066)
(0.077)
-0.091 0.321***
(0.080)
(0.080)

0.130
34,141

0.130
31,160

0.008
34,141

0.043
31,160

p(mom_f_nchild-dad_f_nchild=0)
0.163
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
0.000
p(mom_f_edn-dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
0.000
p(mom_f_hours-dad_f_hours=0)
0.089
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
0.929
p(mom_m_hours-dad_m_hours=0)
0.454
p(mom_m_hours+dad_m_hours=0)
0.013
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.

0.001
0.001
0.000
0.000
0.443
0.826
0.876
0.000

0.258
0.516
0.012
0.231
0.152
0.000
0.541
0.244

0.166
0.011
0.370
0.767
0.547
0.270
0.530
0.000

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country (mother then father)
crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of women age 25-49 excluding those with
allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race.
Regressions are weighted using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight.
Regressions include controls for age (quadratic), family type, and year fixed effects.

Table 5: Results for the Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics on Second Generation Fertility
and Annual Hours, Controlling for Respondent's Education and State Dummies (All Women and
Married Women)
Number of Children
All
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)

Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)

Respondent's Years of Schooling (gradecomp)

r squared
N

Annual Hours

(1)

Married
(2)

0.280**
(0.135)
0.013
(0.017)
-0.030**
(0.012)

0.366**
(0.156)
0.028
(0.019)
-0.023*
(0.013)

27.022
43.314
(79.012) (103.084)
-13.726 -22.184*
(9.956) (13.350)
0.245*** 0.299***
(0.072)
(0.090)

0.092
(0.118)
-0.026**
(0.012)
0.008
(0.013)

0.135
(0.138)
-0.017
(0.016)
0.018
(0.014)

99.595 181.510*
(69.107) (98.259)
0.599
5.362
(7.907) (10.530)
0.142**
0.190*
(0.072)
(0.106)

-0.055*** -0.046***
(0.012)
(0.013)

83.850*** 68.944***
(4.709)
(6.342)

0.111
34,141

All
(3)

Married
(4)

0.114
19,870

0.054
34,141

0.037
19,870

p(mom_f_nchild-dad_f_nchild=0)
0.372
0.338
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
0.009
0.003
p(mom_f_edn-dad_m_edn=0)
0.107
0.118
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
0.411
0.635
p(mom_f_hours-dad_f_hours=0)
0.029
0.042
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
0.011
0.079
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.

0.514
0.199
0.268
0.295
0.319
0.000

0.376
0.079
0.126
0.293
0.441
0.000

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country
(mother then father) crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of
married women age 25-49 excluding those with allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or
unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race. Regressions are weighted using CPS
sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight. Regressions control for age
(quadratic), family type, respondent's education, state dummies, and year fixed effects.

Table 6: Results for the Effect of Immigrant Source Country Characteristics on Second Generation Fertility
and Annual Hours (All Second-Generation Women)
Number of Children
(1)
(2)
Mother's Source Country:
Fertility (mom_fert)

0.046*
(0.024)

0.016
(0.021)
-0.597***
(0.169)

8.474
(14.392)
223.791** 249.033**
(105.795) (111.500)

0.009
(0.021)

0.003
(0.020)
-0.112
(0.168)

40.763
(84.811)

17.857*
(10.042)
87.191
(86.863)

0.084
34,141

0.005
34,141

0.005
34,141

0.272
0.006

0.623
0.098
0.324
0.004

Labor Force Participation Rate Ratio (mom_lfpr_ratio)

Father's Source Country:
Fertility (dad_fert)
Labor Force Participation Rate Ratio (dad_lfpr_ratio)

r squared
N

Annual Hours
(3)
(4)

0.082
34,141

p(mom_fert-dad_fert=0)
0.267
0.679
p(mom_fert+dad_fert=0)
0.078
0.478
p(mom_lfpr_ratio-dad_lfpr_ratio=0)
0.053
p(mom_lfpr_ratio+dad_lfpr_ratio=0)
0.000
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.

Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country (mother
then father) crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of women age 25-49
excluding those with allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or unmatched parent birthplace, and
those of other race. Regressions are weighted using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year
receives equal weight. Regressions control for age (quadratic), family type, and year fixed effects, and
source country GDP per capita and primary and secondary female enrollment rates.

Table 7: Effect of Immigrant Parent Characteristics on Second Generation Fertility and Annual Hours by Family Type
(All Second-Generation Women)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A. Fertility
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)
0.389*** 0.513** 0.475*** 0.540***
(0.134)
(0.218)
(0.059)
(0.166)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
0.049*
0.024
(0.028)
(0.020)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)
-0.014
-0.024
(0.031)
(0.019)
Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
0.299**
-0.280
0.444*** 0.422**
(0.119)
(0.212)
(0.131)
(0.165)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
-0.083***
-0.008
(0.023)
(0.017)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)
-0.031
0.009
(0.027)
(0.019)
r squared
N
Second-Generation Type
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
B. Annual Hours
Mother's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (mom_f_nchild)
Female Years of Schooling (mom_f_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (mom_f_hours)
Father's Source Country:
Female Number of Children (dad_f_nchild)
Male Years of Schooling (dad_m_edn)
Female Annual Work Hours (00s) (dad_f_hours)

0.098
0.102
16,563
16,563
Both Parents
0.000
0.122
0.053
0.064

0.089
0.090
8,934
8,934
Mother Only

25.503
(167.424)
-24.967
(16.666)
0.222*
0.348
(0.131)
(0.225)

-95.573
(105.246)
1.356
(13.705)
0.188*
0.050
(0.100)
(0.122)

57.468
(159.232)
31.479**
(14.011)
0.320**
0.241
(0.144)
(0.220)

0.088
0.088
8,644
8,644
Father Only

75.881
(82.162)
23.760**
(9.315)
0.255***
0.156
(0.070)
(0.110)

r squared
0.013
0.014
0.007
0.007
0.006
0.007
N
16,563
16,563
8,934
8,934
8,644
8,644
Second-Generation Type
Both Parents
Mother Only
Father Only
p(mom_f_nchild+dad_f_nchild=0)
0.424
p(mom_f_edn+dad_m_edn=0)
0.611
p(mom_f_hours+dad_f_hours=0)
0.000
0.000
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS and 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses.
Notes: * p<.10, ** p<.05, *** p<.01. Standard errors are clustered by parent's source country (mother then father)
crossed with which census(es) provided the data. The sample consists of women age 25-49 excluding those with
allocated or unmatched birthplace, allocated or unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race. Regressions
are weighted using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives equal weight. Regressions include
controls for age (quadratic) and year fixed effects.

Table A1: Selected Means for Women and Men: Natives and Second-Generation Individuals, 1995–2011
Women
Men
Second
Second
Generation
Generation
Immigrants
Immigrants
Variable
Natives
Natives
Age
37.47
35.90
37.44
35.70
Asian, non-Hispanic
0.005
0.079
0.005
0.088
Black, non-Hispanic
0.156
0.039
0.132
0.036
Hispanic
0.039
0.383
0.039
0.382
White, non-Hispanic
0.8
0.499
0.824
0.494
Married
0.612
0.569
0.59
0.512
Number of Children
1.115
1.118
0.836
0.760
Years of Schooling
13.668
13.921
13.506
13.756
Annual Work Hours
1456.295
1455.594
1985.242
1939.754
Imm Mother/Native Father
.
0.264
.
0.267
Imm Father/Native Mother
.
0.255
.
0.237
Both Parents Immigrants
.
0.481
.
0.496
- from Different Source Countries
.
0.128
.
0.125
- from Same Source Country
.
0.872
.
0.875
Sample Size
420,361
34,141
379,807
31,160
Source: 1995-2011 March CPS.
Notes: The sample consists of individuals age 25–49 excluding those with allocated or unmatched
birthplace, allocated or unmatched parent birthplace, and those of other race. Natives are US-born
with both parents also US-born. Second Generation Immigrants are US-born with at least one parent
foreign-born. Means are weighted using CPS sampling weights adjusted so that each year receives
equal weight.

