NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTER—COUNTRY COMPARISONS OF
LABOR FORCE TRENDS AND OF
RELATED DEVELOPMENTS: AN OVERVIEW

Jacob

Mincer

Working Paper No. 1438

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 198k

am grateful to the authors and discussants of the country papers
for information and data supplied beyond the original call of duty.
I

Special thanks to Richard Layard and to Mark Kiliingsworth for
helpful comments on a first draft of this report. Thanks also to
Machiko Osawa for patient and cheerful research assistance. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1438
August 1981

Inter—Country Comparisons of Labor Force Trends
and of Related Developments: An Overview

ABSTRACT

This paper is a survey of analyses of women's labor force growth in
12 industrialized countries, originally presented at the conference in

Sussex, England in June 1983. The main focus of the conference papers and
of the current survey is on growth of the labor force of married women in

the years 1960—1980. Trends in fertility, family mobility, and wages also
receive attention as related developments.

Married women's labor force growth was observed in all countries,
expect for the USSR after 1970, when labor force rates of women reached the

level of men. Growth rates differ among countries. They apparently respond
to growth in real wages

ties differ

and/or to growth

in education, but response elastici-

among countries. Estimates of these elasticities contained in

the country paper were helpful in predicting the trends.
Other findings include: tSbiquitous declines in fertility and growth

of divorce in the 1970s. Both developments are related to longer ran labor
force growth. In all countries wages of women were lower than wages of men.
The 1960 average gap of 38% narrowed to 29% in 1980. Factors related to
these trends, including public policy, are discussed in the survey.

Jacob Mincer
Economics Department
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—3676

Jacob 1iricer

Revised
July, 1984
Inter—Country Comparisons of Labor Force Trends and
Related Developments: An Overview

of

I. Recent Developments and the Economic Hypothesis
Between 1960 and 1980 labor force rates of women rose in most of the
industrialized countries, continuing longer term though less apparent

trends. These trends are due mainly to the growth of labor force
participation of married women. As a comparison of the left and right panels
of

Table

I indicates for the 12 countries under review,' the labor force rates

of narried women grew about twice as fast as the

Indeed,
ages

rates of all women.

labor force rates of single women declined if

are included, and grew little beyond school ages. In

participation
women.

women of school

the past the

rate of single women was much higher than the rate of

married

Single women and other women not currently married usually worked in

the labor market after completion of schooling and prior to rnarrLage or

Their labor force rates, therefore, did not grow much over time,
and in many cases declined as schooling lengthened. On the other hand, only a
remarriage.

small proportion of married women was in outside employment at the turn of the

century, to take the urban U.S. as an example. Most of them dropped out of

the labor force after marriage or at the first pregnancy. As the century
progressed and the economies and urban employment grew, especially in the

service sector, increasing proportions of married women returned to the labor

market for shorter or longer intervals after the childbearing and
period.

childrearing

Concurrent, and not unrelated declines in fertility made it possible

for these intervals of non—participation to decline in frequency and in

duration. In the most recent stage of the evolution of women's labor force

—2—
participation, the alternations of labor market and of household activities is

giving way to a more sustained commitment to the labor market. Roughly
speaking, this stage was reached in countries where over half of married women

are working. The most important manifestation of growing continuity of
participation in these countries is that recent cohorts of women take much

less time out of the labor market for child care. Thus, in the most recent
decade the fastest labor force growth is observable among mothers of small

children. To some extent, the greater continuity of market employment was
achieved by a reduction in fertility and by a switch from part—period to part—
time (short hours) employment: The latter grew most rapidly in the decade of

the 70s when employment ofmothers grew fastest. Nonetheless, these trends
suggest a convergence which is already observable in the countries in which
labor force rates are high: In the most recent stage, the demographic
distinctions by marital status and presence of children produce greatly
reduced differences among the labor force participation rates of these groups.
A trend to convergence among demographic groups does not mean that family

status is no longer an important factor in women's labor supply. Although it
is less important in affecting participation rates, it continues to infLuence
the allocation of time and energy between market and household activities in

terms of hours of work, work effort, and job choices. The substitution of
part—time for part—period work and the rather universal persistence of the
concentration of women's employment in so—called "female occupations" are

indicative.2 Even where differentials in labor force rates by marital status
are small, the differentials by sex are still large. Only in the.IJ.S.S.R. is

the labor force rate of women nearly equal to that of men. This peak level

was reached in 1970. In the countries we surveyed the average labor force
rate of married women grew from 30 to 48 percent points between 1960 and

—3—
1980. At this pace it will take another half—century to reach 90 percent
participation rates. It could take less time, if the relative rate of growth,
60% in the 1960—1980 period, does not decelerate —— an unlikely possibility on

purely arithmetical grounds. The participation rate of Swedish married women
surpassed 75% by 1980, but most of the growth there was in part—time work, in

contrast to the U.S.S.t., where part—time work is negligible.3 In Australia,
Britain, France, Germany, and the U.S., labor force rates of married women

crossed the 50% mark by 1980. A decade earlier, the typical married woman in
all countries (with the exception of the U.S.S.R.), was primarily a

homemaker. It is perhaps not coincidental that feminist movements in these
countries spread just about when the 50% "tipping point" was reached in the

1970's. At the other end of the spectrum, in Japan, Spain, the Netherlands,
and Italy the activity rates of married women are still quite low, despite

rapid recent increases. In these countries married women have moved from the
early stage of very low participation after marriage to the next stage of
intermittent participation, in the past two decades.

It is important to note that our preferred definition of labor force
participation is restricted to paid employment outside the home —— a
definition which makes choices between household and market activities

unambiguous. This definition rules out the possibilities of joint activities
primarily in rural households and in cottage industries where paid work is

performed at home. Self—employment is a more ambiguous category in this
respect, and we tried to exclude it. It was not possible to adhere to these
restrictions in all cases. However, inaccuracies created by a few deviations
from the definition are minor, since the ruled out sectoxs are small. The
exception is Japan: A relatively large proportion of Japanese women are still
household workers, on the farm, in cottage industries, or in family

—4—
businesses. Since these groups are declining in importance, while employment
outside the household is growing, data which do not single out the latter show
a horizontal, or more precisely a mild U—shaped trend with the upturn

observable only since the mid—seventies. Here, the focus on outside
employment is desirable not only on theoretical grounds but also as a study of
the vanguard of future developments.

Japan is also illustrative of a much larger group of countries not

included in our collection. The shrinkage of the farm and of other household—
based employment with economic development obscures much of the rise of paid
employment of urban married women in LDCs which are experiencing economic

growth, when both groups are defined as labor force participants. The
resulting U—shaped trends in aggregate women's labor force rates take a long

time to materialize.4 The very rapid postwar economic growth of Japan
telescoped these developments into a much shorter interval, so the U—shaped
aggregate change is observable within the comparatively short period of two

decades, 196O—l98O.
Two widespread and far—reaching developments which appear to be
associated, at least temporally, with the growth of married women's labor
market activities have been declines in fertility, and increases in divorce

(or separation) rates. Although fertility had long—term downward trends in
most of the industrialized countries since the 19th century or even earlier,
these trends were resumed in the late 1960s after interruptions by postwar

"baby booms." The decline in fertility rates was ubiquitous (Table 2)6 and
accelerated in the 1970s, at which time also divorce and separation rates rose
in an unprecedented fashion (Table 3), while marriages were delayed and

marriage rates declined. Although the declines in fertility might be viewed
as a symmetric downward phase ("baby bust") of the baby boom, these declines

—5—
are by now of much longer duration then the upswings were. They also appear
to be independent of the timing and amplitude of the demographic cycles across

the countries we studied. It is therefore more plausible to view the
shrinkage of family size and of duration of marriages as a trend, the pace of
which may vary, rather than as a cyclical phase.

That the declines in family size and in duration of marriage provide an
increased scope and motivation for greater labor market commitment of women is

a reasonable conclusions However, economists do not view this relation
between family and labor force trends as unidirectional.7 Some degree of
mutual causation and feedback is also plausible: Fertility and marriage

patterns adjust to greater labor force commitments. Conversely, exogenously
caused reductions in fertility, due to more efficient and less costly
fertility control, encourage labor force participation, and so does the

prospect of family instability. Moreover, even without a direct link between
fertility and labor force participation, both may be viewed as jointly
dependent variables: That is, both are simultaneously influenced by other

variables, notably by the process of economic growth. Especially important in

this

process are: the growth of real wages, growth of education, and of

urbanization. Superimposed on economic growth are also legal—institutional
developments, including laws pertaining to the family, equal pay legislation,

and taxation. These developments were likely to affect trends in some of the
countries, regardless of whether the public policies were specifically
designed to affect them.

The basic economic model which is the starting point of economists'
analyses of women's labor supply8 centers on the family context of work and

leisure decisions. Family members are seen to divide their time among
leisure, market work, and home work. Historically, women had

primary

—6—
responsibility in household production, including especially child care.
While an increase in family income increases the demand for leisure, the
distribution of work between home and market depends on the individual's
relative productivities in the two sectors: The greater the market wage
relative to home productivity (at zero hours of market work) the greater the

shift to market work. In this simplest formulation, growth of wonen's labor
force over time is directly related to economic growth: A rise in market wages

.. IIL..
LLV LU
uumtt Ui

I1tUUW

IJ

LIIWJLC WOUU LuLl) LIl L)UL LUL Le

LiC

the positive substitution effect of the increased market wage is stronger than
the negative effect (on market work) of increased family income.
Early studies of cross—section data in the U.S. revealed a dominance of
the substitution over the income effects in analyses of labor supply of

married women. Cross—section as well as longitudinal analyses of other
countries in the present volume also show, for the most part, positive
substitution effects of women's wages which exceed in absolute size the

negative effects of family, or husbands' incomes.9 The exceptions, in which
the two effects roughly cancel are found in Japanese studies,10 in one of the
several gritish cross—section samples, and in the Italian cohort analysis, but

not in the cross—section. The dominance is also small in the German cross—
section sample for labor force participation, but large for hours of work.
When all country estimates (Table 6) of women's wage elasticities are

averaged, a figure close to unity is obtained. The average income elasticity

was much smaller, about —.4. On average, these findings are consistent with
the upward trends in married women's labor force participation in the
countries we studied.

The present collection of studies in twelve countries is designed to
provide insights into labor force trends, their causes and consequences, in

—7
each of the countries. It also provides an opportunity to test the viability
of the economic hypothesis not merely on average, but also on a cross—national

basis. With only twelve observations on trends, generalizations from the
findings can be only tentative. Nevertheless, the findings describe
developments during the past two decades in most of the industrialized

world. The value of the much richer findings in each of the country analyses
is not affected by the outcome of the experiments reported in this cross—
national overview.

II. Trends in Labor Force Rates
(a) Country Analyses:

Although the underlying economic model is basically common to all the
studies in this volume, estimates of labor supply (in terms of labor force
participation rates) of married women differ in methodology, speciEtcation of

variables and of functional forms, and in some of the data definitions. 1ost
of the estimates are based on cross—sections, and a few (U.S., Britain, Italy)

on cohort data. The explanatory variables included were wages (WF) of wives
in cross—sections, but wages of all women in cohort data and in time series,
wages (WM) of husbands in cross—sections, but of all males in cohort data and

in time series. Women's education levels (E) served as alternative or
additional variables to their wage. Income from sources other than earnings
(Y0) was an additional variable to wages or earnings of husbands. Presence of
pre—school (N) children in the household was another variable alternately

excluded or included in the estimates. Although the magnitudes of effects
differed from country to country, the signs of the variables were consistent
with the economic hypothesis and with previous research in the U.S. and

elsewhere. The substitution variables (wages of women or their education) had

—8—
strong positive effects on labor force participation in iñost cases, and in

most cases the positive wage elasticities exceeded the negative incoie

elasticities1' by a sizable margin. Pre—school children had a negative effect
on participation. The partial endogeneity of fertility behavior does, of
course, make these "effects" questionable. Their estimated effect represented
in most cases a relatively minor contributioq to the variation in labor force

participation. This variable was left Out for time—series prediction, in any
case. Educational attainment of women was strong when used in lieu of the
wage variable, but remained positive and significant in some of the studies

when used as an additional variable. A few studies used an alternative
concept of labor force participation for the dependent varianle, when work

histories were available in the sample of wives. It is measured by the ratio
of years spent working to number of years elapsed since conpietion of

schooling. This variable (called RELP) approximates more closely the concept
of life—time labor force participation.

The basic relation P=f(W, WM, E, Y0, ...) was estimated in each study,
but methodological differences involved alternative techniques such as two—
stage procedures (the first being a wage equation) or OLS, and forms such as

logit, probit, or linear probability equations. Most of the studies tried to
apply the estimated parameters to the observed changes over two decades (1960—
1980) in order to "predict" or "explain" the trends observed in the time

series in the respective countries. Several of the papers exhibit alternative
techniques or functional forms within the same country, yielding alternative

parameter estimates. Some also cite or borrow cross—section estimates from
other studies of their country data.
The following table indicates in summary form the procedures used in each
country study in estimating parameters of the P—function, and their predictive

—9—
performance in time series. Pairs of alternative estimates are listed for 6
countries (Australia, Britain, France, Spain, Japan, and the U.S.). Out of
the 18 sets of predictions, 9 performed fairly well. Only Britain (1) and
Japan (1) yielded wrong signs; all others predicted upward trends. Apart from
Germany where the trend was underpredicted, estimates usually erred on the
high side.

It is worth noting that predictions were more successful in those few
cases where information on past work experience was available and used to

estimate cross—section parameters. (France (2), Japan (2), Spain (2), and
U.S.) Such information apparently reduces the estimates of wage elasticities
to a more correct size.12

— 10

Country Estimates:

Country
Australia

—

Procedures and Predictions

Procedure
Linear Probability

Prediction
overpredices

Sourcea
Table 6

(1)instrunerital

variables
(2)0Ls

Britain

underpredicts

(1)Probit
(2)Logit

wrong sign
fair

supplement
Table 14,
Layard,et al(1980)

France

(1)Logtt
(2)RELP

overpredicts
good

Table 6, eq. 1
Table 6, eq. 3

Germany

Tobit

u n d e r p red ic t

Israel

Logit

fair

Italy

Probit

ove r p re di c t

Japan

(1)Logit
(2)RELP

wrong sign
good

Table 9

etherlands

Probit

good

Table 5

Spa

(1 )Logit

(2)RELP

overpredicts
good

Table 7
Table 9

Sweden

Probit

good

Table 6
(1967 data)

U.S.

(1)Linear Probability fair
(2)RELP
good

Table 19, Panel B

Logit

Table 5

U.S.S.R.

s

supplement
Table 8

s

overpredicts

supplement

Osawa( 1984)

Cain( 1966)

a Tables in the country papers. Supplement = numerical estimates provided by
authors. Japan(2) and U.S.(2) are from external sources, not provided by the
authors.

b Wages not available by sex. Predictions restricted to the 1970—190
decade.

— 11. —

The relative success of the econometric nodels in close to half of the
country studies makes the economic hypothesis a serious contender for jriinacy

in explaining the pervasive social trends of our time. Nevertheless, the
success is only partial, and the differences in data, methodology, and in
econometric specification may raise doubts about generalizations.

What can we learn from the collection of studies going beyond the

enumeration of findings in each of them? One simple exercise is to look at
mean values of the basic variables across the 12 countries. During the 1960—
1980 period the average per country growth in participation of married women

was 2.84% per year. The average growth of men's wages,13

= 4.377. per year

and of women WF = 5.15% per year. Applying the average income elasticity a =
—.37 and the average wage elasticity
=

a = 1.02,14 we obtain

1.02 x 5.1 — .:37 x 4.37 = 3.64%

an overprediction of the actual average rate of growth of the labor force of

married women (73% compared to 57% growth over the two decades). However, if

growth of women's wages is measured by the growth of men's wages, the
=

prediction is quite accurate!

(1.02

—

.37) x 4.37 = 2.84%.

These calculations are based on Japan(a) in Table 1. When Japan(b) is
used, the average

= 3.05%.

The predicted growth, using average elasticities

of col. 2, Table 6 is now 3.50% when P =
and 2.80 when P =

(a1

+

a2)

4

,

a1

F ÷

,

an over1rediction,

a milder underprediction. On average, it

appears that the economic model works rather well. However, averages can
conceal as well as reveal. A more demaniing question is whether differences
among countries in observed trends can be explained by the same hypothesis.

(b) Cross—National Analysis

In its simplest formulation, the cross—section labor force equation is

— 12 —

most conveniently written as:

+ o lnW + a2j mY1, where i = country index, and the aj's

lflP =

are elasticities.

Denoting growth over time by a dot over the variable:
=

+

=

lFi +

1,...,12

(1)

(1) couli-i serve as the time series equation, where Y, WFi measure growth of

family income and of women's wages in each

country.

If structural parameters do not differ significantly among countries,
there is no subscript on the 's in (1), which are simply averages of trie

a. Otherwise, the estimated a1 have to be applied to (i.e., multiplied by)
the independent variables so that the estimating equation is:
Pj =

+ 61(a11Fi) ÷

2(a21)

(2)

The predictions based on (2) are unbiased if

and 2 <

(while o =

0),

=

0,

and

=

62

= 1. If

the (sun of) variables (alJFi) and (a2Y)

overpredicts the observed trends, on average. In this case either the
elasticities (a1) or the rates of

are overstated, or a2 and Y understated.

Before we implement the inter—country regressions of type (1) and (2),
consider the choice of independent variables: While levels of women's wages
are not necessarily strongly correlated with husbands' or family incomes in
the cross—section, over time wage and income growth of men and women are
strongly correlated, especially across countries, even if the growth rates of
women's wages differ somewhat from growth rates of men's wages within
countries. But it is not only riulticollinearity that makes the separation of

the variables problematic. There is a more basic conceptual problem that
might militate against the use of women's observed wage growth as a variable
in time series: Although growth of market productivity in the economy
potentially affects wage growth of men and women similarly in the long run,

— 13 —

the actual change in observed average wages of working women may be

result

in part a

of changing labor force selectivity as women's labor force grows,

rather than a cause of labor force growth. Changes in compositions of working
women by education, age, and continuity of labor force experience affect the
average growth rate of their wages differentially, even if potential market
productivity of the average woman in the population were to grow at tile same
rate as the productivity of men.

The conceptually correct but difficult to measure variable is the average
market wage of all women of working ages, not merely of those who are

currently observed working. If it is assumed that market productivity of men
and women grew at the same rate over the past several decades, the best
approximation to the growth of all women's wages would be the growth of men's

wages WM, where selectivity is a comparatively minor matter.'6 It is
possible, however, that over relatively long stretches of time potential wages
of women grew more rapidly than wages of men, in which case the use of
observed wage growth of women may be preferable to the use of

as a

substitute, especially if changes in selectivity of working women are not

systematic

or minor.

Our data (Table 3) show that wages of working women, grew, on average,

faster than wages of men in most countries. These changes in relative wages
are analyzed in section IV. It appears that the faster growth of working
women's wages is in part due to selectivity by education i labor force
growth, which leads to an upward bias in

of working women as an

explanation

of women's labor force growth. However, the faster observed growth of
of

than

was also partly due to the faster growth of education in the population

of women17 (Table 10). No

bias

attaches to WF on this account, if women's

educational growth is viewed as largely exogenous.

— 14 —

1omen's educational level in 1970, and growth 60—80 are shown in
Table 4. A faster growth of education of women may be expected if (a) family
income elasticity of the demand for educating daughters exceeds the income
elasticity of demand for educating sons,'8 or if (b) increased investnents in
daughters' education is a response to an increasing probability of labor

market participation of women. The latter possibility implies an endogeneity
of the excess of educational growth of women compared to men, hut the effect
of

Increased enrollments on

subsequent educational attainraent of women takes a

long time: about two decades between the average age of completion of

schooling and the average age of potential working life. Consequently, the
growth of all women's education, may serve as an alternative to growth of
wages of working women, as an indicator of all women's gain in potential

earning power. Of course, education may also affect labor force decisions for
reasons other than potential earnings. As previous research suggests, such
effects work in the same direction as wages. The strength of these addLtional
effects is not clearly established in the literature.
In the regressions shown in Table S below, we experiment with the use of

W4 wage growth of men, WF wage growth of working women, and SE—growth of
female education as alternative measures of growth of potential wages of all

women. In view of the preceding discussion we may
bias, and

suspect

F of an upward

of a downward bias when used as proxies for the correct growth of

women's wages. Other variables we experimented with were: levels of women's
education E70, of urbanization (Urb70), and of women's labor force

participation 70' each measured in the mid—year 1970. The scope of market
opportunities is likely to be wider the higher the level of women's

education. The same is true of a more urbanized economy. FinalLy, at high
levels of participation (such as are current in the U.S.S.R. or Sweden) there

— 15 —

is

little room for further growth of labor foce rates: they cannot exceed

100%. This purely arithmetical factor, however, is not likely to matter in
the middle ranges.

In Table (5) we show regressions of P (percent rate of growth of married
women's labor force participation) on the variables discussed above, following
specification (1) which ignores the structural differences in parameters (ni)

among countries. It should be noted that although the dependent variable is
growth of labor force races of married women, ages 20_5919,

the

independent

variables (except for F70) are defined for all men and all women.

The results of regressions in Table 5 are suggestive. If growth of
potential market earning power of women is raeasured by the growth of real

wages of men (W1) alone, the variable is not significant. But when both wages
of men and of women are included, both are significant ——

especially

WF; each

has the expected sign, negative for W,, positive for WF, and the latter
exceeds the former in size.

Levels of labor force participation (in 1970) serve as an arithmetic
correction (col. 3) for the form of the dependent variable,20 but were not

significant when the U.S.S.R. was excluded. Urbanization levels were
positively related to labor force growth, when the U.S.S.R. was excluded from

the sample. The education variables were not significant.
As would be expected on theoretical grounds, the correlations are
stronger when the Japanese labor force is restricted to married wotieii who are

paid employees (Japan (a) in Table 1).
If the differences in income and substitution elasticities (e) across
countries are not merely noise, the next step is to take them into account,
that is, follow specification (2) in analyzing inter—country differences in

trends. This we proceed to do in Tables 6A and 6. The cross—section

— 16

estimates

—

from which the elasticities were calculated were described in the

table of "Country Estimates: Procedures and Predictions" in the previous
section. As was indicated., more than one set of estimates is available for

some of the countries. Table 6 presents in col. (1) elasticity estimates
which

the authors produced or supplied and used in their predictions. These

were listed in line (1) of "Country Estimates." Col. (2) lists the
alternative estimates from line (2) provided for 6 countries in "Country
Estimates."

Four of these were

supplied in

the

papers, and one each was

added

for Japan21 and for the U.S.22

In each Table (6A and 6B), col. (1) assumes that market productivity of

all women rose at the same rate as that of men. Hence the sum of husbands'
income and wives' wage elasticities was multiplied by the rate of growth of

men's real wages.23 hea levels of all women's educational attainment in 1970
(Ed70) and of urbanization in 1970 are added (col. la) the correlation is

strengthened. In col. (2) we use the cross—product of elasticities and of
wage growth of men and women, ignoring the likely biases. Indeed, the R2 is
far stronger in col. (2) and reaches a maximum of .9 in (2a) where education

level and urbanization are added. Column (3) substitutes annual growth in all
women's educational attainment over the period (1960—1980) for growt1 in wages

of working women. Here growth of men's wages is multiplied by income
elasticities (a2), while growth of education (in years) is multiplied by the

wage elasticities (a). The result is significant. The relation in cml (3)
is stronger than in (1) and in (3a) is as strong as in (la).24
Table 6B which utilizes alternative elasticities (col. 2 in Table 6) in

half of the countries shows very similar results as Table 6A. The greater
predictive power of this set of elasticity estimates within countries
apparently contributes to higher R2 in col. (1) and (2) of Table 63 compared

— 17 —

to

6A. This is not true, however, in col. 3 and

in

the columns marked (a),

where other variables are added. Also, when the U.S.S.R. and Spain are left
Out, tue correlationsincrease very little, not as in 6A.
In sum, a comparison of Table 5 and 6 (A and B) lead to the

following

conclusion: While growth rates of real wages across countries have a weak
relation with the differential groith rates of married women's labor force,

the relation is strong when country parameters are taken into account. In
other words, labor force growth responds to growth in real wages, but the

elasticity of the response differs among countries. Estimates of these
elasticities are quite helpful in predictLng the trends, despite the almost
certain large errors they are subject to.

The prediction (in col. 1) of Tables 6 which

of men and women grow equally is not unbiased.

the

assumes that potential wages

The

intercept

is not 0,

and

slope of the relation is less than one—half, rather than unity. On

average, however, the prediction is surprisingly good: Iean annual labor force
growth was 2.8% per year, while the mear of [(cz +

2)WMJ in

Table 6A was 3.1%

and 2.9% in Table 6B, the latter even closer to the actual. when growth
wages of men and of women

is

of

cross—multiplied by the respective elasticities,

the correlation is stronger, and the

bias

appears to be greater. Here

overprediction is clear: The mean of (a1w1

+

cz2WF) is 4.1% per year in Taole

6A and 3.9% in Table 6B, one—third greater than the average actual growth of
women's labor force.25
As was noted, the wage growth variable

was calculated on an annual

basis for the period 1960—1975, the period of sustained growth in all of the

Western economies. Since the mid (or early) 1970's growth of real wages
slackened and almost ceased in most of the countries. Unemployment rates grew
substantially over this period (see Table 7). Table 8 indicates that growth

— 13

of

—

women's labor force rates in the 1970—80 decade was

slowed by this rather

lengthy recession. The greater the decline in the rate of growth of men's
wages MJ4 (measured by the differences between the average rate of growth in
1960—75 and the subsequent rate in 1975—80), and the greater the increase in
standardized unemployment rates, the greater the slowing of married women's

force growth. Tne dominance of the "discouraged"

labor

workers

over the "added"

in female labor force growth appears to be upheld on an international

basis.

III. Decline in Fertility and Growing Family Instability
In the decade of the H70's all countries experienced declines in
fertility. On average, the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) dropped from 2.42 in
1970 to below replacement level 1.85 in 1930 (Table 2). The largest declines
were observed in the Netherlands where both wage growth and women's labor

force growth were among the steepest. The smallest declines were noted in
Spain and Japan, where labor force growth was small to moderate, but wade
growth steep; in Sweden where both labor force growth and wage growth were
moderate ——

but

where criild care and provisions for parental leave may have

slowed the fertility decline; and in the U.S.S.R. where labor force growth of

women and fertility declines stopped in 197026 Comparative declines in the
Total Fertility Rate over the decade are analyzed in Table 9. Arithmetical
declines in fertility rates, rather than percentage changes were used as
dependent variables.

The regressions in Table 9 show negative, hut not insignificant effects
of male wage growth (in col. 2 and 3), but a significant positive relation
between growth of married wonen's labor force rates and declines in fertiLity
(TFR) in the 1970's.

— 19 —

Labor force growth is significant on a longer—term (1960—1930) basis,
whichever labor force definition is used when Japan (cols. 1 and 2). It i.s
significant on a concurrent basis (1970—1980) only when Japan (b) was used.

none of the other variables were significant. Tnese findings are consistent
with the hypothesis of mutual causation of labor force growth and fertility
declines in the short run and with the notion that fertility declines follow

labor force growth. Effects of wage and of educational growth are not
discernible with these statistics. Such effects may be diffuse and largely
indirect at this level of analysis mainly by causing shifts of women to the
labor market.

Oivorce rates accelerated frot previous levels in all countries. Over
the decade 1970—1980, they tripled in frequency. The smallest increases were
noted in Japan and in Israel where labor force growth was small and average,

respectively; the largest increases were experienced in the Netherlands,
Australia, Britain, and the U.S. where labor force growth of married women was

above average. Table 10 summarizes inter—country regression of growth in
divorce (or separation rates) in the 1970s (measured in percent changes).27
The independent variables: growth of male wages and of women's labor force

cover the longer period from 1960 on. Labor force growth over the longer
period, rather than concurrent, was positive and significant while men's wage

growth was not significant. Neither growth of women's wages nor declines in
fertility were significant. iowever, increases in unemployment during the
seventies significantly acelerated the growth of divorce.

In sum, both fertility declines and the growth o family instability
appear to represent lagged effects of longer—term developments in the labor

force of women. Although feedbacks are very likely, growth of divorce rates
clearly lag behind labor force growth, while fertility is sensitive both to

— 20

longer

—

run and to current labor force growth. It is lausihle that changes in

family stability are concurrent with changes in family size, a variable that
lags current fertility change, hut

the

data were not available for

verification. These findings are, in general, consistent with economic
theories

of family behavior, hut data and degrees of freedom are lacking for

attempts to analyze more variables
direction

IV.

or to provide a clearer delineation of

and strength of causal arrows acong the

varithles.Zd

Trends in the Gender Wage Gap

Wages of women are lower than wages of men in all countries. The (female
to male) wage ratio ranged from 54% in Japan to 90%

rather

in

Sweden in U)80. This

large variation is, in part, overstated because it is sensitive to

differences in definitions of wages (

week, month, or hour), of coverage

(all workers, full time workers, workers in the private economy, in a

particular sector, etc.). In general, the closer the definition to an hourly
wage and the narrower the coverage (e.g. withit manufacturing, or within the
public sector) the smaller the wage differential.

Some interpret the differential in pay between men and women as evidence
of ubiquitous and persistent discrimination

traceaole back to biblical

tines. However, the existence of the "wage gap" does not by itself prove the
existence or extent of discrimination. Thus a number of sociologists and
economists have ascribed the sex differential in wages to the household's
division of labor, in which women have historically had the major

responsibility for household production, especially in child rearing. In the
past, this division of labor, especially under high fertility reJimes resulted

in almost complete specialization of women to household tasks. Even in the
20th century industrialized Western countries, where the demographic

—

transition

'-

—

neared completion, the sexual (livision of labor permitted only a

partial cornidtment of married women's time and energy to labor market

activities and, therefore, to the acquisition of work-related skills,

especially on the job. According to this reasoning, lower wages of women
reflect the resulting differences in market productivity.
The wage ratios shown iii Table 3 are gross, in the sense that they do not

measure wage differentials for similar types of labor. When wages are
standardized by marital status, age, education, work experience and its
continuity, job training, hours of work, and other distinguishing
characteristics of workers the gross wage gap is reduced to a smaller
residual. This residual is, in turn, viewed by some as a pure rteasure of

discrimination, as it indicates different wages for "the sane" labor. Others
see it as a measure of ignorance, since many of the relevant characteristics,

some of which were listed above, are not available in the data. Most of the
authors in the present collection of studies analyzed factors determining
wages of women as a step in their analysis of labor supply, and were able to

measure the resulting reduction in he gross wage gap. Similar studies are
available in the literature in a number of countries. Reductions in the gap
range from a little over 10% in some of the Swedish and British studies to

over a half in some of the U.S. studies. The variation certainly reflects the
kind and amount of information available and applied in the wage

functions.29 Much

of the

gap is attributable to differences in hours of work

and in the continuity of work experience, where such data are available. But,
even if proper standardization were to account fully for the wage gap, reasons
for the sex differences in factors affecting wages would still be subject to

debate. However, the discussion would be much better informed.
Several papers focus on the wage gap issue: Becker's theoretical analysis

— 22 —

links

the wage gap and its persistence to the division of labor in the

family. Persistence of the wage differential in the U.S. over several decades
motivates also the empirical studies of O'Neill and of Smith—Ward.
A reason for the puzzle over the apparent stability of the U.S. wage gap
lies in the human capital interpretation of earnings or wage profiles of men

and women. According to this interpretation, if increased market activity of
women translates into lengthened work experience in the market as it
ultimately must,3° the sex differential in wages should eventually narrow for
at least two reasons: (1) Even if shapes of female wage profiles remained
unchanged, lengthening of women's work experience should contribute to an

increase in their wages, so long as the profiles slope upward. This effect is
reinforced, if lengthened experience denotes greater continuity of work.
Losses due to depreciation of skills whichi result from interruptions would be

reduced. (2) Increased length and continuity of work produce a longer payoff
period to human capital investments, hence an incentive for women to seek more
market oriented schooling, more job training, and occupational choices with

greater career orientation. If so, the longer female wage profile would also
become steeper.

However, given limited budgets of time and energy, commitments to market
work and to market—oriented human capital investments require major reductions
in women's responsibilities for household production, especially of those

related to child—bearing and child—care. The tension between family and
market commitments is resolved or reduced by reductions in fertility,
postponement and shorter duration of marriages, and greater capital intensity
of household work ——

all

observed in most countries. On the other side of the

acconodation is the commitment to market work which, although greatly
increased, remains far from complete: Much of the growth in labor force

— 24

participation, most spectacular in Sweden and in Australia, has been in part—

time jobs. Moreover, most of the increases in market employment have been in
the more traditional women's occupations in the service sectors, in jobs with
lesser traiirig components and with shorter or more flexible hours.
The reality of this accomodation is most readily apparent where it might
be expected least: in the U.S.S.R., where women's labor force participation
has reached the same level as that of men by 1970, and where part—time work is

practically not available. Fertility declined sharply by 1970 and divorce

rates continued to grow. Nevertheless, occupational segregation, whici is
less narrow in the U.S.S.R. than Ia the West (primarily because of much
greater employment of women in manual work, but also in some of the

professions) is pronounced and unchanging.31 The wage ratio at 70 is
comparable to that in the West, despite continuous life—time participation in

market work at full—time jobs. In their studies of the subject, in this
volume and elsewhere, Ofer and Vinokur conclude, that the time and energy
burden of household work, which remains highly labor intensive ia the
U.S.S.R., leads Soviet wives to relatively undemanding

That

market

the

almost

jobs.

equal commitment of time of men and worien to the

did not result in a changing division of household chores among the

sexes is evident from the time budget data supplied by McAuley:32 In

to

labor

addition

full time in outside employment, married wouen in the U.S.S.R. spent

between 20—30 hours a week on housework. Their husbands spent a half or fewer

hours on household work. Total hours of work

are

thus very long for Soviet

wives (over 60 hours per week), and more burdensome in the relative absence of

household appliances. According to U.S. time budget studies33 the conditions
are easier, though somewhat comparable for U.S. wouen fulL—time workers.
Their total weekly hours add up to about 50 hours, but their burden is

— 25 —

lessened at borne and at work by shorter hours, less—continuous participation,
and household equipment. The implication of lesser work effort in the market
is plausible, and more plausible for Soviet women, than for working women in
the U.S.

Similar conclusions about women's lesser coiaaitment to market work

despite rapid growth in their labor force in Sweden, are expressed by

Gustafson and Jacobson. According to them "occupational segregation" of women
has

changed 1ttle in Sweden

the

participation rate up higher than anywhere else in the vest. As already

after decades of labor force growth whici pushed

mentioned, much of the growth has been in part—tine jobs, which are nore

easily obtainable in the so—calLed female occupations in the service
sectors. Commenting more generally on trends in the position of women

in

Scandinavia, authors of a recent article34 describe it as follows:
"Although ... men have assumed sone responsibility for household
chores, women still oear the main burden of housekeeping and child
care —— gainfully employed or not. The solution to carrying the
double burden of work inside and outside the home has been to work
part—time at the latter. 1any women who are employed full—time in
the labor force are in reality overworked."35

"Since the sixties, public authorities in the different Nordic
countries have made various efforts to change the gender—based
division of labor, but the results so far, apart from the increased
participation of women in the labor force have been meager."36
According to the authors, "patriarchal traditions" and "male dominance" are in

part responsible for the recalcitrant division of labor. But, they add:
"Uomen, however, are not entirely blameless; by continuing to seek
"women's" jobs, they also play an important part in perpetuating the
present unequal division of labor. Some, of course, are genuinely
interested in such work, but others, particularly young women, mainly
consider such employment because these jobs combine fairly easily
with the role they expect to have as wives and mothers. The working
conditions of some traditional "men's" jobs do not tempt women, being
either too
or demanding too great an involvement in the
workplace. "

The hypothesis that increases in labor force participation ought to be

— 26

reflected

—

in lengthened labor market experience of working women is

unassailable from an individual viewpoint but it need not apply to an
aggregate labor force which is changing, especially when it is trending

upward. Average work experience lengthens, if the intensive margin (the same
women staying longer in the narket) dominates over the extensive margin, at
which more women (with little experience, by definition) ——

enter or reenter

the market. Thus, growth of the labor force may produce some growth or
decline in average work experience of working women, though the latter is mire

likely to be transitional. On this account labor force growth may produce a
narrowing or a widening of the wage gap over stretches of time.

The studies of June O'eill, Smith and Ward, and Claudia Goldin indicate
a rather small, if any, increase in the length of work experience of U.S.
working women over the past several decades. There also nay have been so-ie

small and not easily discernible increase in the slope of wage profiles. But
the small decline in the wage gap which eventually emerges in the data (since
the mid 70's) was initially more than counteracted by an adverse movement of
educational differentials between men and women workers prior to the 70's.
This rnovetaent consisted of two components: In the population, educational

attainment of men grew more rapidly than that of women between 19S) and

1970. At the same time, labor force rates of more educated women grew less
rapidly than of less educated women before 1970, thereby depressing the growth

of the average female wage rate. The consequent initial widening of the wage
gap followed by a narrowing lent a rather mild U—shape to the U.S.

pattern.38 Additional positive and negative factors are analyzed and
discussed in the U.S. studies.

The near—stability of wage differentials in the U.S., which provoked
puzzlement and analysis, turns out to be an exception in our international

— 27 —

comparisons.

Another exception is the U.S.S.R. where the wage ratio remains

at 70, despite the almost full equality of labor force rates of men and
women, which undoubtedly also implies little difference in the length of work
experience.

Wage differentials narrowed in all other countries over the past two
decades (except that Japan's ratio narrowed in the 60's and stabilized in the

70's, and data for Spain are missing). On-average the wage ratio rose from

62% to 71% thereby closing almost one fourth of the gap.39 It is intercstin
to find (in Table 11) that the narrowing was, indeed, positively correlated,

across countries, with the rate of (married women's) labor force Jrowth. We
do not know whether this is because faster growth resulted in or from

lengthened work experience, since data on the latter are not available. The
French study indicates that married women employed in 1977 had spent about 80%
of their post—school years working,40 and a similar statistic appears in

Swedish data. The figure (at about 60%) is lower for U.S. married women

workers, whicb may explain, in part, why the U.S. wage ap is big;er. But the
comparison of uperience levels in a single year tells us nothing about
changes in the wage ratios.

In Table 11 the dependent variable is percent change in the wage ratio.
The positive correlation between labor force growth and narrowing of wage
differentials shown in col. (1) may be due to factors which may have affected
both, such as growth of women's education. Coluvmn (2) shows that growth of
women's educational attainment (in the population) was, indeed, a positive and

significant factor. The significance of labor force growth is attenuated but
not neccessarily eliminated, when educational growth (E) is included.
We tried two other variables whici nay have affected the wage ratios: the
changing proportion of married couples in the population and the changing

— 23

labor

force rates of men. A

decline

—

intlie proportion of married occurred in

the 70's, and a decline in the labor force rates of men was observed

throughout the period, hut especially in the 70's. Neither of the variables
was siuificant, although the signs were plausible.41
Labor

force growth, per se, may have had no effect, unless it lengthened the

average

work experience of working women, a matter on which we have no data,

or unless more educated worne increased participation more rapidly than the

less educated ones. We iave no extensive information on growth of educational
attainment of working women as distinguished from all

women. The former is

clearLy more closely connected with observed wages of women, hence also with

the wage ratios. We do have information on changes in both
distributions
force

in some of the

eclucqtional

countries. These show that increases in labor

rates of Lnore educated women were

above average titroughout the

period

in

Israel, the Netherlands, also in Italy, Japan and in the U.S. after
1970. So the observed narrowing of the differentials was due both to catching
France,

up

of women's with men's educationaL attainment in the population, as well as

to

a positive educational selectivity of woiien's labor force growth during

this period.

V. Effects of Public Policy
Otner developments which may have
growth and to

contributed

to trends in labor force

changes in the wage ratio are connected with public poLicy.

Changes in laws receive special attention in the Swedish, Australian, and
British

studies. They

countries

are relevant in considering developments

in the

other

as well although our information on these matters is not complete.

Public

policy which affects labor sup?ly, fertility behavior, and more

generally the family institution does not necessarily emanate from a concern

— 29 —

with

these matters42 and is not necessarily designed to change them. Thus

tax, social security, and other welfare provisions are not, prima facie,
addressed to the issues under discussion. But they are certainly not 'ieutral
in their effects: Non—market (household) activities are exempt from taxes.
Iricorne—splttting among spouses for tax purposes encourages non—market

actvities relative to tax treatment which is independent of family status.
Social security provides dependent benefits which are not paid for,
encouraging nonparticipation, while employment requirements for receipts of

unemployment coo)ensation encourage labor force participation. A change from
income—splitting to individual treatment encourages labor force entry of

wives, especially at righ marginal tax rates. A shift from family—based to
individual treatment in income taxation occurred i; Sweden, the Netherlands,

Italy, and Israel. It has been in existence for a longer period in Australia
and Japan. Both a shift from family—based taxes to individual taxation and an
increase in marginal tax rates in countries which tax individuals induces more
married women into the labor force, especially spouses of higher—income

husbands. Since the correlation between earning power of spouses tends to be
positive, the tax changes are also likely to contribute to a narrowing of the

observed male—female wage gap. The tax changes instituted in Sweden in the
60's, in the Netherlands and Italy in the 70's probably affected labor force

growth and wages of working women in this fasiion. This nay have also
happened to some degree in Australia and Israel.

Additional laws which were more specifically directed at the family were
enacted in Sweden and in Israel: Long (one year) and subsidized parental
leaves in Sweden, coupled with a guaranteed return to previous employment, and
an increased supply of publicly provided day care per:nitted greater continuity

in employment of mothers. Both higher levels of labor force participation and

— 30

higher

—

wages resulting from more continuous employment are consequently

observed. Though less generous in terms of pay, similar parental leaves were
instituted in Israel during the 70's. In addition, tax credits for children
were also introduced there. Parental leaves, day care subsidies and tax
credits are basically pro—natalist. They may have contributed to slowing of
the declines in fertility in Israel and in Sweden, as we already noted.

Another set of laws which are aimed at perceived or actual labor market
discrimination ranges in the degree of government intervention from "equal pay
for

the same job" to "equal pay for comparable work" on the wage side, ani

from "fair employment laws" to "affirmative action programs" on the employment

side. The less intrusive laws provide meclianis;ns for bringing suits against
discriminating
"affirmative

employers. The more recently enacted (

in the TJ...)

action" programs, and currently debated and even litigated

"comparable worth" principles call for active designation of numerical

employment "goals" and of "comparable" pay scales. Most countries enacted
some form of the usually less intrusive laws.

The U.K. study attributes a 15% rise of the relative wage of women

between 1973 and 19Th to the Equal Pay Act which was passed in 1970. Although
the growth of women's employment slowed in the late 70's both in numbers and
more so in hours, and real wages stopped growing after 1975, the study
concludes that the Equal Pay Act had no adverse effects on women's employment

relative to that of men. This was, in part, due to rapid growth of women's
employment in the public sector during the 1970s, but the conclusion is held
to be valid also for the private sector.

Most interesting is the Australian experience with pay scales, more

specifically with wage floors set by federal tibunals. Prior to 1969 the
floors were set in an unequal manner: The tribunals explicitly differentiated

31

occupations

as "male" and "female" and put lower floors for "female"

occupations

and for women's

wages in mixed occupations. The relative floors

were raised from 5E,7 to 75% after the second World War.

In the

years l9bO to

1972 the principle of "equal pay for equal work" was enacted which affected

women working in mixed occupations. In the 1972—75 period the

tribunal
work

federal

introduced the priiciple of "comparable worth," or "equal pay for

of equal value."

The authors of the Australian study note that female relative to male
employment continued to increase despite the 30Z relative wage increase wtich

they

attribute to the introduction of equal pay.3 However, even more thai in

Britain, the increase in relative employment was largely (tue to the growth of

wouen's employment in the public sector. In the private sector growth of
relative employment (measured in hours)

stopped after 1972. The authors find

no evidence of excess deaand for female labor before the equal pay decisions,

hut claim that an excess supply exists since then, They are puzzled, however,
by the observation that the (relative, by sex) ratio of mean wages to wage
floors did not change throughout the period.

Even if relative employment of women did not decline, its growth
certainly slowed (especially in terms of hours worked) since 1975, below

levels expected from secular and cyclical trends.44 This is consistent with
the author's finding (Table G

) that

the estimated cross—section parameters

underpredicted the growth of participation befor the equal pay acts and

overpredicted

it afterwards,

We may conclude that tax laws, parental leaves, and child—care subsidies
induced both an accelerated labor force growth of wives and mothers and a

relative growth in their wage rates. The equal pay laws apparently
contributed also to the narrowing of the wage gap in Britain and Australia,

— 32

—

but probably slowed women's labor force growth.
1hat can we conclude about the

future

narrowing of the wage gap based on

1960—1980 international experience? Some evidence was shown, that narrowing
occurred partly because of (1) women's educational growth in the population,
and more so in the labor force (2) changes in tax and other laws pertaining to
the

family, and (3) equal pay laws in Britain

not

secure, and nore intensive research of the

and Australia. The evidence is

apparent

effects is very much

to be desired.
Most of the changes which

affected the wage ratio are self—limiting.

This is true of women's educational catch—up, of tax changes, and of other

legal cuanges. Ultimately, without labor market discrimination and with equal
educational attainment, the wage gap can be eliminated only when sex
differences in life—time work experience vanish, provided differences in

investments in job market skiLls and work effort also disappear. ihether this
will happen, or to what extent the wage gap will narrow is a question of

economic and technological change as it affects work hours, location, and
flexibility of both, as much as it is a question of how the same forces will
affect the fanily institution.

— 33

FOOTNOTES

These

are: Australia, Britain, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, U.S., U.S.S.R.
2

A closer picture of time allocation is given in time budgets. Only two
such surveys were available (the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.), supplied in
Becker's Appendix, and in McAuley's comments.
One half of a percent, according to McAuley.
For an analysis of such trends in LDC's, see Hill (1983).

Rates for all women began to rise in Japan in the !nld—7O's. The upward
trend for paid employees is clear and strong (Japan' in Table 1). The
distinction between aggregate labor force participation and work outside
the home of Japanese women is emphasized and analyzed by Anne i-TiLL (1983,
1984).

In the U.S.S.R. the decline was much steeper before 1970, than the
subsequent rise, which is entirely due to the increasing numerical weight
of the Moslem population (see Ofer and Vinokur).
Seeh;sley Davis (1982), and giricer (1963).

The model was originally formulated and applied by Mincer (1962). Further
developments are due to Becker (1965,1931), Cain (1966), Kosters (1966),
Ueckinan (1974,1973,19b0) and Grunau (1977).
A strong substitution effect in the labor supply of women is exlainaDle
by substitutability of market goods and services for home production. See
Mincer (191,2), and Gronau (1977).
10

Flowever, a sample restricted to wives who are paid employees in the Tokyo
area show a dominance of substitution effects (:-iill, 1983; Osawa, 1934).

For purposes of time—series estimation, income elasticities were
calculated as sums of elasticities of labor force growth with respect to
growth of men's wages (WM) and to growth of other income (Y0) —— assuming
equal rates of growth.

12 This can he seen by comparing the

in col. (2) and col. (1) in Tanle 6,
for France, Japan, and Spain. Both U.S. estimates utilized information on
work experience.

13 Annual growth of men's wages was calculated from the 1960—75 period. See
discussion in the next section.
14 Parameters from col. (1) of Table (6), corresponding to upper rows of the
"Country Estimates" in the text.

1) Sec next section for an argument.

— 34

16 The selectivity problem is well recognized in cross—section micro—data
analyses. However, there is no reason for men's (husbands?) wages to
constitute an estimate of women's (wives?) wages in cross—sections.

17 The faster growth of relative wages of women was also ascribed to legal
changes in some of the papers. However, the effects of such changes on
labor force growth are ambiguous.
Evidence on this is apparent in comparisons of sex differetitials in school
enrollment rates among countries differing in levels of income (e.g. World
Development Report, 19Q). The difference may be much smaller within the
group of hig income countries. In the 2dth century the J.S. differential
in enrollment rates existed only at post—high school levels. It widenened
after the Second War (most likely as a result of Gt Bills) and vanished
before 1970. Differential change, if any, was uni—directional in European
countries.

19 Exceptions in
2u

definition

are noted in

Table

1 for 4 countries.

The use of (P) instead of

P in Tables 5 and 6 (A and 3) resulted in
weakened correlations of all variables, except the level of P70 wuich
became positive and significant. Apparently, the relative growth of labor
force participation was inverse to level at the extremes of the range but
absolute change was positively related to levels throughout most of the
range. At any rate, our double log specification of the labor force
equation (1) and (2) fits better than a linear specification.

21 In their paper, Shimada and Higuchi estimated cross—section elasticities
for a large sample of women in employee households. These elasticities
(col. I of Table 6) are supplied to explain growth of the labor force of
such women (data shown for Japan (a) in the right—hand panel of Table
1. Osawa (1984) using RELP information estimated elasticities for a
1).
smaller sample of married women who were paid employees in the Tokyo
area. These elasticities (col. 2 of Table 6) are applied to the growth of
labor force of married women who are paid employees (data for Japan (b) in
the right—hand panel of Table 1).

22 The alternative U.S. estimate is the first ever RELP
from micro—data by Cain (1966, Table 29, col. V).

estimates,

calculated

23 As is indicated in Table 3, annual rates of growth of men's wages were
based on the period 1960—75, prior to the world—wide stagnation that set
in the mid—70's. Additional effects of the stagnation on labor force
growth in the 1970's are analyzed in Table 7. Income elasticities were
calculated as sums of elasçicites with respect to Y() and W, on the
assumption that over time Y0 = W1.

24 Not surprisingly, the correlations are increased when the U.S.S.R. and
Spain are left out. R2 rises from .43 to .72 in col. (1), from .79 to .84
in col. (2), and fron .39 to .71 in col. (3). Also (tE) in col. (2)
becomes significant even without the
coefficient in the set of 10
countries (not shown).

— 35

25 Note that these predictions are calculated as averages of products (of
elasticity times wage growth) rather than products of averages as on p. 13
above.

26 See footnote 6.

27 Data for Spain were missing.

23 For an attempt at such an analysis of U.S. data, see R. L'lichael's
contribution in this vol.une.

29 For a more detailed survey see June O'Neill (1984).
3u

But work experience riced not lengthen before that stage is reached, and

the
31

wage gap nay even widen over the transition period.

According to McAuley's comment. See also Ofer and Vinokur (1983).

32 His comments at the Sussex Conference.
See Appendix Table in Becker's paper.
T. Skard and E. Haavio—Nannila (1984).
Op.

cit.,

36 Ibid.,

p.

p. 152.

159.

Ibid., p. 160.

The reversal started in the mid 70's, not visible in our

Table 3.

At this pace the gap would fully close in the middle of the next century.
40

Table 5,

41

The decline in the fraction of married couples could plausibly narrow the
wage ratio, since marital status has a positive effect on wades of men and
an opposite effect on wages of women. The decline in the labor force

bottom row, in Riboud's paper.

rates of men, which occurred mainly at both ends of the wage spectrum
could widen the differential.

42 Potential policy implications of these issues are discussed in Clerr Cain's

paper.

Not surprisingly, views on normative issues differed widely in
Conference discussions.
For industry details see also Gregory and 1)uncan (1981).
It should be noted that labor force rates of men decLinel in the 70s in
Australia (by 4.3 points), as they
points) and in most
of the other countries (the decline was 3.8 points in the U.S.), accor-ling
to comments by Axel Mittelstildt.
This biases the relative employment of
women upwards. Also, slowing of married women's female labor force growth
in recessions was counteracted, in part, by the Australian law which

did ii Britain (3.5

— 36

—

denies unemployment compensation to wives of spouses whose eirnings exceed
a (low) level. The "added worker" effect in recessions is, thereby,
strengthened.

Table 1

Labor Force Participation Rates
All Women and harried Women, 1960, 1970, 1980.
12 Countries

Married Women2

All Women'
(1)
1960

Country

(2)

1970

(3)
1980

(1)

1960

(2)
1970

(3)

(4)

1980

growth

per

an nuil

Australia

29.5

42.3

55.4

19.2

36.5

50.8

4.86

Britain

43.4

54.6

62.3

33.7

4d.8

57.2

2.64

France

44.5

47.1

57.0

35.6

41.5

52.6

1.95

Germany

46.5

50.9

56.2

36.5

42.7

54.4

2.00

Israel

29•0a 370b 392

25•7a

360b 435

2.63

Italy

35.2

33.8

39.9

18.5

24.2

35.4

3.24

japana

477C

50.0

52.7

360C

39•

41.9

1.00

japan"

21.9

27.0

29.5

12•6d 18.3

26.0

4.02

Netherlands

49.0

43.9

34.9

7.6

17.3

30.6

6.96

Spai:

22•7a 26.1

33.2

n.a.

16.3

26.0

2.37

Sweden

•51•0a 60.1

76.9

43.1

56.2

75.6

2.1

U.S.A.

37.8

43.4

51.3

305a 403a 51a 48

U.S.S.R.

77.4

89.4

88.2

77.4

89.4

8;3.2

.66

'Over 15 years of age, exceptions noted
2Ages 20—59, exceptions noted
Israel (a) 1961 (b) 1975, all ages
Japan (a) All Women, ages 20—64, in nonagricultural households and Married
Women in employee households
(b) Paid employees, all ages
(c) 1965
(d) 1962
(a) 1964, all Women, ages 20—59
Spaii
U.S.
(a) All ages
U.S.S..
All Women, ages 20—54
Sources:

Country papers and authors.
Japan: Bureau of Women and Youth, Ministry of Labor, Status
of

Women, Tokyo, Ministry of Finance Printing Office, 1982.

Table 2
Total Fertility Rates and )ivorce Rates,
12 Countries, 1970, 1980
Divorce Rates2

TFR2

Country

1970

1980

1970

1980

Australia

2.56

190a

.98

2()2C

Britain

2.44

1.89

1.17

3.01

France

2.48

1.97

.79

Germany

2.02

1.38

.51

.63

Israel

3.41

2.76

.81

1.14

Italy

2.42

1.84

Japan

2.16

177b

'etherlands

2.58

1.61

.79

l.6Y

Spain

2.84

2.65

n.a.

n.a.

Sweden

1.92

1.68

1.61

2.39

U.S.

2.8

3.51

5.19

U.S.S.R.

1.77

2.ô2

3.50

2.04

1.21

Notes to Table 2: TFR=Total Fertility Rate = sun of age—specific birth
rates of women at each age group 1.5—49.

1. a) 1981
b) 1978
c) 1979
d) 1971
Sources: Australia, U.S.S..: The orld Bank, World Development Report, 1983.
Israel: CBS, Statistical Abstract; reference in this volume.
Japan: Prime -1inister's Office, Japan Statistical Yearbook; tn this
volume.
Sweden: SOS Befolkningsfl3r1ridringar; in this volume.

U.S.: U.S. Bureau of Census, $tatistical Abstract of the U.S., 192.
others: Statistical Office of the European Community,
Demographic Statistics, 1931.
2. Number of final divorce decrees granted under civil law, per 1000
population. Exception: Germany, per 10,000 marriages.
Source: U.N. Demographic Yearbook, 1972, 19:31.

Table 3
Wage

Crowth and Wage Ratios

12 countrIes, 1960—1960

Annual Growth Rates
of Real Wages (%)

Ratio of Women's
to Men's Wages3

Country

Men'

Women2
_______

1960

1970

1980

Aus t ra ii a

3.60

6.20

.59

.59

.75

Britain

3.46

4.18

.61

.61

.79

France

3.92

4.32

.64

.67

Germany

4.67

5.35

.65

.69

.72

Israel

3.26

3.31

ri.a.

.70

.73

Italy

5.14

5.75

.73

.74

.83

Japan

6.46

7.79

.46

.54

.54

Netherlands

6.39

8.07

.60

n.a.

.71

Spain4

7.60

7.60

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

Sweden

3.14

4.51

.72

.84

.90

U.S.

2.23

2.12

.66

.65

.66

U • S • S • R.

2.30

2.30

.70

.70

.70

Notes:
1.
Calculated for the period 1960—1975
Exceptions based on:
Australia
196 1—1976

Spain

1964—197 5

Nether lands

1960—1970

Sweden

1963—1931
2. Calculated for tile period 1960—1980
Exceptions based on:
Australia
1961—1976
France
1960—1978
Israel
1970—1980
Netherlands
1960—1978
Sweden
1963—1981
3. Hourly wages, aggregate, except:
Australia: Teekly, full tLrne workers
Britaifl
:
iourly, manual workers
France
:
Annual, full time workers
Italy and Sweden: Hourly, in manufacturing
4. Classification by sex not available for Spath.
Wage growth of women assuned equal to wage growth of men.
Sources: Country papers and authors

71a

Table 4
Educational Attainment of Uoinen
(Average Years of Schooling)

Increase 1960_19801

Country

Average in 19701

Australia

8.20

1.51

i3ritain

10.32

1 .04

France

8.60

1.80

Germany

10.40

Israel

8.40

1.53
2.38

Italy

6.05

2 • 1)4

Japan

10.26

1.72

Nether lancEs

7.75

2.32

Spain

n.a.

n •

Sweden

8.80

2.30

U.S.

12.20

U.S.S.R.

7.20

.70
2.54

a

Notes to Tale 4
Average Educational
Australia:
Britain:
Germany:

Israel:

Italy:
U.S.:
U.S.S.R.:

Attainment (25+) exceptlons noted.
population 15+
all except those in school
all except those in school
all except those in school
1971 population 21+
population 18+
population 10+

Sources: Country papers and

authors.

Table 5
Annual Growth of Labor Force Rates
of Married Women, 196U—1980
Variables (la)

(2a)

(ib)

(2b)

.018
(1.3)

.013
(1.1)

.012
(1.0)

.006
(.7)

.22
(.7)

—1.08
(1.7)

.42

—1.04

(1.6)

(2.3)

1.20
(2.2)

WF

.05

1.35
(3.5)

.25

.11

.38

!otes:

1. Regressions (a) and (b) contain alternative labor force sectors in
Japan: (a) pertains to labor force growth of married woiaeri in
employee households, (b) pertains to labor force growth of narried
women who were paid enployees. Sources in Table 1.

2. W1 assumed equal to
available for wages.

for

Spain, where a breakdown by skx is not

3. R is adjusted for degrees of freedom.

Table 6

Cross—section Estimates of E1asicity Parameters
(2)

(1)
£

I

c

Australia

1.83

—.66

.93

—.39

Britain

.35

—.36

.49

—.04

France

1.15

—.32

.58

—.17

Cermauy

.72

—.63

.72

—.63

Israel

.61

—.04

.1

—.04

Italy

1.66

—,42

1,66

—.42

Japana

0

—.20
1.21

—.43

japanb
Netherlands

2.02

—.37

2.02

—.37

Spain

1.79

—.64

.54

—.23

Sweden

.80

—.24

.S0

—.24

U.S.

.82

—.52

.73

—.07

U.S.S.R.

.53

+.01

.53

+.01

Mean

1.02

—.37

.90

—.26

Notes to Table 6:
Japana: ased on national samples of employee families (Shimada, et al.,
1981).

japanb: Based on sample of wives who were paid employees in the Tokyo area

(Osawa,

1984).

Table 6a

Annual Growth of Labor Force Rates
of Married Women, 1960—1980
Intercountry Regression (1)
Variables

(1)

(Ia)

(2)

(2a)

(3)

(3a)

.018
(3.6)

—.045
(1.4)

.015

—.044

.003

—.056

(4.0)

(2.0)

(1.3)

(2.4)

.321

.551
.301

.415
(9.0)
.380
(1.0)

.156

.164

.248

(3.1)

(5.8)

alJF-a.,W\

(4.7)

a1(E)

(3.3)

(.4)

(5.1)

(SE)

n.s.

n.s.

E70

.0025
n.s.

.003
(1.7)

Urb70

.0005
(1.3)

.0003

.0005

(1.7)

(1.5)

.43

.82

.66

.91

.0035
(1.5)

.68

.81

'lote:

Col. (la), (2a), (3a) exclude Spain for which education data are
unavailable.

Table 6B

Annual Growth of Labor Force Rates
of Married Women, 1960—1980
Intercouritry Regression (2)
Variables
c

a

a

(3a)

(1)
.017

(Ia)

(2)

(2a)

—.023

—.012

(3)
.014

—.039

(4.0)

(.7)

.016
(4.7)

(.4)

(2.3)

(1.2)

.443

.463

(4.2)

(4.2)

.374

.410
(5.4)

—.223
(.6)

.031
(.1)

.151
(2.5)

.202
(2.9)

1 F+a7'.,
—

(5.8)

2 M

n.s.

AE
E70
.0006
(1.7)

Urb70
.60

R2

Note:

See

Table 6A.

.62

.75

.002
(1.5)

n.s.

.0004
(1.3)

.0004
(1.')

.77

.43

Table 7
Slowdown in ?len's Wage Growth, 197() to 1980

Increases in Unemployment Rates 1974—1)80
Country

Decline in tiage Growth'

Increase in Unenp1oyrcent2

Australia
Britain

0

3.8

4.0

3.7

France

0.7

3.8

Germany

2.6

1.7

Israel

1.5

2.0

Italy

2.4

2.7

Japan

4.5

.7

Netherlands

3.6

2.()

Spain

2.8

3.0

Sweden

4.7

.7

U.S.

2.0

2.4

Notes

on Table 6
1. Calculated as : '1 (60—75) —

(75—80), annual rates.
W.1
Exceptions noted for the seconi ter!0:
(75 — 78)
France :

Sweden : WM ( — 1)

Netherlands
W4 (70 — 73)
Also see notes in Table 3 for exceptions
2. Calculated as differences between age and sex standardized unemploynent
rates in 1980 and in 1974. (ILO, Jorld Labor Report, 1934).

Table 8
Regressions of Married Iornen
Labor Force Growth, 1970—1980

Variables

El.(2)

El.(l)

c

(al+a2)M

.019

.011
(1.8)

(2.3)

.438

.470

(3.4)

(3.5)

,021

.024

(7.0)

(3.3)

.319

.289

(4.8)

(5.6)
—.213

—.315

(2.9)

(1.4)

—.0023

(1.8)
.094
(1.8)
.55

=

(60_75)

—

(75—80)

U.S.S.R. and Spain excluded

.59

.71

.92

Table 9

Declines in Total Fertility Rates, 1970—1930
Variables

C

(a)
(1)

(2)

(3)

—.042

—.044

—.038

(2.2)

(2.5)

(2.0)

—.237

—.460

—.513
(1.4)

(.6)
—.79

P(60—80)

(2.2)

(b)

(1.3)

—.9
(2.5)

P(70—80)

—1.34

(2.5)
.22

Dependent Variable:
(a) Using P in Japan (a)
(b) Using P in Japan (b)
U.S.S.R.

excluded

.30

.31

Table 10

Growth of Divorce Rates, 1970—1980
Variables

(1)

(2)

c

—.024

—.022

(.7)

(.7)

.274
(.5)

—.196

.72
(1.6)

1.08
(1.9)

.02
(2.8)

.02
(3.4)

.55

.62

P(60—31))

in Japan (a)
(2) P in Japan (b)
(1)

Spain and U.S.S.R. ec1uded

(.3)

Table 11
Changes in Wade Ratios
10 Countries, 1960—1q80

Variables

(1)

(2)

(1)

(2)

c

.0035
(1.5)

—.002

.002
(.8)

—.002

.139

.064
(1.1)

.169

.089

(2.4)

(1.4)

(60—8o)

(2.0)

AE

(.7)

.085
(2.7)

(.9)

.080
(2.6)

AU

R2

.25

U.S..R. and Spain excluded
in Japan (a)
(b) P in Japan (b)
(a)

.58

.34

.62

Table 12
Ieans

(ii) and

Standard Deviations

Variable

2.84

1.54

3.05

1.61

4.37

1.70

i(60—80)

3.90

1.44

F(60SO)

5.17

2.01

2.52

1.97

8.92

1.73

AE(60—80)

1.85

.64

Urb70

69.50

10.30

2.6R

2.03

.71

.43

(60_80)b
W\1(60—75)

E70

WR(60$0)
1ote:

Dot over variable denotes annual rate of growth
a —— based on Japan(a), b —— based on Japan(b)
= annual rate of growth of female to male wage ratio

RE FE RE

Becker,

Gary S. "A Theory of

the

NCS

Allocation

of Time," The

September 1965.
__________•

A Treatise on the Family, Harvard University Press, 1981.

Ben—Porath, Yoram. "Labor Force Participation Rates and
Journal of Political Economy, May—June 1973.

Cain,

Economic Journal,

the

Supply of Labor,"

Glen. iarried Women in the Labor Force, Chicago University Press, 1966.

•
"The Economic Analysis of Labor Supply: Developments Since
-lincer," University of iiscorisin, unpublished, ovenber 12.

I)avis, Kingsley and Pietronella van den Oever, "Demographic Foundations of Ne
Sex Roles," Population and Developnent Review, Septenther 1982.
Gregory, Robert and R.C. Duncan, " Segmented Labor Markets and the Australian
Experience of Equal Pay for [omen," Journal of Post—Keynesian Econo'iics,
No. 3, 1981.
Groriau, Reuben. "Leisure, Home Production, and Work," Jourial of Political
Economy, Decenber 1977.
I-Ieckman, James. "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply,"
Econometrica, July 1974.
•
"A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor Supply of
Women," American Fconomic Review, May 1978.

"Sample Selection Bias," in James P. Smith (ed.) Female Labor
___________
Supply, Princeton University Press, 1980.
Hill, Anne. "Female Labor Force Participation in Developing and Developed
Countries," Review of Economics and Statistics, August 1983.
"Female Labor Force Participation in
Resources, Sprint 1984.
•

Japan,"

Journal of tiuman

Goldin, Claudia. "Life—Cycle Labor Force Participation of Married Wonen,"
Working Paper, No. 125, NBER, December 1983.
Killingsworth, Mark. Labor Supply, Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Kosters, rlarvin. "Income and Substitution Effects in a Family Labor Supply
Model," Report P—3339, The Rand Corporation, December 196ô.

Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in Aspects of
Labor Economics, 1i.G. Lewis, ed., Princeton University Press for
1962.

"larket Prices, Opportunity Costs, and Income Effects," in C.
Christ

(ed.) 1easurement in Economics, a Volume in temory

of

Yehuda

Cruenfeld, Stanford University Press, 1963.
of

and S. Polachek. "Fanily Investnents in luman Capital: Earnings
Women," Journal of Political Economy, Part II, March—April 1974.

icAuley, Alistair. Wonen's Work and Wages in the Soviet Union, London, Allen
and Unwin, 1981.
Ofer, Gur and A. Vinokur. "Earniris Differentials by Sex in the Soviet
Union," in S. Rosefield, ed., Economic Welfare and the Econorics of Soviet
Socialism: Essays in Honor of Abran Berson, Harvard, 19R3
O'Neill, June. "Earnings Olfferentials: Empirical Evidence and Causes," in C.
Schmid, ed., Discrimination and Equalization in the Labor Market,
forthcoming, 1)84.

Osawa, Machiko. "Women's Skill Formation, Labor Force Particijation and
Fertility in Japan," Ph.D. Thesis, University of Southern IlLinis, 1084.
Skard, T. and E. Flaavio—ManniLa, "Equality Between the Sexes," [)nedalus,
Winter 1984.

Smith,

James P.(ecl.) Female Labor Supply, Princeton University Press, 1980.

