                                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




GENDER, SOURCE COUNTRY CHARACTERISTICS AND LABOR MARKET ASSIMILATION AMONG IMMIGRANTS
                                        1980-2000

                                                   Francine D. Blau
                                                  Lawrence M. Kahn
                                                    Kerry L. Papps

                                                 Working Paper 14387
                                         http://www.nber.org/papers/w14387


                               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
                                              October 2008




          The authors are indebted to Martha Bailey, Charlie Brown, John DiNardo, Andrew Oswald, Mark
          Rosenzweig, Jeff Smith, Dean Yang and participants at the Society of Labor Economists meetings
          in Chicago, May 2007, the Wang Yanan Institute for Studies in Economics 2007 International Symposium
          on Contemporary Labor Economics, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, December 2007, the Herman
          Colloquium, University of Michigan, March 2008, and the Centre for European Economic Research
          (ZEW) Workshop on Gender and the Labour Market, Mannheim, Germany, March 2008 for helpful
          comments and suggestions, to Fidan Kurtulus and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu for excellent research assistance
          and the Russell Sage Foundation for financial support. Portions of the research for this paper were
          completed while Blau and Kahn were Visiting Fellows in the Economics Department of Princeton
          University, supported by the Industrial Relations Section. The views expressed herein are those of
          the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

          NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
          reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
          NBER publications.

          © 2008 by Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, and Kerry L. Papps. All rights reserved. Short sections
          of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
          credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Gender, Source Country Characteristics and Labor Market Assimilation Among Immigrants,
1980-2000
Francine D. Blau, Lawrence M. Kahn, and Kerry L. Papps
NBER Working Paper No. 14387
October 2008
JEL No. J16,J22,J24,J61

                                              ABSTRACT

We use 1980, 1990 and 2000 Census data to study the impact of source country characteristics on
the labor supply assimilation profiles of married adult immigrant women and men. Women migrating
from countries where women have high relative labor force participation rates work substantially more
than women coming from countries with lower relative female labor supply rates, and this gap is roughly
constant with time in the United States. These differences are substantial and hold up even when we
control for wage offers and family formation decisions, as well as when we control for the emigration
rate from the United States to the source country. Men's labor supply assimilation profiles are unaffected
by source country female labor supply, a result that suggests that the female findings reflect notions
of gender roles rather than overall work orientation. Findings for another indicator of traditional gender
roles, source country fertility rates, are broadly similar, with substantial and persistent negative effects
of source country fertility on the labor supply of female immigrants except when we control for presence
of children, in which case the negative effects only become evident after ten years in the United States.


Francine D. Blau                                     Kerry L. Papps
ILR School                                           Department of Economics and Nuffield College
Cornell University                                   University of Oxford
350 Ives Hall East                                   New Road, Oxford OX1 1NF
Ithaca, NY 14850-3901                                UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER                                             kerry.papps@economics.ox.ac.uk
fdb4@cornell.edu

Lawrence M. Kahn
Department of Labor Economics
ILR School
Cornell University
362 Ives Hall East
Ithaca, NY 14853
lmk12@cornell.edu
I. Introduction


       A steady flow of new immigration has resulted in an increase in the foreign born share of

the US population from 4.8 percent in 1970 to 11.1 percent in 2000. Perhaps more dramatically,

the percentage of the foreign born population that came from Europe or North America fell from

70.4 to 18.5 percent between 1970 and 2000, with a corresponding increase in the Asian and

Latin American share from 28.3 percent in 1970 to 52.4 percent in 1980 and 78.2 percent in 2000

(US Bureau of the Census website: http://www.census.gov). Thus, while the shift in source

country composition was especially rapid between 1970 and 1980, further substantial changes

occurred between 1980 and 2000. As we document in more detail below, this change in source

country distribution has resulted in an immigrant population that increasingly comes from poorer

countries with lower levels of education. An additional feature of the immigrant population that

is less frequently noted is that immigrants typically come from countries with a more traditional

division of labor by gender than the United States. Moreover, over the 1980-2000 period, the

gender gap in labor supply in the United States narrowed much more than in immigrant source

countries. If immigrant women’s labor supply behavior mirrors that in their home countries,

rising shares of the US population composed of immigrants from countries with more traditional

gender roles will cause the US female labor force participation rate to be lower than otherwise.

On the other hand, if immigrant women’s labor supply eventually assimilates to US levels, this

effect would be lessened.

       While some evidence suggests that source country female participation does influence

immigrant women’s labor supply behavior in the United States (Antecol 2000), little is known

about its effect on the assimilation process. The assimilation profile can shed light on what will

happen in the long run as these women are exposed to labor market conditions and social norms

in the United States. For example, suppose women from a more traditional country have on

average a 20% hours shortfall relative to comparable immigrant women from less traditional

countries. This could reflect a substantial and persistent 20% shortfall throughout their time in


                                                 1
the United States, or, say, a 40% shortfall during the early stages of their time in the United

States, which falls to zero with longer residence. The two scenarios have different implications

for convergence of the group to comparable natives and may impact the labor supply behavior of

the second generation of immigrants as well.

       In this paper, we study the impact of traditional gender roles in immigrant source

countries on the assimilation of married immigrant women and men into the US labor market.

We focus on married immigrants for whom gender roles are expected to have a greater effect and

in order to consider explicitly the division of labor in the family among immigrants compared to

natives. Family migration models have recently been developed to shed light on this question.

At issue is the shape of the assimilation profile itself. One version of such models predicts that

women will initially take dead-end jobs to finance their husbands’ human capital investments,

and eventually drop out of the labor market or reduce their labor supply as their husbands’ labor

market outcomes improve (Baker and Benjamin 1997). Rather than convergence, this view

predicts a negatively-sloped labor supply profile for immigrant women relative to natives, a

finding that has been observed for Canada (Baker and Benjamin 1997) but not for the United

States; Blau, Kahn, Moriarty and Souza (2003) find US immigrant women’s labor supply profiles

to be upward sloping, much like those of immigrant men. Here we further probe this question to

determine whether the predictions of the family migration model are observed for women

coming from countries with a traditional division of labor by gender. If this is the case, women

from more traditional source countries will fall further behind natives and immigrants from less

traditional source countries as their time in the United States increases.

       Even if women from both traditional and nontraditional source countries have upward

sloping profiles, it is unclear a priori which group is likely to assimilate more rapidly. Some

considerations suggest that assimilation profiles of women from less traditional source countries

will be steeper. This steepening may occur via wages if women from countries with higher

participation rates are more career-oriented and hence invest more in labor market skills.

Moreover, even controlling for wages, they may be better able to search for and learn about


                                                  2
market opportunities. An additional scenario predicting a more rapid assimilation of labor

supply for such women is one where, upon arrival in the United States, all immigrants experience

major disruptions in their labor market activity, regardless of their source country characteristics.

For example, married immigrant women from both types of source countries may be “tied

movers” (Mincer 1978), reducing their initial labor market activity. However, women arriving

from countries with higher female labor supply may ultimately be planning on higher labor

supply in the United States, thus steepening their assimilation profiles relative to women from

lower female labor supply countries. On the other hand, women from countries with more

traditional gender roles may have higher rates of assimilation in that they may be acculturating to

US norms as well as accumulating information about US labor market opportunities. In this

latter case, any initial differences in labor supply between women from more and less traditional

source countries will diminish over time, whereas in the former case, initial differences will be

magnified.

       Studying the impact of source country characteristics on immigrant women’s labor supply

in the United States can also yield insights into the issue of cultural assimilation. Higher female

labor force participation rates in the United States than in many immigrant source countries may

ultimately be due to tastes and beliefs about women’s appropriate roles in society, although they

may also be due to different economic incentives in the United States and the countries of origin.

For example, women in the United States may have higher relative wages than in some source

countries, providing incentives for higher labor force participation and greater investments in

human capital. If differences in labor supply behavior between immigrant women from high and

low participation source countries tend to persist over time in the United States, it suggests that

cultural factors are indeed important. If, however, the labor supply of women from both groups

tends to converge as both assimilate to the US native levels, one might conclude that the hold of

home country beliefs on women’s appropriate roles is relatively weak in the face of US work

incentives and possibly a US market work-oriented culture. (Of course, it is also possible that

immigration from both types of countries is selective of women who planned to assimilate


                                                  3
toward native labor supply levels.) Because immigrants are likely to differ from natives in

significant unmeasured ways, comparing labor supply assimilation paths of immigrants from

more and less traditional source countries may shed additional light on the impact of cultural

factors.

           To examine the impact of source country characteristics on immigrant women’s

assimilation into the US labor market, we use the 1980-2000 US censuses, which we augment

with an extensive set of source country characteristics data, as described in the Appendix. These

include two indicators of the extent of traditional gender roles in the source country: (i) female

relative to male labor force participation and (ii) women’s completed fertility. . In addition, we

control for other source country characteristics that may affect immigrants’ labor supply behavior

in the United States, including income (GDP per capita in constant US dollars), primary and

secondary school enrollment rates, the fraction of immigrants to the United States from the

country who were refugees, whether the country is English speaking and whether English is an

official language of the country, and the distance from the source country to the United States.

Conceptually important features of our analyses are that we measure these characteristics at the

time each immigrant came to the United States and interact each of them with years since the

immigrant migrated. This is appropriate, since we would like a measure of the tastes or

economic incentives one left behind in deciding to migrate and changes in the strength of their

effect over time in the United States.

           Some recent papers have studied the impact of source country characteristics on the labor

supply and fertility of immigrants or their descendants and have informed our study. A study by

Blau (1992), using the 1970 and 1980 Censuses, found a positive effect of source country fertility

rates at the time of immigrants’ arrival in the United States on immigrant women’s fertility

compared to otherwise similar natives, suggesting an impact of gender roles in source countries

on the behavior of immigrant women in the United States. Antecol (2000) provided further

evidence of such a relationship. Using the 1990 Census, she found that source country female

labor force participation rates (measured as of 1990) were positively correlated with US labor


                                                   4
force participation, even controlling for human capital characteristics. Also of interest is

Antecol’s finding of a positive, though weaker, correlation between US and source country

participation for “second and higher generation” immigrants, defined by their answer to the

Census question on ancestry. A paper by Fernández and Fogli (2006) also suggests an impact of

source country characteristics on the second generation. Using 1970 Census data on US-born

women with foreign-born parents, they found that source country female labor supply and

fertility each had a positive effect on the corresponding outcome of second generation women in

the United States.

       We build on these studies in several ways. Most importantly, we investigate the impact

of source country characteristics on the labor supply assimilation profiles of immigrant women in

addition to their levels of labor supply. Thus, in contrast to earlier work, we will be able to

disentangle the routes through which source country characteristics ultimately affect labor supply

in the United States, i.e., the impact on initial levels and on assimilation paths. Moreover,

contrasting the assimilation profiles of women from more and less traditional source countries is

a useful way to uncover the possible impact of long-term cultural factors, and also allows us to

determine whether the family migration model works better for immigrants from more traditional

source countries. In addition, as in Blau (1992), we measure these characteristics as of the time

each immigrant came to the United States. This is a potentially important innovation,

particularly if indicators such as GDP, fertility or female labor force participation change over

time within countries. Finally, earlier work tended to focus on one or two features of the source

country such as female labor supply (Antecol 2000) or labor supply and fertility (Fernández and

Fogli 2006). As in Blau (1992), we use a broader set of variables to characterize home countries,

increasing the likelihood that our models estimate the true effect of source country female labor

supply and fertility rather than the impact of omitted factors that are correlated with these

variables.



II. Data and Descriptive Patterns


                                                  5
        Our basic data source is the 1980, 1990 and 2000 US Census of Population public use

micro-samples. In addition, as described in detail in the Appendix, we have assembled a time-

series, cross-sectional database on source country characteristics, which we have merged into the

Census microdata for immigrants based on their country of origin and the date they arrived in the

United States. Because of changes in the list of countries across censuses, we have had in some

cases to aggregate countries and compute appropriately weighted country characteristics. We

also performed some imputations for missing data. (See the Appendix for further details.) Note

that the measure of source country female labor supply we employ is women’s labor force

participation relative to men’s (female LFP/male LFP). This relative measure is appropriate in

that it captures the gender division of labor explicitly. A further advantage is that it implicitly

adjusts for problems in measuring the labor force, particularly at different levels of economic

development, at least to the extent that such problems affect men’s and women’s measured

participation rates similarly.

        We focus on individuals aged 18-65 who are married to someone aged 18-65 and restrict

the immigrant sample (respondents and spouses) to those who migrated as adults—age 18 or

over. We follow this procedure because our empirical approach relies on within immigrant

arrival cohort changes to estimate assimilation effects. If child immigrants are included, some

immigrants who recently arrived in the United States as children will be excluded from our

sample of those aged 18-65 in an initial Census but will have attained age 18, and therefore

eligibility for our sample, in subsequent Censuses. Thus, the composition of the sample would

automatically change with time in the United States as those arriving as children comprise a

higher share of those with longer duration of residence (Friedberg 1993). This is likely to bias

the results because those migrating to the United States as children may be less affected by home

country characteristics and more similar to native-born Americans when they reach adulthood

than those migrating as adults. This also implies that adult immigrants, who are the large

majority of immigrants, are the more appropriate samples on which to observe the assimilation


                                                  6
process in any case. We use all immigrants for whom we can match source country

characteristics and, for tractability, we take a 4% sample of natives, whom we appropriately

weight in all analyses. 1 Overall, we were able to match over 99% of immigrants who had valid,

non-allocated values for country of birth and year entered the United States to source countries

for which we were able to compute the country variables.

           Tables 1 and 2 contain descriptive information on labor market outcomes and personal

characteristics for our sample of married individuals. Means are presented separately for all

(adult) immigrants, recent (adult) immigrants (defined as those who migrated within the last five

years), and natives in each of the three Censuses, for women (Table 1) and men (Table 2).

Overall, immigrant women exhibit more traditional patterns than US-born women. For example,

Table 1 shows that immigrant women have lower labor supply (measured by average annual

work hours, including those with zero hours) and have more children than US women, even

though they are about the same age. Moreover, while immigrant and native women both

increased their labor supply between 1980 and 2000, the native-immigrant gap grew

considerably: in 1980, natives worked 65 hours (8%) more than immigrants; by 2000, the gap

was 319 hours (32%). Recent immigrant women are less comparable because they are 5-7 years

younger than the other two groups. However, it is notable that they work less than immigrant

women overall and their hours gap with natives grew even more steeply; in 1980, recent

immigrant women’s hours were 72% of natives’ but fell to only one half by 2000.

           Wage and education gaps between immigrant and native women increased as well.

Among employed wage and salary workers, immigrant and native women earned the same hourly

wages in 1980; but by 2000, natives outearned immigrants by 11%. Similarly, immigrants tend

to have lower educational attainment, with higher concentrations of high school dropouts and

lower concentrations of high school graduates and those with some college. And, while

educational attainment rose for both immigrant and native women, it rose by more for natives.

However, in each year, immigrant women were slightly more likely than natives to be college
1
    Borjas (1995) followed a similar procedure.


                                                  7
graduates, reflecting a substantial upper tail in the educational distribution of immigrants.

Finally, while natives became slightly less likely to be white, non-Hispanic over the period (the

incidence of white, non-Hispanics fell from 89% to 87%), the likelihood of being white, non-

Hispanic decreased by much more among immigrants—from 42% in 1980 to 23% in 2000.

Thus, compared to natives, the stock of immigrant women became less skilled and more

dominated by low wage ethnic groups over the period.

       In contrast to women, immigrant men worked only 8% fewer hours than native men in

1980, a gap that increased only slightly (to 11%) by 2000. Thus the gender gap in labor supply

fell much more for natives than for immigrants. As in the case of women, immigrant men’s

wages declined relative to those of natives: an 8.0% native advantage in 1980 rose to 18.1% by

2000, a comparable change to that for women. There were also similar changes in relative

education and ethnicity for men as for women.

       The finding of a growing immigrant-native labor supply gap among women in the United

States raises the question of whether there are similar trends when female labor supply in

immigrant source countries is compared to that in the United States. To the extent that source

country labor supply patterns mirror the growing native-immigrant gap in labor supply, we may

also ask whether this is associated with a shift in the composition of countries from which

immigrants originate versus differential time trends within sending countries and the United

States. These questions are addressed in Tables 3 and 4, which are based on our sample of 106

countries. (Illustrative values for the 25 top immigrant source countries for activity ratios and

fertility rates are shown in Table A-1.)

       Table 3 shows the mean characteristics of source countries for immigrant women, with

source country characteristics measured at the time immigrants migrated to the United States.

(We omit a corresponding table for men, since the source countries of immigrant men and

women tend to be quite similar.) The table also shows the corresponding means for the United

States, similarly weighted by the number of immigrants in each arrival period cell. Panel A

shows means for the stock of all immigrants. The largest weights in this panel will come from


                                                  8
countries and time periods for which there were a lot of immigrants to the United States. Panel B

shows means for recent immigrants, thus removing the time of arrival as a weighting factor and

focusing on recent inflows.

          Table 3, Panel A indicates that, in each year, the average immigrant woman came from a

country which, at the time of her arrival in the United States, had lower relative female labor

force participation and higher fertility than the United States had at the same time. These

patterns are also true for recent immigrants (Panel B). Thus, throughout this period, immigrants

tended to come from countries with a more traditional division of labor by gender than the

United States. Moreover, although average home country relative female labor supply at the time

of arrival increased over the period, the corresponding US value increased by considerably more,

resulting in a growing gap between US and source country relative female labor force

participation. In 1980, for example, the average ratio of female to male participation rates was

0.45 for immigrant source countries compared to 0.51 for the United States over the same time

period; by 2000 the comparable figures were 0.57 for immigrant source countries and 0.72 for

the United States. A similar pattern held for recent immigrants: in 1980, average relative female

participation was 0.51 for immigrant source countries compared to 0.59 for the United States; by

2000 the comparable figures were 0.60 for immigrant source countries and 0.78 for the United

States.

          The average immigrant woman also came from a country with much lower per capita

income than the United States and, whether one measures the income gap by raw (real) dollars or

in relative terms, the difference between US and home country income grew both for immigrants

overall and for recent immigrants between 1980 and 2000. Furthermore, immigrants and recent

immigrants were less likely to have come from English-speaking countries in 2000 than 1980,

although a larger share of immigrants and recent immigrants as of 2000 came from countries

which used English as an official language (but were not English-speaking). On the other hand,

primary and secondary enrollment gaps between the United States and immigrant source

countries have narrowed, and the (small) primary enrollment gap has been entirely eliminated.


                                                 9
However, the secondary enrollment gap remains quite large. Thus, most of these indicators

suggest that both the 2000 stock and 2000 flow of immigrant women came from countries likely

to have imparted fewer skills relevant for US labor market participation and success relative to

native women than their 1980 counterparts.

         Home country fertility, another potentially important factor affecting cultural and

economic assimilation, behaved differently for the stock vs. the flow of immigrants between

1980 and 2000. On the one hand, home country fertility at time of arrival fell for the stock of

immigrants from 1980-2000, but by less than the corresponding US fertility decline.

Corresponding US fertility was 53% of the immigrant home country level in 2000, compared to

63% in 1980. In contrast, home country fertility for recent immigrants decreased substantially

relative to US fertility and was only 44% above the US level for recent immigrants in 2000,

compared to 2.3 times the US level in 1980. 2 Thus although origin countries have higher fertility

than the United States, the gap is closing at the margin.

         Table 4 investigates the degree to which these changes in the source country

characteristics of immigrants are due to changes in the mix of source countries versus within-

country changes over time by showing results for fixed country weights. 3 For the stock of

immigrants (Panel A), had the distribution of origin countries stayed the same, source country

fertility would have decreased by much more while GDP per capita would have risen. However,

the relative female participation rate—the key variable for our study—would have increased by

about the same amount as when source country mix is allowed to vary. A more focused look at

the impact of changing source country composition is shown in Panel B for recent arrivals. For

this group, home country relative female participation would have risen by 10.8-11.3 percentage

points from 1980 to 2000 with constant country weights, in contrast to its actual rise of 8.4

percentage points. Thus, at the margin, source countries are shifting somewhat toward those with

2
  Using recent arrival weights, US fertility fell between 1980 and 1990 and then rose back to its 1980 level by 2000.
3
  The English speaking, English official and distance variables are not included in the table since they are of course
constant when fixed country weights are employed. Thus the changes for the English speaking and English official
variables noted above are entirely due to shifting composition.


                                                          10
lower relative female participation. In contrast, the changing country mix for new immigrants

does not seem to have affected fertility at the margin, as the home country fertility rate fell by

1.8-1.9 births, both controlling and not controlling for source country composition. In addition,

at the margin, source countries are shifting toward lower income countries, although, within

these countries, income per capita is rising.

       In sum, on average, the annual work hours of both the stock of female immigrants and the

flow are lower than those of native women and declined relative to native women’s over the

1980-2000 period. The native-immigrant hours gap was considerably smaller for men and

increased only slightly over the period. Thus, the gender division of labor became increasingly

more traditional among immigrants compared to natives. At the same time, on average,

immigrant women come from countries with considerably lower relative female labor force

participation than prevailed in the United States at their time of arrival. Moreover, this US-

source country gap in relative female participation increased considerably over time, primarily

due to faster female participation increases in the United States than within immigrant source

countries, rather than to a shift in the mix of source countries. Source countries also have

considerably higher fertility rates than the United States, although these differences are declining

among recent arrivals. Low and declining source country GDP per capita (relative to the United

States), a decreasing fraction of source countries that are English speaking and the persistent US-

source country gap in secondary school enrollments may also affect the market preparedness of

immigrant women, although the rising share of immigrants coming from countries using English

as an official language and increasing secondary school enrollment rates in source countries are

potentially countervailing factors.

       The importance of source country characteristics for immigrant women’s behavior in the

United States is broadly suggested by Figures 1a and 1b, which examine the simple relationship

between immigrant women’s annual hours relative to natives and activity rate ratios and total

fertility rates in their countries of origin. The annual hours of immigrant women relative to

natives are measured by the coefficients on country fixed effects from a first-stage regression


                                                  11
estimated on pooled 1980, 1990 and 2000 Census data of annual hours on age, age squared, two

year dummies, and country fixed effects (for all 106 countries in our data). Source country

variables are measured at the time of immigrant arrival and are averaged across Censuses for

each immigrant source country. The trend lines plotted in the figures are estimated across all 106

countries and indicate a positive and significant relationship between immigrants’ annual hours

relative to natives and source country activity rate ratios and a negative and significant

relationship between immigrants’ annual hours relative to natives and source country total

fertility rates. 4 The data points in each figure are included to illustrate the estimated relationship

and (to keep the figure legible) include only the top 25 source countries (countries are ranked by

their weighted share of the sample of married women across all years, with only adult immigrants

included). In what follows we more closely examine the impact of these and other source

country characteristics on the labor supply behavior of immigrant women.



III. Empirical Procedures


         Our goal is to estimate the impact of source country characteristics on married immigrant

women’s and men’s labor supply assimilation into the US labor market. We use pooled 1980,

1990 and 2000 Census microdata to examine this issue. In each case, we compare immigrants to

natives with the same observable characteristics. Thus, assimilation here refers to the degree to

which immigrants’ labor supply patterns converge to those of comparable natives. As noted, we

restrict our analyses to married individuals in order to study assimilation in a family context

among the group most likely to reflect the impact of more traditional source country norms.
         To analyze labor supply, we estimate equations of the following form on the pooled

sample of married adult immigrants and natives separately for men and women:



4
  The trend line shown in each figure is estimated weighting observations by the inverse of the standard errors from
the first-stage regression.


                                                         12
(1)    Hit = B′Xit + ΣcacAowncit + ΣsbsYownsit + ΣsΣodsoYownsitZownoit + ΣcecAspousecit

                  + ΣsfsYspousesit + ΣsΣogsoYspousesitZspouseoit + k90T90it + k00T00it + uit,



where for individual i in year t (t=1980, 1990 or 2000), H is annual hours worked in the previous

year (usual weekly hours * weeks worked, including those with 0 hours), X is a vector of

controls, Aownc and Aspousec are a series of own and spouse immigrant cohort-of-arrival

dummy variables, Yowns and Yspouses are a series of dummy variables referring to own and

spouse’s years since migration (YSM), Zowno and Zspouseo are a series of country of origin

characteristics for the individual and his/her spouse, T90 and T00 are year dummies referring to
1990 and 2000, and u is an error term. We cluster the standard errors at the respondent’s country

of origin level, treating the US as an origin country for natives. After creating sampling weights

to reflect the random sample of natives and taking into account Census sampling weights for

1990 and 2000, we adjust each year’s weights so that the total weight of each year’s observations

is the same.

       We define the cohort of arrival and years since migration variables for immigrants and

their spouses as follows. First, note that the immigrant arrival period is defined in interval form

in the 1980 and 1990 Censuses. Hence, we define sets of cohort of arrival and years since

migration dummy variables that are consistent across the three Censuses. We specify the years

since migration variables as dummies, rather than forming a continuous variable (say by

evaluating the intervals at their midpoints), in order to capture all the available information in the

most flexible form. The cohort of arrival dummies include all but one possible arrival cohort:

1995-2000, 1991-94, 1985-90, 1980-84, 1975-79, 1970-74, 1965-69, and 1960-64 (these are the

Aownc and Aspousec dummies). The full set of years since migration dummies is included: 0-5,

6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21-30 years in the US (these are the Yowns and Yspouses dummies).

The sum of these years since arrival dummy variables for the respondent would be identical to an

immigrant dummy variable, and the sum of the spouse years since arrival dummies would be

identical to a spouse immigrant dummy variable; therefore, such indicators are not separately


                                                  13
included in equation (1). Using the full set of years since migration dummies requires us to omit

one of the possible cohort dummy variable categories; we have omitted the 1950-59 cohort for

both the respondent and spouse. Pooling the sample across three Census years and assuming

common period effects for immigrants and natives together allow us to separately identify

immigrant cohort and assimilation effects (Borjas 1985).

         The interval form of the arrival period in the 1980 and 1990 Censuses affects our

restriction of the sample to adult immigrants and to adult immigrant spouses. 5 For each interval,

we only include immigrants who we can definitely conclude were at least 18 years old on arrival

in the US. 6 For comparability, similar procedures are followed for the 2000 Census data. This
also requires us to exclude individuals in the open-ended arrival category in those years (i.e., pre-

1950), since we cannot ascertain whether such individuals migrated as children or adults; we also

exclude spouses of such individuals. The resulting maximum years since migration is thus 30 for

1980, and, for comparability, a maximum of 30 years since migration is also set for 1990 and

2000. This explains why the above years since migration dummies exhaust the sample of adult

immigrants.

         The origin country characteristics Zowno and Zspouseo are measured for the time the

individual migrated to the United States and are set equal to zero for natives. Thus, they are in

effect interactions between an immigrant dummy variable and the country characteristics.

Because the years since migration dummies (Yowns or Yspouses) add up to one for each

immigrant respondent or immigrant spouse, for each country characteristic, the sum of its

interactions with the years since migration variables equals the country characteristic itself.

Therefore we do not include main country characteristics effects (Zowno or Zspouseo). 7 The

5
   As in the case of own characteristics, we expect spouse home country characteristics to be less salient for those
who migrated as children than for those who migrated as adults.
6
  That is, if the immigrant arrived between A0 and A1, we take only individuals for whom (A0 – BY) ≥ 18, where BY
is birth year as calculated from the individual’s reported age. An alternative would have been to evaluate the arrival
intervals at the midpoint and calculate age of arrival accordingly. We follow former procedure due to its greater
accuracy in excluding child immigrants (see Bleakley and Chin 2004).
7
   Our formulation is mathematically equivalent to including main Zowno and Zspouseo effects but omitting the
interactions between Zowno or Zspouseo and one YSM dummy.


                                                          14
specification in equation (1) allows the source country variables to affect both the level of labor

supply and the impact of time in the United States on labor supply.

           Source country variables were selected to serve as indicators of the degree to which the

home country has a traditional division of labor by gender, the extent of labor market

preparedness of men and women, and to address possible issues of selective migration. They

include: the female labor force participation rate/male labor force participation rate; the total

fertility rate (an estimate of completed female fertility); GDP per capita in 2000 US dollars; the

proportion of immigrants arriving in the period who were refugees; the female (female

regression) or male (male regression) enrollment rates in primary school and secondary school; a

dummy variable for whether the country is English speaking; a dummy variable for countries that

are not English speaking but in which English is an official language; 8 and the distance between
the source country and the United States.

           Female relative labor supply and fertility rates in the source country are indicators of

traditional gender roles in the country of origin which may, or may not, be replicated in the

United States. Moreover, both home country female relative labor supply and fertility, as well as

income, education, and use of English are all likely to be related to preparedness for work in the

US labor market. In addition, migration likely involves a disruption of work patterns due to

housing and job search in the United States. Refugees and those who came a long distance may

suffer the largest disruption, likely affecting their work assimilation profiles. In addition,

because of the fixed costs of migration, those who come from a greater distance are likely to have

higher labor market returns to migration than those coming from shorter distances, all else equal

(Chiswick 1978). This potential selectivity can also be reflected in work assimilation patterns.

For example, migrants moving from a longer distance may be more likely to have jobs lined up

in the United States (contributing to their higher rate of return to migration), thus raising their

work hours at entry and flattening their assimilation profiles (i.e., the opposite predictions from


8
    The English speaking and English official variables are from Bleakley and Chin (2004).


                                                          15
the disruption mechanism). Thus, the impact of distance on assimilation profiles is theoretically

ambiguous.

        The combination of the cohort dummies and the assimilation effects allows us to

completely characterize immigrant labor supply over time relative to that of natives, starting with

arrival in the United States of each arrival cohort, controlling for the X variables and year effects.

We implement three specifications for the X variables.

        First, we control only for a vector R which includes the following variables for

respondent and spouse: age, age squared, three education dummies (high school degree, some
college, and college degree, with less than high school as the omitted category), interactions

between an immigrant dummy and the three education dummies, and three race/Hispanic origin

dummy variables (black non-Hispanic, other non-Hispanic, and Hispanic, with white non-

Hispanic the omitted category). R also includes eight Census region dummies, and dummy

variables for each of California, Texas, New York, Florida, Illinois and New Jersey, the states

with the largest immigrant populations. Of special note in our controls is the inclusion of

immigrant-education and spouse immigrant-education interaction terms. 9 These variables allow
the impact of education on labor supply to be affected by whether the education was obtained in

the United States and further allow an immigrant (or immigrant spouse’s) level of education to

affect the assimilation process. In addition, because we have included home country enrollment

levels, these interactions in effect transform the immigrant and spouse immigrant education

impacts into effects relative to home country schooling. Implicitly then, these variables control

for self-selection of immigrants by education, as well as for the substantive effect of education.

Immigrants who are higher up in the educational distribution of their country of origin may differ

in their unmeasured characteristics from those with an equal level of education who place lower

in their home country’s educational distribution. To the extent this type of selection is controlled



9
  Recall that since the own and spouse cohort YSM dummies add up to an own and a spouse immigrant dummy
respectively, we do not include main effects for immigrant and spouse immigrant.


                                                     16
for by our specification, we expect to obtain estimates of the effects of other explanatory

variables that are less biased by selectivity.

        Second, to account explicitly for the role of wages and other income in the assimilation

process, we augment R with log of own and spouse wages and family nonwage income, where

these variables are allowed to have separate effects in 1980, 1990 and 2000—that is, we fully

interact log wages and own nonwage income with three year dummy variables referring to the

1980, 1990 and 2000 Censuses. As described in detail in the Appendix, hourly wages are

defined as annual earnings divided by annual work hours for wage and salary workers. We

consider hourly wage observations as invalid if they are less than $1 or greater than $200 per

hour in 2000 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditures price index from the National

Income and Product Market Accounts (see http://www.bea.gov). For nonworkers, the self-

employed and those with invalid wage observations or allocated earnings, wages are imputed

using a regression approach. A separate wage regression is run for each combination of year

(1980, 1990 or 2000), gender and weeks worked category (less than 20 or 20 and higher). 10

Nonworkers are assigned predicted wages based on the regression using the under 20 weeks per

year sample. The other categories of workers whose wages are imputed (i.e., the self-employed

and those with invalid wage observations or allocated earnings) are given imputations using the

regression corresponding to the weeks they worked (i.e., less than 20 or 20 and higher). This

imputation is similar in spirit to that proposed by Juhn (1992) and Juhn and Murphy (1997).

        Because the denominators of the wage variables and the annual hours dependent variable

are the same, ordinary least squares (OLS) would likely suffer from measurement error bias. We

account for this by constructing instruments for the wage variables. Once we have an actual or

simulated wage for everyone, we construct wage deciles for every person where the deciles are

10
  The regressors used were own and spouse variables for age, age squared, 3 education categories, education
interacted with an immigrant dummy, and 3 race/Hispanic categories, plus 8 region categories and dummy variables
for the six states with the largest immigrant populations (California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York and
Texas), as well as the own and spouse years since migration and years since migration*source country variables
specified above. Since the regressions were run separately by Census year, we cannot also include own or spouse
arrival cohort dummy variables.


                                                        17
year-gender specific. We compute predicted wages for each person based on wage equations

using all of that year’s exogenous variables plus nine own wage decile dummy variables and nine

spouse wage decile dummy variables. These predicted wages are then interacted with year

dummy variables, yielding six predicted wage variables (own and spouse wages for each of the

three Census years). In principle, these variables should be less contaminated with measurement

error than the actual wage variables (Juhn 1992; Juhn and Murphy 1997; Baker and Benjamin

1997). We then use these predicted wage variables as instruments for actual wages. As

discussed by Wooldridge (2002, pp. 116-117), this strategy is an example of the method of

generated instruments, and the usual instrumental variables results for coefficient consistency and

asymptotic standard errors hold, as long as the wage deciles are not correlated with the error term

of the labor supply function.

       Third, we augment the model just described with a vector of variables specifying the

number of children in the following age categories: 0, 1, 2, 3-5, 6-11 and 12-17 years old.

Children are counted if they are present in the household and are the own children of the woman

or her spouse. The purpose of this specification is to account for fertility in the labor supply

assimilation process. Because children of different ages are likely to have different effects on

parents’ labor supply, a detailed specification of the child variables is warranted.

       Results from these three specifications can be compared to reach some conclusions about

the routes through which source country characteristics affect labor supply. For example, it is

possible that source country female labor supply positively affects immigrant women’s wage

offers in the United States, and that this indirectly raises their labor supply. Our models will be

able to provide evidence on such mechanisms.

       We restrict our sample to married individuals aged 18-65 with spouse aged 18-65, so that

both members of the couple are of working age, and, as mentioned earlier, we include only adult

immigrants.



IV. Results


                                                 18
       A. Baseline Results for Assimilation


       We begin by briefly considering, as a benchmark, the results for the basic specification in

the conventional model excluding source country characteristics (see Table A-2). Of particular

interest are the results for the years since migration dummy variables which show the general

pattern of assimilation. We focus on the results for married adult immigrants, although the

findings for all adult immigrants were very similar. We add the own and spouse years since

migration coefficients in order to assess the assimilation profile for a married couple moving to

the United States at the same time. The results of this simulation show a rising profile of work

hours with time in the United States for both men and women. Further, the rate of increase is

similar for men and women. Among married adult immigrant women, work hours increase by

357 hours for those with 21-30 years in the US compared to recent arrivals, an increase of 38% at

the mean for immigrants; for married adult immigrant men, the increase is 670 hours or 36%.

These differences are highly significant.

       The cohort coefficients must be taken into account to make a comparison of immigrants’

labor supply to natives’. This is done in Figure A-1, which shows simulated assimilation profiles

for adult immigrant women married to adult immigrant men who came to the United States at the

same time; the cohort arrival dummies are evaluated at the sample averages. As may be seen in

the figure, married immigrant women are estimated to work 392 hours less than comparable

native women upon arrival in the United States (35.9% of the mean for all women of 1093) and

fairly rapidly assimilate to native levels, working only 56 hours less after 6-10 years and

remaining at approximately the native levels thereafter. Immigrant males’ hours are 410 hours

less than comparable native upon arrival (20.5% of the mean for all men of 1999 hours) and also

rapidly assimilate to native levels by 6-10 years. However, males then surpass natives, working

260 hours more after 21-30 years in the United States (13.0% of the mean). As may be seen in

Figure A-1, results are virtually identical when we estimate equation (1), which includes source


                                                 19
country interactions, and evaluate those interactions at the sample means. Results are also the

same when we include only source country main effects (results not shown). Thus, in the

baseline, work hours of men and women increase by similar relative amounts with time in the

United States. In the following sections, we will look explicitly at the role of source country

characteristics in influencing this baseline pattern.



        B. Average Effects of Source Country Characteristics on the Labor Supply of

        Immigrants


        Table 5 shows selected regression results for annual hours for married adult immigrants

relative to comparable natives. In these models, we do not interact country characteristics with

the years since migration dummies, in order to show the average effects of these characteristics

for adult immigrants’ work hours. (Additional regression results are shown in Appendix Tables

A-3 and A-4). We include both own and spouse source country characteristics. The most useful

results are those in the last two columns, where we show the sum of the own and spouse

coefficients and the significance level of the sum. The sum corresponds to an experiment in

which we compare a married couple migrating together from one country to an otherwise similar

couple who migrated together from a different country. Coming from a country with a high level

of relative female labor force participation significantly raises immigrant women’s labor supply

in the United States in each specification. In the basic specification (Model 1), the effect is 549

hours. The effect is somewhat smaller, at 511 hours, when we include controls for own and

spouse log wages and nonwage income (Model 2), suggesting that a portion of the home country

female participation effect on annual hours operates through wages and income, though the bulk

of it (over 90%) is present even controlling for wages and income. However, the effect in Model

3 is 544 hours, roughly the same as in Model 1, implying that the indirect effect of home country

female participation does not operate through children, at least in the specification without

interaction effects.


                                                  20
         To assess the magnitude of these effects, we note that across the sample of married adult

immigrant women, the 75th percentile of the home country female relative activity rate is 0.636,

while the 25th percentile is 0.368. This calculation uses individual immigrants, not individual

source countries, as the unit of analysis, thereby giving countries sending larger numbers of

immigrants larger weight in computing the percentiles. The 75th percentile figure corresponds

roughly to the Austrian value for the relative female activity rate for 1996, while the 25th

percentile is roughly the level for Pakistan in 1994. 11 Moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile

with respect to home country female labor supply raises married adult immigrants’ work hours in

the United States by 137-147 hours per year, a noticeable effect that is 15-16% of their average

annual work hours of 939.

         A further indicator of a traditional home country division of labor is its fertility rate.

Table 5a shows that coming from a higher fertility country significantly lowers married

immigrants’ work hours in the basic specification or when we control for own and spouse wages

and nonlabor income. The 75th percentile for fertility is 5.63 children (roughly Iran’s 1990 level),

while the 25th percentile is 2.49 children (roughly Chile’s 1996 value). Thus, changing home

country fertility by the 75-25 gap (3.14 children) lowers married immigrants’ US labor supply by

108-131 hours, or 12-14% of the mean, in either Model 1 or Model 2. However, when we

control for the woman’s own fertility (as well as wages and nonlabor income), the effect of home

country fertility becomes very small and insignificant. Thus, higher home country fertility leads

to lower US labor supply for married adult immigrants, but this effect operates virtually entirely

through fertility decisions.

         An additional important set of results for women concerns home country use of English.

Specifically, migrating from an English-speaking country raises US labor supply by 82-88 hours

per year, or about 9% at the mean, and moving from a country where English is an official

language raises labor supply by 178-214 hours, or 19-23% of the mean. These effects are highly

11
   For these and other examples in the text of the countries corresponding to the percentiles, we sometimes refer to
interpolated data.


                                                         21
significant in each case. The estimated effect of an English-speaking country is very similar

whether or not we control for own and spouse wages, nonlabor income and fertility; moreover,

while the impact of English as an official language on women’s annual hours declines across

Models 1, 2 and 3, most (over 80%) of this effect holds up even when we control for US wage

offers and fertility.

        In terms of other source country characteristics, GDP per capita has significant negative

effects (suggesting an income effect to the extent that measured nonwage income does not

completely capture permanent income); moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile in GDP per

capita lowers immigrant women’s labor supply by 85-127 hours, or 9-14% of the mean. 12

Coming from a country with a higher refugee proportion lowers women’s labor supply, with

significant or marginally significant coefficients. The distribution of refugee percentage is very

skewed, with the 75th percentile at 2% but the 90th percentile at 94.7% refugees. But, even

increasing the refugee proportion from the 10th (0 refugees) to the 90th percentile (0.947, roughly

Cuba’s 1974 level) still lowers hours by only 46-87 hours (5-9% of the mean). Also, while

raising the home country primary school enrollment rate significantly raises women’s work

hours, the effect of a 25th to 75th percentile increase in primary school enrollment only increases

annual work hours by 29-31 (3% of the mean). Finally, on average, coming from a longer

distance from the United States significantly reduces women’s labor supply, lowering their

annual hours by 66-75 (7-8% of mean hours) at the mean of the distance variable, 4137 miles.

        Table 5 also shows some significant source country effects for men’s labor supply. For

example, men coming from an English-official country work 149-157 more hours than those

coming from a non-English-official country; these effects are about 8-9% of their average work

hours of 1839. A higher refugee percentage lowers work hours significantly, and moving from

the 10th to the 90th percentile lowers men’s hours by 298-300, or about 16%, per year. This effect

suggests considerable disruption for refugees and below we will provide additional evidence on

12
   The 25th percentile in GDP per capita ($838) corresponds roughly to Afghanistan in 1996, while the 75th
percentile ($5078) roughly to Uruguay’s 1991 level.


                                                        22
this issue by studying the impact of refugee proportion on the assimilation profile. Finally, home

country fertility has negative and significant effects on men’s labor supply; the absolute effect is

similar in Models 1 and 2 to those for women but of course is about half as large relative to the

men’s mean work hours as for women. However, in Model 3, home country fertility continues to

have a similar effect for men as in Models 1 and 2, unlike for women. It thus appears that for

men, coming from a country with high fertility is associated with less preparedness for work in

the United States. This interpretation could also characterize the results for women. However,

the small and insignificant effect of home country fertility on women’s labor supply in Model 3

(which controls for children), suggests that, in the case of women, it is indeed larger family size

that lowers the labor supply of women from high fertility source countries. Nonetheless, it is

possible that it is lack of labor market preparedness rather than cultural factors associated with

the source country that causes this larger family size. Thus, the results for men suggest some

caution in our interpretation of the findings for women and illustrate the value of comparing

effects of source country characteristics across men and women. It is interesting that there is no

symmetric negative effect of female/male participation rate on male annual hours (the coefficient

for this variable is insignificantly positive and small in magnitude in the male regressions). This

strengthens our confidence that source country labor supply patterns do indeed have a gender-

specific effect on female immigrants that is suggestive of a cultural effect.



       C. Source Country Characteristics and Assimilation Profiles for Labor Supply


       We now present results for the impact of source country characteristics on men’s and

women’s labor supply assimilation profiles. The basic findings are summarized in Tables 6 and

7. One motivation for studying the impact of source country characteristics on the assimilation

of immigrants’ labor supply is to gain insight into the decisions made by immigrant families. Do

immigrant families migrating from countries with a traditional division of labor by gender

reproduce that division of labor in the United States, or do they (at least eventually) conform to


                                                 23
US patterns? If the latter, how quickly does such assimilation occur? Tables 6 and 7 address

such questions by showing the results of estimating equation (1).

        Looking first at the results for relative female labor supply in the female regressions,

several important findings emerge. First, and most importantly, in each of the three

specifications, the source country relative activity rate has a positive, significant effect on annual

hours in each YSM category. Thus, as suggested by the results for models including only source

country main effects, source country female labor supply is strongly positively associated with

immigrant women’s labor supply behavior in the United States. We are now able to see that this

effect is roughly stable across YSM categories; the effect of the activity rate ratio on labor supply

at 6-10 through 21-30 years since migration is not significantly different from its effect at arrival

(0-5 years). 13 Thus, the factors mentioned earlier that might potentially cause the gap between

women from high and low activity rate source countries to intensify or decay over time in the

United States appear to roughly cancel out. Finally, as was the case in models including source

country variables without interaction effects, wages and presence of children do not appear to

account for very much of the observed relationship between female activity rate and labor supply

in the basic specification. The coefficients on the interactions are reduced only slightly when

wages are included in Model 2 and then usually increase to roughly their original levels when the

child dummies are additionally added in Model 3.

        These effects and the relationship of immigrant women’s labor supply to the native-born

reference group are illustrated in Figure 2 for the basic specification. The figure shows simulated

assimilation profiles for adult immigrant women married to adult immigrant men who came to

the United States from the same country and at the same time, assuming the couple migrates

from a country with (i) a high female relative activity rate, at the 75th percentile of our sample, or

(ii) a low female activity rate, at the 25th percentile. In order to construct the profiles, we assume



13
  This conclusion is of course made taking into account both the married woman’s years since migration-female
activity rate interactions and the interactions of her spouse’s variables.


                                                       24
the sample averages for the cohort arrival dummies and the source country characteristics apart

from the female relative activity rate.

       As may be seen in the figure, there is a substantial and persistent gap between the annual

hours of women from high and low activity rate countries: an unweighted average of 136 hours

across YSM categories, corresponding to 14% of immigrant women’s mean hours of 939. Both

groups of women work less than comparable natives upon arrival; 279 hours less for women

coming from a high female activity rate country and 403 hours less for those migrating from a

low female activity rate country. These are sizable deficits of 26 to 37% relative to the sample

average work hours (including natives) of 1093. Work hours for women from both types of

countries assimilate dramatically over time relative to comparable natives. Women from high

female labor supply countries work roughly the same number of hours as natives after 6-10 years

and work at or above the native levels thereafter. Women in families migrating from low female

labor supply countries continue to work less than natives throughout their residence in the United

States, but by the 21-30 year mark they have reduced their deficit to 126 hours (12%). These

upward sloping assimilation profiles for women from both high and low female labor supply

source countries are inconsistent with the family migration model.

       The assimilation results for married adult immigrant women can be compared to those for

married men, as shown in Table 7 and Figure 3 for the basic specification. (The findings for

Models 2 and 3 are virtually identical and are thus not shown.) The activity rate ratio interactions

are not significant and, in the figure, the profiles for men born in high and low female labor

supply countries are virtually identical. Thus, source country female labor supply clearly has

much more important effects on immigrant women’s than immigrant men’s labor supply, as

expected given that men’s labor supply is in general less sensitive to their environment than

women’s (Blau and Kahn 2007). The gender difference in findings is suggestive of an impact of

culture and norms of the source country, though the finding could also reflect the effect of

differences between the two types of countries in the labor market preparation of women.




                                                 25
       Additional information about gender roles and family migration patterns can be obtained

by examining the impact of source country fertility on labor supply assimilation profiles for

married immigrant women and men (Tables 6 and 7). The results for the basic specification for

men and women show the reduced form or full effects of home country fertility on labor supply

profiles. In this specification, for each YSM category, work hours are negatively related to

source country fertility; these differences are significant for men in each case and for women in

three of the five cases (at 11-15, 16-20 and 21-30 years since migration). Evaluating these

effects at the 25th and 75th percentiles of the source country fertility rates yields an impact of

between 80 and 185 hours for women (9-20% of the immigrant mean) and 101 and 204 hours for

men (5-11% of the immigrant mean). There is no evidence in the basic specification that the

effect of source country fertility differs with time in the United States for men; for women the

effect of fertility is significantly more negative at 11-15 years since migration than at arrival.

Thus, as in the case of the activity rate, we find substantial and persistent differences in the labor

supply behavior of women from high and low fertility source countries, and, as in the fertility

specification excluding source country interactions, we find similar evidence for men as well.

       The relationship of immigrant women’s labor supply to the native-born reference group in

the basic specification is illustrated in Figure 4a. Women from both high and low fertility source

countries work less than their native counterparts upon arrival in the United States (the point

estimates of the difference are 294-374 or 27-34% of the mean for all women) and assimilate

towards native labor supply with time in the United States. Women from low fertility source

countries slightly exceed comparable natives by 6-10 years in the United States; their labor

supply remains at or slightly above native levels thereafter. The labor supply of women from

high fertility source countries remains below that of comparable natives, but by 21-30 years since

migration they have narrowed the hours deficit to 112 hours, or 10 % less. The assimilation

profile rises more steeply between arrival and 11-15 years since migration for women from a low

fertility source country (349 hours, or 37% of the mean) than for women from a high fertility

source country (244 hours, or 26%), a difference that is significant. But for no other YSM


                                                  26
category is the coefficient on the fertility variable significantly different from its coefficient at 0-

5 years, and, indeed, after 21-30 years since migration, the hours gap for high versus low fertility

origin countries is 117 hours, only marginally more that the arrival gap of 80 hours. For

immigrant men, a 309-440 hour deficit relative to comparable natives upon arrival becomes a

191-318 hour advantage by 21-30 years of residence, as labor supply increases fairly steadily and

by similar amounts over time in the United States for men from both high and low fertility source

countries (Figure 5).

         Results in Table 6 enable us to ascertain the role of wages and presence of children in

accounting for the differences in the labor supply behavior of women from high and low fertility

source countries. 14 Results additionally controlling for wage and nonwage income (Model 2) are

fairly similar to those from the basic specification, although the coefficient on the interaction

with 11-15 years is now no longer significantly different from 0-5 years. However, when we

further add controls for children in the full specification (Model 3), patterns look markedly

different, as illustrated in Figure 4b. Hours on arrival are actually higher for women in couples

migrating from high fertility countries, although this difference is not significant, and,

interestingly, labor supply of women from high and low fertility source countries converges after

6-10 years at about the level for comparable natives. This suggests, perhaps not surprisingly, that

the differences between women from these two types of source countries in Models 1 and 2 are

associated with differences in family formation patterns. However, after 6-10 years, the profiles

diverge with women from low fertility source countries hovering at around the native levels,

while the annual hours of women from high fertility source countries progressively decrease

relative to both immigrants from low fertility source countries and comparable natives. While

the hours differences between immigrants from high and low fertility countries for given YSM

categories are not statistically significant for YSM categories less than 21-30, the difference at

21-30 years is large (144 hours) and statistically significant.

14
  As was the case for source country female labor supply, the results for men in Table 7 and Figure 5 are virtually
unchanged when we control for wages and nonlabor income (Model 2) or additionally for children (Model 3).


                                                         27
       The pattern of labor supply with years since migration for women from high fertility

source countries provides some limited evidence in favor of the family migration model in Model

3, which controls for current fertility (as well as wages and nonlabor income). It suggests that,

after assisting with family income and their husbands’ job-related investments, women from high

fertility source countries may take advantage of their families’ growing financial stability to scale

back more in line with traditional patterns. That this pattern should emerge only after controlling

for the presence of children may reflect offsetting effects of source country fertility. On the one

hand, higher source country fertility raises the number of children and thus lowers hours worked

when children are not controlled for. On the other hand, it may be indicative of more traditional

gender roles that make adherence to the family migration model more likely, but this adherence

can only be observed once we control for the presence and ages of children.

       Even focusing on the results for Model 3, however, the evidence in support of the family

migration model is mixed. The profile initially slopes upward even for women migrating from

high fertility countries, a finding counter to the strong version of the family migration model,

although perhaps reflecting the impact of initial disruption that lowers labor supply for women

from both high and low fertility source countries. In addition, even though work hours of women

from high fertility source countries decline after 6-10 years of residence, the immigrant-native

hours gap for this group always remains smaller than it was upon arrival in the United States.

Moreover, the family investment model postulates that childbearing would be postponed to

accommodate the need for wives’ financial contributions and that does not seem the case here.

Further, the male profiles are virtually the same whether or not we control for the children

variables (results not shown). Thus, there is no evidence that men’s investment behavior is

affected by home country fertility. Rather, as in the case of the models with source country

interactions excluded, men coming from low fertility source countries work more than those

coming from high fertility source countries, whether or not we control for wages, nonlabor

income and number of children. As mentioned earlier, low home country fertility may also be a

proxy for work orientation in addition to its potential value as an indicator of gender roles. Our


                                                 28
findings for males suggest some caution in interpreting the results for women as indicators of

traditional gender roles in the source country.

       In addition to the effect of traditional gender roles (i.e. relative female activity rates and

fertility), Tables 6 and 7 show some interesting effects of other source country characteristics on

immigrants’ labor supply assimilation profiles. We focus our discussion on the basic

specification (Model 1). First, coming from a country where English is an official language has

large, statistically significant positive effects on both women’s and men’s labor supply on arrival:

244 hours for women (26% of the immigrant mean) and 370 hours for men (39% of the

immigrant mean). For both men and women, this difference falls dramatically. For men, the

interactions with YSM are no longer significant after 10 years in the United States; for women

the interactions remain significant until the 21-30 years YSM category. The impact of coming

from an English speaking country also shows a pattern of positive effects on men’s and women’s

labor supply that decline with time in the United States, although coefficients are smaller and less

often significant.

       Second, for both men and women, coming from a longer distance significantly reduces

work hours at arrival. For example, increasing the distance by 5000 miles (roughly the difference

between Canada’s distance and Japan’s distance to the United States) reduces women’s work

hours at arrival by 145 and men’s by 175. However, for both men and women, the interactions

of distance with YSM category are no longer significant after 0-5 years and are smaller in

absolute value than the effect at arrival. Thus, coming from a long distance appears to produce

an initial disruption for both men and women that is made up after a relatively short time in the

United States. Since distance does not affect long-run work hours for either men or women (or,

from Table 5, the average work hours of immigrant men or women), it does not appear to be an

indicator of positive or negative selection with regard to work behavior. It is also worth noting

that refugee proportion has a negative effect on labor supply that is substantial and significant for

men. The effect for males falls in magnitude from -431 at arrival to -215 after 21-30 years,




                                                  29
suggesting the disruptive effects of leaving as a refugee (as argued earlier); however, this

difference (between the effect at arrival and at 21-30 years) is not statistically significant.

         Third, the assimilation profiles differ in interesting ways by level of schooling. For both

men and women, the immigrant-native gap in work hours at arrival (i.e. immigrant hours minus

native hours, all else equal) is much more negative for immigrants with at least a high school

degree than it is for high school dropouts, and these differences are large and highly significant.

Moreover, the gap increases in magnitude with level of education and is largest for college

graduates. For each education category, these effects relative to high school dropouts diminish in

magnitude with time in the United States, indicating steeper assimilation profiles relative to

natives for the more highly educated. 15 It is possible that the labor market is more specialized for

those with higher levels of schooling and that it therefore takes a longer period of job search or a

need for additional training for these workers to locate an acceptable job. Since these patterns

hold up even after controlling for wages, these do not appear to be merely labor supply

responses. Additionally, the more specialized labor markets for those with higher levels of

schooling may require additional visas not needed in more menial jobs, again potentially

explaining the lower relative work hours at arrival and steeper slopes for the more highly

educated.



         D. Controlling for Selective Return Migration and Other Robustness Checks


         The foregoing figures and tables show important effects of source country characteristics

on the time path of immigrants’ labor supply. However, it is well known that the sample of

immigrants is likely to change with time in the United States. On the one hand, if the least
15
   Differences relative to 0-5 years since migration are significant in all cases for men and for those with a college
education (some college and graduates) for women. To calibrate the education effects in Tables 6a and 7 relative to
natives, we may, as in Figure 2, evaluate the immigrant-native difference in work hours for high school dropouts for
immigrant women married to immigrant men who came to the US from the same country and at the same time,
assuming the sample averages for the cohort arrival dummies and the source country characteristics. These
differences for women (men) are: 0-5: -146 (-136); 6-10: 57 (137); 11-15: 72 (180); 16-20: 48 (210); 21-30: .3
(297).


                                                          30
successful immigrants return to their native countries, then we may observe a spurious positive

relationship between YSM and labor supply. On the other hand, the most successful immigrants

may have a target income level and return home when they have reached the target, implying a

spurious negative relationship between YSM and labor market success. In addition to the effect

of labor market success on emigration, there may also be country-specific effects on the decision

to emigrate (Jasso and Rosenzweig 1982), which could in principle further confound our attempt

to estimate the effect of source country variables on immigrant assimilation. Furthermore,

subsequent return migration to the United States on the part of some immigrants plausibly raises

similar selection issues and also induces response error on the Census questions designed to

ascertain how long immigrants have been in the United States (Redstone and Massey 2004).

Using longitudinal data on individual immigrants, Lubotsky (2007) finds that earnings profiles

estimated using independent cross sections, such as those presented here for labor supply, are

steeper than those using longitudinal data. This suggests that the positive bias on Census-based

profiles outweighs the negative bias. Such considerations could also affect our estimates of the

impact of source country characteristics if there are systematic differences across source

countries in the propensity for return migration.

       We addressed the issue of the possible selection bias due to return migration by using

available data on emigration rates by source country (see the Data Appendix). Specifically, we

included the male and female 1980-1990 emigration rate in our labor supply models, where, for

example, for women we include the female emigration rate to one’s source country and the male

emigration rate to one’s spouse’s source country. In such models, we now compare assimilation

profiles for immigrants coming from different types of source countries but where the return

migration propensity is the same. While the return migration rate can clearly be affected by

actual labor supply behavior, these additional variables in principle allow us to compare

comparably-selected samples of migrants. The basic results for source country labor supply and

fertility were very similar to those reported above. Moreover, the return migration effect (i.e. the

sum of the own and spouse coefficients) was always positive for both men and women and was


                                                    31
significant some of the time for women. These point estimates suggest that the least successful

migrants are more likely to emigrate, consistent with Lubotsky’s (2007) results. Thus, our results

are robust with respect to this control for return migration selectivity.

         Another issue concerns our focus on married individuals. This raises the possibility that

our results may be affected by self-selection into marriage and, since the incidence of marriage

was declining over this period, changes in this selectivity over time (Blau and Kahn 2007). In

this respect it is reassuring that our basic conclusions about the impact of home country

characteristics on women’s labor supply assimilation profiles were similar when we used the

sample of all immigrants (see results for the basic specification in Table A-5). 16 Using this larger

sample addresses concerns about possible selection bias when we confine the analysis to married

individuals.

         In another robustness check, for comparison purposes, we examined results using current

(rather than arrival) home country characteristics in some of our analyses. Our conclusions were

very similar under either specification, suggesting that the relative values of the source country

characteristics are fairly constant over time. Finally, results were also broadly similar when we

performed separate pairwise analyses for 1980-90 and 1990-2000, rather than pooling all three

years as we do in our main specifications.



V. Conclusions


         In this paper, we began by describing the changing labor supply of the married immigrant

population in comparison to natives over the 1980-2000 period. We found that a modest female

immigrant shortfall in work hours (vs. natives) in 1980 grew substantially over the next twenty

years. In contrast, among men, the small immigrant work hours deficit grew only slightly. Thus,

16
   There are some small differences worth mentioning. The coefficients on the source country fertility interactions
in the sample of all immigrants are generally negative but smaller in magnitude than for the married sample, and
never significant. In addition, the coefficients on the English speaking variable while positive for both groups are
smaller and less often significant for married individuals.


                                                         32
while both immigrant and native women’s labor supply both increased absolutely and relative to

men’s, the gender difference in work hours fell much more for natives than for immigrants.

       We then described changes in the characteristics of immigrant source countries at the

time of immigrants’ arrival in the United States for the stock of immigrants present in the United

States over the 1980-2000 period. On average, immigrant women came from countries with

considerably lower relative female labor force participation than prevailed in the United States at

the same time, and there was a sizable increase in the US-source country gap in relative female

participation over the period. This was principally related to larger female participation increases

in the United States than within immigrant source countries, rather than to a shift in the mix of

source countries. Home country fertility rates were also substantially higher than in the United

States and fell at a slower relative rate for the stock of immigrants, although they declined more

sharply for recent arrivals. Immigrants also came from countries with considerably lower GDP

per capita and secondary school enrollment, and shifts in the mix of source countries contributed

to these differences. In addition, source countries were more likely to be English speaking in

1980 than in 2000, although immigrants in 2000 were more likely to come from countries that,

while not English-speaking, used English as an official language, and secondary school

enrollment rates rose in source countries relative to the United States. On most indicators,

however, the US immigrant population is increasingly from countries where women are either

less well prepared for, or have weaker preferences for, market work.

       We then turned to a detailed examination of the assimilation of married immigrant

women into the US labor market. We found that, controlling for personal characteristics, women

from high female labor supply countries work more than those from low female labor supply

source countries and that this gap is substantial and roughly constant with length of residence in

the United States. The work hours of women from both types of source countries do however

assimilate dramatically over time relative to comparable natives. Women from high female labor

supply countries (at the 75th percentile of the distribution) work roughly the same number of

hours as natives after 6-10 years and work at or above the native levels thereafter. Women


                                                 33
migrating from low female labor supply countries (at the 25th percentile of the distribution) have

reduced their deficit to 126 hours (12%) by the 21-30 year mark. These findings suggest that

growing up in a country with less traditional gender roles facilitates the labor market assimilation

of women, perhaps by giving them higher (unmeasured) human capital levels or a stronger work

orientation. Men’s labor supply levels and profile slopes are unaffected by source country female

labor supply, results that suggest that the female findings reflect notions of gender roles rather

than overall work orientation.

       Findings for another indicator of traditional gender roles, source country fertility rates, are

broadly similar, with substantial and persistent negative effects of source country fertility on the

labor supply of female immigrants, except when we control for presence of children. When we

do control for children, we obtain some partial support for the family migration model: labor

supply of women from high and low fertility source countries converges after 6-10 years at about

the level for comparable natives, but then diverges, with work hours of women from low fertility

source countries hovering at around the native levels, while work hours of women from high

fertility source countries progressively decrease relative to both immigrants from low fertility

source countries and comparable natives. Despite this, women from high fertility countries

continue to work more than they did on arrival, in contrast to a strong version of the family

migration model which predicts maximum female work hours upon arrival in the United States.

       The nature of gender roles in source countries for immigrants to the United States is

changing in potentially offsetting ways. On the one hand, fertility rates are falling dramatically

elsewhere relative to the United States, potentially raising immigrant women’s labor supply here.

On the other hand, while female labor force participation relative to men’s grew around the

world between 1980 and 2000, it grew even faster in the United States. These trends could

potentially widen the relative gap in labor supply between native and immigrant women.

However, more recently female participation rates in the United States have leveled off,

suggestion that source country rates may begin to catch up to the US rate. Thus, the future




                                                 34
assimilation of immigrant women into the US labor market will depend on the strength of these

opposing forces.




                                              35
                                        Data Appendix

Individual Variables

        Data were obtained from the 1980, 1990 and 2000 five percent extracts of the US Census.
Those people born in the United States or a US territory or possession, or born abroad to an
American parent are classified as natives; others are classified as immigrants. All immigrants in
the extracts are included, along with all natives who were married to immigrants. A 4% random
sample was taken of the remaining observations, with the 1990 and 2000 Census person weights
multiplied by 25; comparable weights were created for the 1980 Census for which no Census
weights are provided. (Hence, we have a 1/500 sample of natives.) To ensure that each year was
given equal weight, the adjusted weights were then divided by the sum of these weights over all
observations in a given year.

        For the married sample, husband and wife records were matched, with observations
dropped if either spouse was not in the 18-65 age range, had zero weight, had allocated annual
weeks worked, allocated hours worked per week, allocated birthplace or year of immigration, or
had missing source country information. For the total sample, observations were dropped if a
person was not in the 18-65 age range; had zero weight; had allocated annual weeks worked,
allocated hours worked per week, allocated birthplace or year of immigration, or had missing
source country information.

        Since we focus on adult immigrants, the preceding samples were further restricted by
excluding immigrants who arrived in the United States before age 18. Data on arrival period in
the 1980 and 1990 Censuses is in interval form. For each interval, we only include immigrants
for whom we can definitely conclude that they were at least 18 years old on arrival in the United
States. That is, if the immigrant arrived between A0 and A1, we take only individuals for whom
(A0 – BY) ≥ 18, where BY is birth year as calculated from the individual’s reported age. For
comparability, similar procedures were followed for the 2000 Census data. This also required us
to exclude individuals in the open-ended arrival category for 1980 and 1990 (i.e., pre-1950),
since we cannot ascertain whether such individuals migrated as children or adults. The resulting
maximum years since migration is thus 30 for 1980, and, for comparability, a maximum of 30
years since migration is also set for 1990 and 2000. We define sets of cohort of arrival and years
since migration variables dummies that are consistent across the three Censuses. The cohort of
arrival dummies include all but one possible arrival cohort: 1995-2000, 1991-94, 1985-90, 1980-
84, 1975-79, 1970-74, 1965-69, and 1960-64 (1950-59 is the omitted category). The full set of
years since migration dummies is included: 0-5, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, and 21-30 years in the US.

       Values for the highest grade completed by husbands and wives in the 1990 and 2000
samples were assigned using Jaeger’s (1997) suggested correspondence. Annual hours worked
were defined as the product of the number of weeks worked (WKSWORK) in the previous year
and the number of hours usually worked (UHRSWK) during those weeks; a respondent was
considered to be in the workforce if UHRSWK>0.




                                               36
        All nominal earnings and income variables were converted into 2000 dollars using the
National Income and Product Account price index for personal consumption expenditures. All
top-coded values of total wage and salary earnings (INCWAGE) in each year were multiplied by
1.45. (Our correction factor was midway between the 1.4 value used by Card and DiNardo
(2002) and Autor, Katz and Kearney’s (2004) value of 1.5.) The Census top-coded value for
INCWAGE was $75,000 in 1980, $140,000 in 1990 and $175,000 in 2000. lnw was equal to the
log of the modified value of INCWAGE divided by the product of WKSWORK and HRSWK.
All top- and bottom-coded values of the interest, divided and rental income variable
(INCINVST) in each year were also multiplied by 1.45.

        Flags were generated for any observation that had an allocated value for any variable used
in creating lnw, non-zero self-employment income or an allocated value for self-employment
income or a wage value less than $1 or greater than $200 (in 2000 dollars). An imputed wage
variable was created, using actual wages unless the individual was not employed or the
calculated wage value was not valid, in which case predicted values were used from separate log
wage regressions for each combination of gender, Census year, and low/high work weeks (using
a 20 week cut-off). The low work week regression was used for those who did not work, while
actual weeks determined the weeks cutoff for those whose wage was not valid. The regressors
used were age, age squared, 3 education categories and 3 race/Hispanic categories, 8 region
categories and dummy variables for the six states with the largest immigrant populations
(California, Florida, Illinois, New Jersey, New York and Texas), as well as the years since
migration, and years since migration*source country variables specified in the text. Spouse
values for these variables were also included as regressors in those specifications where we
consider married men and women only.


Source Country Variables

        The source country characteristics described below were collected at five-year intervals
for the period 1950 to 2000. To form a consistent list of source countries, we combine some
countries which were not available in some Census years (e.g. subsets of countries in Africa, the
Pacific Islands, and the West Indies) and countries that split or combined between 1980 and 2000
(e.g. the former USSR countries, East and West Germany, former Czechoslovakia, and former
Yugoslavia). Some countries were combined because data on source country characteristics were
only available in a combined form. The data set includes 106 source countries in total. The
characteristics for each composite group are the average values over constituent countries
weighted by each country’s population age 18 to 65 from the 2000 Census 1% extract. Due to
missing values of source country variables in some years, we have, in cases, interpolated for
intervening years, used earliest (most recent) values for preceding (subsequent) years, and
imputed source country characteristics from neighboring countries. Source country
characteristics were matched to arrival cohorts as follows: 1950-1959: 1955; 1960-1964: 1960;
1965-1969: 1965; 1970-1974: 1970; 1975-1979: 1975; 1980-1984: 1980; 1985-1990: 1985;
1991-1994: 1990; 1995-2000: 1995.




                                                37
Source Country Characteristics: Definitions and Sources

Variable                Description
Fertility               Total fertility rate: the number of children that would be born per woman, assuming no
                        female mortality at child bearing ages and the age-specific fertility rates of a specified
                        country and reference period. The data are available between 1955 and 2000 at five
                        year intervals. Source: United Nations Statistics Division, Series 13700 (2006).
GDP per Capita          GDP per capita (1995 US $): GDP is an aggregate measure of production equal to the
                        sum of the gross values added of all resident institutional units engaged in production.
                        The total population of a country may comprise either all usual residents of the country
                        (de jure population) or all persons present in the country (de facto population) at the
                        time of the census. The data are available annually between 1960 and 2000. Source:
                        United Nations Statistics Division, Series 29918 and 13660 (2006), with supplemental
                        data from U.S. Arms and Control Disarmament Agency and U.S. Department of
                        State,World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers (various issues).
Female/Male Activity    Female LFP / Male LFP: Economically active population ("usually active" or
Rate                    "currently active" (currently active is also known as "the labor force")) comprises all
                        persons who furnish the supply of labor for the production of economic goods and
                        services (employed and unemployed, including those seeking work for the first time),
                        as defined by the System of National Accounts (SNA). The rates are calculated for
                        individuals age 15 and up. The data are available between 1950 and 2000 at ten year
                        intervals and in 1995. Source: United Nations Statistics Division, Series 4270 and
                        4230 (2006).
Refugee Proportion      Refugees as a proportion of total immigrants. The data are available between 1950
                        and 2000 at five year intervals. Source: Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and
                        Naturalization Service, U.S. Department of Justice (various years)..
Primary School          Female or male primary school enrollment rate: Gross enrollment ratio is the ratio of
Enrollment Rate         total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the age group that officially
                        corresponds to that level of education in question. The World Bank data are available
                        in 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990-1998; Barro-Lee data are available between 1960
                        and 1985 at five year intervals. Source: World Bank World Development Indicators
                        CD-Rom, Series SE.PRM.ENRR.FE (2002), with supplemental data from Barro and
                        Lee (1994).
Secondary School        Female or male secondary school enrollment rate: Gross enrollment ratio is the ratio of
Enrollment Rate         total enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the age group that officially
                        corresponds to that level of education in question. The World Bank data are available
                        in 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990-1998; Barro-Lee data are available between 1960
                        and 1985 at five year intervals. Source: World Bank World Development Indicators
                        CD-Rom, Series SE.SEC.ENRR.FE (2002), with supplemental data from Barro and
                        Lee (1994).
English-Speaking        English speaking country. Source: Bleakley and Chin (2004); their data were from the
Country                 World Almanac and Book of Facts (1999).
English Official        English is an official language of the country (for non-English-Speaking countries).
Language                Source: Bleakley and Chin (2004); their data were from the World Almanac and Book
                        of Facts (1999).
Emigration Rate         Annual emigration rate (overall and by sex): the annual number of emigrants divided
                        by the average of the 1980 and 1990 immigrant populations. Source: Annual
                        emigration estimates by country and sex from Ahmed and Robinson (1994).
Distance to US          Distance to the U.S. (miles): computed as the distance between the capital of the
                        foreign country and the closest of three U.S. gateways – New York, Los Angeles or
                        Miami. See http://www.indo.com/distance/ and
                        http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook
                                         References

Ahmed, Bashir and J. Gregory Robinson, “Estimates of Emigration of the Foreign-Born
     Population: 1980-1990,” U.S. Bureau of the Census Population Division Working Paper
     No. 9, December 1994.

Antecol, Heather, “An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in Labor
      Force Participation Rates,” Labour Economics 7, no. 4 (July 2000): 409-426.

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz and Melissa S. Kearney, “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
       Re-Assessing the Revisionists,” unpublished manuscript, MIT, July 2004.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “The Role of the Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market
       Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review87,
       no. 4 (September 1997): 705-727.

Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee, Sources of Economic Growth. Carnegie-Rochester
       Conference Series on Public Policy 40, (1994): 1–46.

Blau, Francine D., "The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High-Fertility Source
       Countries," in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work
       Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas. Chicago, IL:
       University of Chicago Press, 1992, pp. 93-133.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married
       Women: 1980-2000,” Journal of Labor Economics 25, no. 3 (July 2007): 393-438.

Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Joan Moriarty, and Andre Souza. "The Role of the
       Family in Immigrants’ Labor-Market Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative
       Explanations: Comment,” American Economic Review 93, no. 1 (March 2003): 429-447

Bleakley, Hoyt and Aimee Chin, “Language Skills and Earnings: Evidence from Childhood
       Immigrants" Review of Economics and Statistics 86, no. 2 (May 2004): 481-496.

Borjas, George J. “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants.”
        Journal of Labor Economics 3, no. 4 (October 1985):, 463-489.

Borjas, George J. “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
        Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13, no. 2 (April 1995):
        201-245.

Card, David and John E. DiNardo, “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
       Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles,” Journal of Labor Economics 20, No. 4
       (October 2002): 733-783.

Chiswick, Barry R., “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born Men,”
      Journal of Political Economy 86, No. 5 (October 1978): 897-921.

Fernández, Racquel and Alessandra Fogli, “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
      Work, and Fertility,” Unpublished Working Paper, New York University, October 2006.

Friedberg, Rachel M., “Immigration and the Labor Market.” Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT, 1993.



                                              39
Jaeger, David A., “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15, issue
        3 (July 1997): 300-309.

Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R. Rosenzweig, "Estimating the Emigration Rates of Legal
        Immigrants Using Administrative and Survey Data: The 1971 Cohort of Immigrants to
        the United States," Demography 19, no. 3 (August 1982): 279-290.

Juhn, Chinhui, “Decline of Male Labor Market Participation: The Role of Declining Market
       Opportunities,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no. 1 (February 1992): 79-121.

Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin M. Murphy. “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply,” Journal of
       Labor Economics 15, no. 1 (January 1997): 72-97.

Lubotsky, Darren, “Chutes or Ladders? A Longitudinal Analysis of Immigrant Earnings,”
      Journal of Political Economy 115, no. 5 (October 2007): 820-867.

Mincer, Jacob, “Family Migration Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy 86, no. 1 (October
      1978): 749-73.

Redstone, Ilana and Douglas S Massey, “Coming to Stay: An Analysis of the U.S. Census
      Question on Immigrants’ Year of Arrival,” Demography 41, no. 4 (November 2004):
      721–738.

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), "Fertility Rate (13700): Total Fertility Rate" (UN
       Pop. Div. Quinquennial Estimates and Projections)
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb/cdb_series_xrxx.asp?series_code=13700.

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), “GDP (22918): Gross Domestic Product at Market
       Prices, Constant US$” (World Bank Estimates)
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb/cdb_series_xrxx.asp?series_code=29918.

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), “Population (13660): Population Total” (UN Pop.
       Div. Annual Estimates and Projections) [code 13660]
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb/cdb_series_xrxx.asp?series_code=13660.

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), “Economic Activity Rate (4270): Economic Activity
       Rate by Sex, Thirteen Age Groups, 1950-2010” (ILO Estimates and Projections)
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb/cdb_series_xrxx.asp?series_code=4270.

United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD), “Economically Activity Population (4230):
       Economically Active Population by Sex, Thirteen Age Groups, 1950-2010” (ILO
       Estimates and Projections)
       http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb/cdb_series_xrxx.asp?series_code=4230.

U.S. Arms and Control Disarmament Agency, World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers
       (various issues).

U.S. Department of Justice, Annual Report of the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various issues.

U.S. Department of State, World Military Expenditures and Arms Transfers (various issues).




                                               40
U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Statistical Yearbook of the Immigration and
       Naturalization Service Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, various
       issues.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
      MA: The MIT Press, 2002.

World Almanac and Book of Facts. New York: World Almanac Books, 1999.




                                             41
                                                                                                                                               a
     Figure 1a: Immigrant Annual Hours Relative to Natives by Source Country Activity Rate Ratio




                                400
                                                                                                               JAM
                                                                                       PHL




                                200
                                                                     PRT
                     Relative annual hours
                                                               CUB
                                    0                                                                        HTI     CHN
                                                                                                             POL

                                                                                            YGO                          VNM
                                                                                          KOR
                        -200




                                                           PER ITA                       DEU
                                                                                        TAI
                                                                                       CAN                         USR
                                                                                       GBR
                                                              SLV                    IND
                                                           DOM
                                                                COL
                                -400




                                                                                                                         LAO
                                                   IRN
                                -600




                                                                                               JPN
                                                               MEX

                                             .2                          .4                 .6                   .8                    1
                                                                              Source country activity rate ratio

                a
                    The trend line has a slope of 432.64 with a standard error of 121.74.

                                                                                                                                           a
        Figure 1b: Immigrant Annual Hours Relative to Natives by Source Country Fertility Rate
                                400




                                                                                               JAM
                                                                                                                   PHL
                                200




                                                               PRT
                     Relative annual hours




                                                                               CUB
                                                                              CHN                                        HTI
                                    0




                                                         POL

                                                    YGO                                                         VNM
                                                                              KOR
                        -200




                                             DEUUSR
                                                 ITACAN TAI                                              PER
                                               GBR
                                                                                                  IND     SLV
                                                                                                        DOM
                                                                                                COL
                                -400




                                                                                                                                 LAO
                                                                                                                               IRN
                                -600




                                             JPN
                                                                                                         MEX

                                              2                      3                 4               5                   6           7
                                                                               Source country total fertility rate

                a
                    The trend line has a slope of -29.22 with a standard error of 14.60.


Notes: The annual hours of immigrant women in the US relative to natives are measured by the coefficients on
country fixed effects from a first-stage regression estimated on pooled 1980, 1990 and 2000 Census data of
                          2
annual hours on age, age , two year dummies, and country fixed effects (for all 106 countries). The trend line
shown in each figure is estimated weighting observations by the inverse of the standard errors from the first-
stage regression. Source country variables are measured at the time of immigrant arrival and are averaged
across Censuses for each immigrant source country. The data points in each figure illustrate the estimated
relationship for the top 25 source countries (countries are ranked by their weighted share of the sample of
married women across all years, with only adult immigrants included).
                                                                    Figure 2: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrant Women, by
                                                                          Source Country Relative Female Activity Rate, Basic Specification (Model 1)

                                                    100

                                                                                                                       51
                                                                                                     21
                                                                                  9                                                      2
                                                      0
Annual Work Hours relative to Comparative Natives




                                                           0-5                 6-10              11-15             16-20              21-30



                                                    -100
                                                                                  -119               -114              -113
                                                                                                                                         -126


                                                                                                                                                Low activity rate (25th pctile)
                                                    -200
                                                                                                                                                High activity rate (75th pctile)


                                                             -279
                                                    -300




                                                    -400     -403




                                                    -500
                                                                                          Years Since Migration
                                                                Figure 3: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrant Men, by Female
                                                                                     Relative Activity Rate, Basic Specification (Model 1)

                                                   300
                                                                                                                                        260
                                                                                                                                        244

                                                   200
Annual Work Hours Relative to Comparable Natives




                                                                                                                     135
                                                                                                                     132
                                                   100
                                                                                                    70
                                                                                                    67

                                                                                22
                                                                                11
                                                     0
                                                          0-5                6-10               11-15             16-20              21-30

                                                                                                                                               Low activity rate (25th pctile)
                                                   -100
                                                                                                                                               High activity rate (75th pctile)


                                                   -200



                                                   -300


                                                            -372
                                                            -380
                                                   -400



                                                   -500
                                                                                         Years Since Migration
                                                                Figure 4a: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrant Women, by
                                                                              Source Country Fertility Rate, Basic Specification (Model 1)

                                                   100


                                                    50                                            55
                                                                                                                   47
                                                                               40
Annual Work hours Relative to Comparable Natives




                                                     0                                                                                5
                                                          0-5               6-10              11-15             16-20              21-30

                                                    -50

                                                                                                                   -89
                                                   -100
                                                                                                                                      -112
                                                                               -133               -130
                                                                                                                                             Low fertility rate (25th pctile)
                                                   -150
                                                                                                                                             High fertility rate (75th pctile)

                                                   -200


                                                   -250


                                                   -300     -294


                                                   -350
                                                            -374
                                                   -400
                                                                                       Years Since Migration
                                                                Figure 4b: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrant Women, by
                                                                               Source Country Fertility Rate, Full Specification (Model 3)


                                                   100


                                                    50                                            53

                                                                               16                                   22
Annual Work Hours Relative to Comparable Natives




                                                     0
                                                                               -10                                                     -8
                                                          0-5               6-10              11-15             16-20              21-30
                                                                                                  -33
                                                    -50                                                             -57

                                                   -100


                                                   -150                                                                                -152


                                                   -200                                                                                       Low fertility rate (25th pctile)

                                                                                                                                              High fertility rate (75th pctile)
                                                   -250


                                                   -300     -304

                                                   -350
                                                            -380
                                                   -400


                                                   -450
                                                                                       Years Since Migration
                                                                Figure 5: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrant Men, by Source
                                                                                     Country Fertility Rate, Basic Specification (Model 1)

                                                   400


                                                                                                                                        318
                                                   300
Annual Work Hours Relative to Comparable Natives




                                                                                                                     225
                                                   200                                                                                  191

                                                                                120                 120
                                                   100

                                                                                                                     47
                                                                                                    19
                                                     0
                                                          0-5                6-10               11-15             16-20              21-30     Low fertility rate (25th pctile)
                                                                                                                                               High fertility rate (75th pctile)
                                                                                -84
                                                   -100


                                                   -200


                                                   -300     -309


                                                   -400
                                                            -440

                                                   -500
                                                                                         Years Since Migration
               Table 1: Mean Values, Selected Variables for Married Immigrant Women, Recent Immigrant Women and US Native Womena
                                                  1980                                    1990                                      2000
                                      All         Recent                     All          Recent                      All          Recent
                                   Immigrant    Immigrant    US-Born      Immigrant     Immigrant     US-Born      Immigrant     Immigrant         US-Born
Variables                           Women        Women       Women         Women         Women        Women         Women         Women            Women
Annual Work Hours                    822.51      636.91       887.13        975.75        660.07       1170.09       983.06        650.89          1301.98
Participated in Labor Market          0.542       0.460        0.608         0.590         0.459         0.729        0.578         0.435            0.758
Number of Children Under 18           1.401       1.495        1.157         1.296         1.258         1.039        1.220         1.136            1.043
Speaks English Well                   0.697       0.583        0.996         0.671         0.569         0.995        0.652         0.578            0.995
Ln Hourly Earnings                    2.255       2.126        2.257         2.330         2.172         2.366        2.454         2.313            2.566
Age                                  40.814      34.268       39.231        40.857        34.745        39.899       40.942        35.200           41.574
High School Dropout                   0.395       0.382        0.221         0.305         0.272         0.113        0.249         0.221            0.061
Exactly High School Degree            0.286       0.257        0.470         0.269         0.265         0.389        0.247         0.236            0.312
Some College                          0.148       0.157        0.177         0.191         0.191         0.297        0.184         0.175            0.340
College Graduate                      0.171       0.204        0.133         0.235         0.272         0.201        0.320         0.368            0.287
White, Nonhispanic                    0.418       0.310        0.891         0.268         0.259         0.886        0.229         0.258            0.867
Black, Nonhispanic                    0.037       0.037        0.066         0.046         0.040         0.064        0.051         0.045            0.065
Hispanic                              0.277       0.251        0.032         0.301         0.294         0.038        0.316         0.324            0.046
Other Ethnicity                       0.268       0.402        0.010         0.386         0.408         0.013        0.404         0.373            0.022
New England                           0.061       0.048        0.053         0.050         0.052         0.052        0.045         0.049            0.050
Middle Atlantic                       0.236       0.197        0.152         0.195         0.193         0.138        0.190         0.168            0.129
East North Central                    0.122       0.113        0.196         0.089         0.086         0.184        0.095         0.114            0.176
West North Central                    0.024       0.028        0.086         0.020         0.024         0.082        0.027         0.036            0.083
South Atlantic                        0.135       0.119        0.164         0.150         0.148         0.180        0.170         0.193            0.184
East South Central                    0.013       0.016        0.071         0.011         0.012         0.070        0.015         0.020            0.074
West South Central                    0.077       0.098        0.105         0.090         0.081         0.109        0.104         0.111            0.113
Mountain                              0.036       0.038        0.054         0.036         0.039         0.058        0.054         0.066            0.070
Pacific                               0.295       0.343        0.120         0.359         0.365         0.126        0.301         0.242            0.121
California                            0.254       0.297        0.083         0.320         0.325         0.086        0.258         0.199            0.078
Florida                               0.072       0.050        0.038         0.078         0.069         0.045        0.080         0.085            0.046
Texas                                 0.063       0.079        0.061         0.078         0.070         0.067        0.093         0.100            0.071
New York                              0.151       0.129        0.064         0.123         0.124         0.056        0.114         0.096            0.052
Illinois                              0.059       0.059        0.048         0.048         0.044         0.044        0.050         0.054            0.039
New Jersey                            0.061       0.045        0.031         0.053         0.052         0.029        0.056         0.052            0.026
Sample Size                          69431       20815        76940         85810         25293         76277        111283        34499            71198
a
    Immigrants include only adult immigrants.

Note: Recent immigrants are defined as those who arrived in the US within the last five years. Earnings are measured for wage and salary
workers only, and annual work hours include those with zero hours. Immigrant samples include only those from countries with observations in each
Census year.
                  Table 2: Mean Values, Selected Variables for Married Immigrant Men, Recent Immigrant Men and US Native Mena
                                                 1980                                     1990                                      2000
                                   All          Recent                       All          Recent                      All          Recent
                                Immigrant     Immigrant      US-Born      Immigrant     Immigrant     US-Born      Immigrant     Immigrant         US-Born
Variable                          Men            Men          Men           Men            Men         Men           Men            Men             Men
Annual Work Hours                 1823.52      1557.99       1969.47       1829.00       1530.06       2011.46       1855.07      1635.87          2052.51
Participated in Labor Market        0.905        0.840         0.922         0.888         0.812         0.921         0.889        0.847            0.912
Speaks English Well                 0.731        0.664         0.996         0.719         0.645         0.996         0.704        0.655            0.996
Ln Hourly Earnings                  2.712        2.525         2.792         2.692         2.534         2.824         2.754        2.703            2.935
Age                                43.617       37.520        41.755        43.336        37.947        42.218        43.521       37.936           43.658
High School Dropout                 0.383        0.325         0.248         0.290         0.241         0.133         0.238        0.185            0.081
Exactly High School Degree          0.191        0.180         0.366         0.199         0.202         0.327         0.211        0.210            0.300
Some College                        0.130        0.152         0.174         0.174         0.170         0.282         0.159        0.138            0.306
College Graduate                    0.296        0.343         0.212         0.338         0.387         0.258         0.392        0.466            0.314
White, Nonhispanic                  0.407        0.337         0.891         0.274         0.295         0.884         0.240        0.299            0.867
Black, Nonhispanic                  0.050        0.048         0.067         0.058         0.049         0.067         0.061        0.047            0.069
Hispanic                            0.307        0.250         0.031         0.319         0.283         0.036         0.327        0.307            0.044
Other Ethnicity                     0.236        0.365         0.011         0.348         0.373         0.012         0.372        0.347            0.020
New England                         0.063        0.052         0.053         0.053         0.057         0.052         0.047        0.052            0.049
Middle Atlantic                     0.264        0.208         0.151         0.210         0.210         0.138         0.201        0.171            0.128
East North Central                  0.129        0.113         0.195         0.093         0.088         0.184         0.099        0.118            0.175
West North Central                  0.020        0.028         0.085         0.018         0.023         0.082         0.026        0.037            0.083
South Atlantic                      0.124        0.113         0.164         0.144         0.148         0.180         0.166        0.197            0.185
East South Central                  0.008        0.013         0.071         0.008         0.011         0.070         0.014        0.021            0.074
West South Central                  0.070        0.100         0.106         0.089         0.073         0.110         0.104        0.110            0.113
Mountain                            0.030        0.034         0.054         0.032         0.036         0.059         0.051        0.065            0.070
Pacific                             0.293        0.339         0.121         0.353         0.355         0.127         0.292        0.229            0.122
California                          0.262        0.301         0.083         0.321         0.322         0.087         0.256        0.189            0.079
Florida                             0.073        0.054         0.039         0.080         0.070         0.045         0.080        0.089            0.046
Texas                               0.060        0.081         0.061         0.079         0.064         0.067         0.094        0.099            0.071
New York                            0.173        0.137         0.064         0.134         0.135         0.056         0.122        0.096            0.052
Illinois                            0.067        0.060         0.048         0.052         0.043         0.044         0.053        0.053            0.039
New Jersey                          0.067        0.046         0.031         0.057         0.055         0.029         0.060        0.053            0.026
Sample Size                        60259        17184         86112         78441         19872         83646        104866        26829            77615
a
 Immigrants include only adult immigrants.

Note: Recent immigrants are defined as those who arrived in the US within the last five years. Earnings are measured for wage and salary
workers only, and annual work hours include those with zero hours. Immigrant samples include only those from countries with observations in each
Census year.
                             Table 3: Mean Values, Selected Source Country Characteristicsa

                                                       1980                        1990                        2000

                                               Source         United      Source          United      Source          United
Variables                                     Countries       States     Countries        States     Countries        States

A. All Married Immigrant Women

Total Fertility Rate                            4.473         2.817         4.332        2.167          3.663         1.957
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                    4768.349     16807.340      4557.314     20900.160      4705.619     25786.900
Female LFP/Male LFP                             0.445         0.513         0.509        0.617          0.566         0.716
Percentage Refugees                             0.061         0.000         0.097        0.000          0.117         0.000
Primary School Enrollment Rate                 98.734       100.045        99.599       99.483         100.594      100.400
Secondary School Enrollment Rate               41.565        89.421        49.560       92.612         58.775        94.920
English Speaking Country                        0.157         1.000         0.112        1.000          0.091         1.000
English Official Language (non-English
Speaking)                                       0.105         0.000         0.148         0.000         0.169         0.000
Miles from Country                            3834.490        0.000       4234.575        0.000       4247.687        0.000

B. Married Recent Immigrant Women

Total Fertility Rate                            4.683         2.020         3.613        1.830          2.922         2.030
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                    4749.055     19425.880      5724.865     24730.970      5900.415     29572.390
Female LFP/Male LFP                             0.513         0.592         0.559        0.704          0.597         0.782
Percentage Refugees                             0.061         0.000         0.119        0.000          0.112         0.000
Primary School Enrollment Rate                 98.333       100.045       101.149       98.948         101.560      101.121
Secondary School Enrollment Rate               48.568        90.510        61.189       97.376         68.439        97.248
English Speaking Country                        0.123         1.000         0.101        1.000          0.085         1.000
English Official Language (non-English
Speaking)                                       0.141         0.000         0.148         0.000         0.172         0.000
Miles from Country                            4523.229        0.000       4376.068        0.000       4159.227        0.000
a
  Immigrants include only adult immigrants.

Note: Source country and US characteristics are measured as of each immigrant's arrival period and averaged across
immigrants. For source countries, this yields means weighted by the number of immigrants in each source country-arrival
period cell. For US characteristics, this yields means weighted by the number of immigrants in each arrival period cell.
Census sampling weights are taken into account. Immigrant samples include only those from countries with observations
in each Census year.
                  Table 4: Mean Values, Selected Source Country Characteristics for Married Immigrant Women, Fixed Country Weightsa

                                                1980 Origin Country Weights            1990 Origin Country Weights            2000 Origin Country Weights

Variables                                      1980         1990         2000         1980          1990         2000         1980         1990      2000

A. All Married Immigrant Women

Total Fertility Rate                           4.473        3.836        3.055       5.058        4.332          3.515       5.301        4.524       3.663
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                    4768.349    6017.644     7919.322     3590.832     4557.314      5915.472     3012.368     3801.015   4705.619
Female LFP/Male LFP                             0.445       0.502        0.572        0.457        0.509         0.566        0.464        0.515      0.566
Percentage Refugees                             0.061       0.086        0.105        0.054        0.097         0.110        0.057        0.106      0.117
Primary School Enrollment Rate                 98.734      101.364      102.551      96.091       99.599        101.514      94.002       98.123     100.594
Secondary School Enrollment Rate               41.565       54.593       70.121      36.691       49.560         62.744      34.683       46.989      58.775

B. Married Recent Immigrant Women

Total Fertility Rate                           4.683        3.548        2.834       4.760         3.613         2.906       4.815         3.636      2.922
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                    4749.055    5784.506     7266.150     4662.534     5724.865      7250.200     4197.147     5065.300   5900.415
Female LFP/Male LFP                             0.513       0.574        0.621        0.498        0.559         0.606        0.494        0.552      0.597
Percentage Refugees                             0.061       0.147        0.118        0.064        0.119         0.086        0.088        0.126      0.112
Primary School Enrollment Rate                 98.333      101.251      103.340      97.650       101.149       103.200      95.963       100.182    101.560
Secondary School Enrollment Rate               48.568       62.239       75.192      47.067        61.189        73.549      44.973        58.296     68.439
a
  Immigrants include only adult immigrants.

Note: Source country characteristics are measured as of each immigrant's arrival date and averaged across immigrants. Country weights are fixed
by giving each immigrant a weight for her source country corresponding to the indicated year's frequency of immigrants from that source country.
Census sampling weights are taken into account. Immigrant samples include only those from countries with observations in each Census year.
                      Table 5a: Selected Annual Hours Results Excluding Source Country Interactions, Married Womena
                                                                                   Spouse Source Country         Sum of Own and Spouse
Source Country Variables                              Own Source Country Effects          Effects                 Source Country Effects
                                                           coef        (a)se         coef           (a)se           Sum         Significance
1. Basic Specification (OLS)
Fertility                                                   8.406      18.937       -42.725        15.902         -34.319         0.0962
GDP per Capita                                             -0.013       0.004        -0.017         0.004          -0.030         0.0000
Female/Male Activity Rate                                 383.192      74.186       165.891        46.182         549.083         0.0000
Refugee Proportion                                         53.817      46.578      -143.213        42.257         -89.396         0.0567
Primary School Enrollment Rate                              2.434       1.123         0.161         0.631           2.595         0.0390
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            2.227       1.307        -1.042         1.014           1.185         0.3370
English-Speaking Country                                   66.587      32.468        18.426        27.193          85.013         0.0273
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking              192.843      40.987       21.103         85.784         213.946         0.0211
Miles from Country                                         -0.011      0.008         -0.007         0.005          -0.018         0.0269
2. Basic Plus Own and Spouse Log Wages and Nonwage Income (IV)
Fertility                                                   0.094      16.239       -41.785        15.366         -41.691         0.0290
GDP per Capita                                             -0.013       0.003        -0.012         0.003          -0.025         0.0000
Female/Male Activity Rate                                 330.814      68.349       179.752        43.886         510.566         0.0000
Refugee Proportion                                         39.285      44.748      -131.183        37.714         -91.898         0.0505
Primary School Enrollment Rate                              2.114       1.003         0.290         0.586           2.404         0.0385
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            1.534       1.118        -1.169         0.886           0.365         0.7290
English-Speaking Country                                   67.879      29.633        19.870        22.286          87.749         0.0108
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking              174.518      35.272       25.560         68.482         200.078         0.0091
Miles from Country                                         -0.010      0.007         -0.008         0.004          -0.018         0.0246
3. Basic Plus Own and Spouse Log Wages and Nonwage Income and Children Variables (IV)
Fertility                                                 18.770       14.572      -22.960         11.344          -4.190         0.8218
GDP per Capita                                             -0.010       0.003       -0.010          0.003          -0.020         0.0000
Female/Male Activity Rate                                 326.824      58.083      216.721         34.532         543.545         0.0000
Refugee Proportion                                         49.239      40.979      -97.775         33.148         -48.536         0.1893
Primary School Enrollment Rate                              2.124       0.931        0.285          0.552           2.409         0.0115
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            1.565       1.107       -0.767          0.780           0.798         0.4489
English-Speaking Country                                   81.466      27.933        0.582         22.422          82.048         0.0095
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking              170.105      35.023       7.548          77.580         177.653         0.0328
Miles from Country                                         -0.010       0.006       -0.006          0.004          -0.016         0.0162
a
    Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Basic Spec. includes own and spouse levels for: cohort dummies, years since migration dummies, 3 educ. dummies, 3 educ. dummies
interacted with immigrant status, 3 race/Hispanic origin dummies, age and age squared; 8 region, 6 state and 2 year dummies. Instruments
include own and spouse wage decile dummies.
                        Table 5b: Selected Annual Hours Results Excluding Source Country Interactions, Married Mena
                                                                                   Spouse Source Country         Sum of Own and Spouse
Source Country Variables                              Own Source Country Effects          Effects                 Source Country Effects
                                                            coef       (a)se         coef           (a)se           Sum         Significance
1. Basic Specification (OLS)
Fertility                                                  -24.758     12.435       -17.474         9.250          -42.232        0.0020
GDP per Capita                                               0.005      0.003         0.002         0.002            0.007        0.0541
Female/Male Activity Rate                                  56.372      73.822        -3.181        36.970          53.191         0.4834
Refugee %                                                 -163.212     69.689      -151.436        49.466         -314.648        0.0021
Primary School Enrollment Rate                               0.850      0.803        0.374          0.568           1.224         0.0925
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            -0.615      0.803        -0.828         0.567           -1.443        0.1193
English-Speaking Country                                   11.364      29.039       28.045         20.331          39.409         0.2866
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking              103.925      46.448       45.253         35.801         149.178         0.0006
Miles from Country                                          -0.010     0.007         0.001         0.008            -0.009        0.3076
2. Basic Plus Own and Spouse Log Wages and Nonwage Income (IV)
Fertility                                                  -18.255      9.290       -26.618        12.956          -44.873        0.0018
GDP per Capita                                               0.003      0.002         0.006         0.003            0.009        0.0157
Female/Male Activity Rate                                   -9.348     37.987        63.888        72.843          54.540         0.4635
Refugee %                                                 -165.886     72.260      -152.416        49.256         -318.302        0.0022
Primary School Enrollment Rate                               0.272      0.599         0.827         0.770           1.099         0.1231
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            -0.995      0.636        -0.625         0.812           -1.620        0.0923
English-Speaking Country                                   40.123      21.960       21.277         30.119          61.400         0.1153
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking               44.910      36.173      112.020         49.924         156.930         0.0012
Miles from Country                                          0.001      0.008         -0.010        0.007            -0.009        0.3664
3. Basic Plus Own and Spouse Log Wages and Nonwage Income and Children Variables (IV)
Fertility                                                  -18.480      9.333       -27.038        13.000          -45.518        0.0015
GDP per Capita                                               0.003      0.002         0.006         0.003            0.009        0.0180
Female/Male Activity Rate                                   -9.388     38.314        63.023        72.995          53.635         0.4718
Refugee %                                                 -165.944     72.078      -151.517        49.318         -317.461        0.0022
Primary School Enrollment Rate                               0.277      0.599         0.831         0.772           1.108         0.1207
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                            -0.985      0.636        -0.630         0.813           -1.615        0.0933
English-Speaking Country                                   40.103      22.153       21.417         30.213          61.520         0.1158
English Official Language, Non-Eng. Speaking               44.744      36.249      112.700         50.194         157.444         0.0012
Miles from Country                                          0.001      0.008         -0.010        0.007            -0.009        0.3671
a
    Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Basic Spec. includes own and spouse levels for: cohort dummies, years since migration dummies, 3 educ. dummies, 3 educ. dummies
interacted with immigrant status, 3 race/Hispanic origin dummies, age and age squared; 8 region, 6 state and 2 year dummies. Instruments
include own and spouse wage decile dummies.
 Table 6a: Sum of Own and Spouse Effects on Annual Work Hours for Models Including Source Country Interactions, Married
                             Women, Selected Variables from Basic Specification (Model 1)a

Variable                                                                                     Model 1
                                                         0-5 years     6-10 years          11-15 years          16-20 years          21-30 years
Fertility rate                                              -25.304        -55.094           -59.015**     †       -43.161*              -37.180*
                                                           (22.885)       (28.913)            (22.251)             (17.860)              (16.456)
GDP per capita                                             -0.023**       -0.037**    ††       -0.050**    ††       -0.037**    †         -0.026**
                                                             (0.003)        (0.003)              (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.005)
Activity rate ratio                                      464.656**      476.427**            506.396**            614.289**            476.716**
                                                         (101.376)      (135.245)            (104.232)             (97.070)              (74.214)
Refugee proportion                                        -122.953         -95.503              -60.999              -58.982           -162.381*
                                                           (79.215)     (107.731)             (70.726)             (55.077)              (65.574)
Primary enrollment rate                                        1.215          1.474               3.572*             3.850**               3.253**
                                                             (1.619)        (1.576)              (1.374)              (1.221)               (0.971)
Secondary enrollment rate                                      1.064          1.523                1.095               -0.010                -0.953   †
                                                             (1.622)        (1.869)              (1.285)              (1.058)               (0.915)
English speaking country                                  145.288*        104.985                78.503               68.430           114.505**
                                                           (59.855)       (53.440)            (44.929)             (42.490)              (26.079)
English official country                                  244.429*       233.019*             234.421*             156.219*                 85.371    ††
                                                           (95.519)       (98.321)            (89.924)             (74.576)              (84.639)
Miles from home country                                    -0.029**          -0.013   †           -0.017               -0.009   †             0.007   ††
                                                             (0.008)        (0.011)              (0.011)              (0.009)               (0.007)
Immigrant × high school                                 -137.091**     -133.062**           -125.533**             -86.181*             -98.029**
                                                           (35.078)       (45.883)            (32.783)             (36.473)              (32.893)
Immigrant × some college                                -259.760**     -181.136**     †     -180.449**     †       -92.290*     ††     -104.491*      ††
                                                           (48.883)       (53.320)            (36.503)             (40.143)              (40.830)
Immigrant × college                                     -338.209**       -111.660     ††    -139.472**     ††      -94.509*     ††         -24.270    ††
                                                           (52.404)       (66.698)            (45.391)             (41.807)              (37.817)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                                                         No
Child dummies                                                                                      No
Observations                                                                                    490939
R-squared                                                                                         0.09
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively. † and †† denote
significance from the 0-5 years coefficient at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models also include 8 regional dummies, 6 high immigrant
proportion state dummies and own and spouse variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic
origin dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies.
 Table 6b: Sum of Own and Spouse Effects on Annual Work Hours for Models Including Source Country Interactions, Married
             Women, Selected Variables from Specification Including Ln Wage and Nonlabor Income (Model 2)a

Variable                                                                             Years Since Migration
                                                         0-5 years     6-10 years      11-15 years       16-20 years        21-30 years
Fertility rate                                              -35.761      -63.228*         -62.173**         -49.897**         -45.891**
                                                           (20.428)       (27.457)         (20.405)          (16.673)          (16.190)
GDP per capita                                             -0.017**       -0.033** ††       -0.044** ††       -0.033** ††      -0.023**
                                                             (0.002)        (0.003)           (0.004)           (0.005)          (0.005)
Activity rate ratio                                      382.872**      434.811**        488.943**          576.307**         462.908**
                                                           (85.348)     (129.602)          (97.040)          (96.748)          (73.407)
Refugee proportion                                        -115.827       -105.183            -66.250           -24.960       -182.389**
                                                           (77.937)     (104.370)          (60.329)          (57.632)          (55.252)
Primary enrollment rate                                        1.403          1.318            3.186*          3.381**          3.086**
                                                             (1.553)        (1.499)           (1.292)           (1.081)          (0.854)
Secondary enrollment rate                                     -0.016          0.502             0.286            -0.351           -1.383
                                                             (1.416)        (1.653)           (1.184)           (1.040)          (0.880)
English speaking country                                 153.699**       110.657*             80.749            71.177        119.713**
                                                           (48.878)       (51.406)         (41.264)          (41.805)          (27.107)
English official country                                 242.523**       217.199*          211.911*          129.932* †          57.265 ††
                                                           (74.690)       (88.488)         (82.342)          (59.916)          (69.343)
Miles from home country                                    -0.028**          -0.015            -0.018            -0.011            0.011 ††
                                                             (0.008)        (0.011)           (0.010)           (0.008)          (0.006)
Immigrant × high school                                 -134.454**     -163.600**       -144.245**         -110.461**           -64.986
                                                           (34.906)       (43.707)         (30.672)          (36.154)          (34.427)
Immigrant × some college                                -211.607**     -190.188**       -194.923**           -95.992* ††        -73.796 ††
                                                           (47.695)       (50.757)         (34.710)          (39.568)          (38.947)
Immigrant × college                                     -224.862**         -61.819 ††    -107.613* ††          -51.142 ††       97.271* ††
                                                           (49.916)       (61.285)         (42.240)          (41.172)          (38.680)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                                                      Yes
Child dummies                                                                                   No
Observations                                                                                 490939
R-squared                                                                                      0.13
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively. † and †† denote
significance from the 0-5 years coefficient at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models also include 8 regional dummies, 6 high immigrant
proportion state dummies and own and spouse variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic
origin dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies. Own and spouse wage instruments are generated using decile
dummies in each year.
 Table 6c: Sum of Own and Spouse Effects on Annual Work Hours for Models Including Source Country Interactions, Married
                             Women, Selected Variables from Full Specification (Model 3)a

Variable                                                                            Years Since Migration
                                                         0-5 years    6-10 years      11-15 years       16-20 years        21-30 years
Fertility rate                                              24.244          -8.418         -27.284 ††         -25.071 ††     -45.907** ††
                                                          (21.843)      (24.991)          (20.002)          (14.737)          (16.904)
GDP per capita                                             -0.013**      -0.025** ††      -0.036** ††        -0.027** ††      -0.023**
                                                            (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.004)            (0.004)          (0.005)
Activity rate ratio                                      494.066**     488.855**        515.064**          570.524**         470.393**
                                                          (95.096)     (107.651)          (93.492)         (107.441)          (80.135)
Refugee proportion                                           -5.201       -83.322          -64.760            -30.872       -155.511**
                                                          (74.279)      (76.278)          (57.791)          (59.915)          (55.386)
Primary enrollment rate                                       1.610          1.626         3.310**            3.176**          2.943**
                                                            (1.482)        (1.184)          (1.175)            (1.057)          (0.932)
Secondary enrollment rate                                     0.877          1.065            0.423             -0.002           -1.410
                                                            (1.426)        (1.434)          (1.149)            (1.035)          (0.958)
English speaking country                                 145.600**         80.023           59.519             70.285        134.380**
                                                          (42.913)      (44.381)          (33.593)          (36.798)          (28.264)
English official country                                  187.603*      194.272*         210.447*            116.876            52.160 ††
                                                          (80.637)      (89.067)          (85.362)          (64.831)          (76.184)
Miles from home country                                    -0.026**         -0.016           -0.016             -0.007 †          0.014 ††
                                                            (0.006)        (0.009)          (0.009)            (0.009)          (0.007)
Immigrant × high school                                 -190.997**    -188.997**       -154.322**         -119.752** †         -60.369 ††
                                                          (32.743)      (37.724)          (28.404)          (36.154)          (34.215)
Immigrant × some college                                -309.471**    -218.956** ††    -187.095** ††        -88.578* ††        -73.307 ††
                                                          (46.743)      (44.721)          (30.094)          (38.365)          (37.382)
Immigrant × college                                     -349.183**     -134.963* ††    -111.877** ††          -38.713 ††        75.419 ††
                                                          (50.038)      (52.241)          (35.912)          (41.639)          (39.078)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                                                    Yes
Child dummies                                                                                 Yes
Observations                                                                               490939
R-squared                                                                                    0.19
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively. † and †† denote
significance from the 0-5 years coefficient at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models also include 8 regional dummies, 6 high immigrant
proportion state dummies and own and spouse variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic
origin dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies. Own and spouse wage instruments are generated using decile
dummies in each year.
 Table 7: Sum of Own and Spouse Effects on Annual Work Hours for Models Including Source Country Interactions, Married
                             Men, Selected Variables from Basic Specification (Model 1)a

Variable                                                                                  Model 1
                                                         0-5 years    6-10 years       11-15 years       16-20 years        21-30 years
Fertility rate                                           -41.517**     -65.100**          -32.310*         -56.701**           -40.331**
                                                          (15.511)      (17.631)           (14.077)          (21.117)           (15.322)
GDP per capita                                              0.017**        -0.002 ††         -0.001 ††          -0.006 ††          -0.002 ††
                                                            (0.004)       (0.003)           (0.004)            (0.005)            (0.005)
Activity rate ratio                                         28.845       -39.190             10.258            10.513             59.368
                                                         (133.550)     (104.164)           (82.093)          (97.882)           (81.506)
Refugee proportion                                      -430.768**    -309.112**         -273.005*          -175.966          -215.118*
                                                          (96.511)     (106.509)         (119.761)         (142.268)            (82.156)
Primary enrollment rate                                       1.931         0.240             0.458              1.336              1.069
                                                            (1.129)       (0.836)           (0.930)            (0.975)            (0.926)
Secondary enrollment rate                                    -2.834        -0.585             0.062           -2.322*            -2.319*
                                                            (1.589)       (0.992)           (1.187)            (0.979)            (0.887)
English speaking country                                   120.359        52.887             16.392            62.106               2.552
                                                          (74.271)      (36.079)           (33.498)          (39.044)           (37.102)
English official country                                 370.358**     118.107** ††          18.505 ††        -18.639 ††         -72.810 ††
                                                          (68.274)      (41.726)           (46.357)          (66.990)           (64.951)
Miles from home country                                    -0.035**        -0.008 †           0.006 ††           0.014 ††           0.004 ††
                                                            (0.012)       (0.009)           (0.010)            (0.013)            (0.010)
Immigrant × high school                                 -219.416**    -111.804** ††     -112.898** ††     -119.238** ††      -105.256** ††
                                                          (34.132)      (41.113)           (28.473)          (28.136)           (25.070)
Immigrant × some college                                -345.472**    -176.690** ††     -157.331** ††     -116.512** ††        -92.634** ††
                                                          (46.347)      (37.950)           (29.509)          (33.944)           (28.968)
Immigrant × college                                     -376.920**    -188.083** ††     -165.535** ††         -66.687 ††          12.613 ††
                                                          (55.072)      (56.867)           (38.486)          (36.829)           (32.554)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                                                     No
Child dummies                                                                                  No
Observations                                                                                490939
R-squared                                                                                     0.15
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively. † and †† denote
significance from the 0-5 years coefficient at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models also include 8 regional dummies, 6 high immigrant
proportion state dummies and own and spouse variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic
origin dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies.
       Figure A-1: Assimilation Profiles, Annual Work Hours, Married Adult Immigrants, Basic
                                       Specification (Model 1)



                                     0
  Annual Work Hours Relative to




                                   -50 0-5       6-10              11-15               16-20            21-30
      Comparable Natives




                                  -100
                                  -150
                                  -200
                                  -250
                                  -300
                                  -350
                                  -400
                                  -450
                                                         Years Since Migration

                                               No source country chars      Source country interactns

a. Women



                                  300
  Annual work Hours Relative to




                                  200
      Comparable Natives




                                  100
                                     0
                                         0-5     6-10               11-15               16-20           21-30
                                  -100
                                  -200
                                  -300
                                  -400
                                  -500
                                                         Years Since Migration

                                               No source country chars      Source country interactns


b. Men
                  Table A-1: Activity Ratios and Fertility Rates in the 25 Top Immigrant Source Countries for Married Women

Country               Weighted fraction       Activity ratio at arrival          Fertility rate at arrival         Observations in sample
                       of immigrant        1980         1990         2000    1980           1990        2000    1980       1990        2000
United States                NA            0.513       0.617         0.716   2.817         2.167        1.957   76940     76277       71198
Mexico                    15.59%           0.233       0.316         0.393   6.764         5.657        4.120    8644     13053       21350
Philippines                6.70%           0.501       0.527         0.553   6.454         5.761        5.068    4014      6709        7405
India                      5.29%           0.534       0.520         0.493   5.591         5.017        4.273    2246      3860        7605
Korea                      5.19%           0.490       0.575         0.618   4.688         3.440        2.610    3141      5329        5231
China                      4.54%           0.742       0.790         0.837   5.523         3.720        2.581    2216      3581        6136
United Kingdom             3.70%           0.464       0.543         0.642   2.396         2.135        1.864    4036      3249        2801
Vietnam                    3.47%           0.812       0.816         0.855   6.794         5.958        4.713    1557      3272        4439
Germany                    3.40%           0.530       0.562         0.629   2.213         1.970        1.501    4630      2760        1887
Canada                     3.31%           0.404       0.548         0.720   3.247         2.390        1.743    3515      2631        2916
Cuba                       3.29%           0.251       0.324         0.524   4.191         3.522        2.052    4009      2948        1987
USSR                       2.98%           0.763       0.794         0.790   2.623         2.335        2.127    1307      1573        4954
Japan                      2.91%           0.595       0.597         0.627   2.201         1.886        1.655    2639      2717        2352
Taiwan                     2.05%           0.521       0.534         0.555   3.850         2.770        2.314     843      2401        2249
Poland                     1.83%           0.699       0.754         0.770   3.022         2.377        2.169    1351      1325        2155
Colombia                   1.64%           0.282       0.338         0.469   6.084         4.853        3.637     943      1400        1956
Italy                      1.60%           0.346       0.380         0.472   2.411         2.301        1.802    2499      1229         554
El Salvador                1.57%           0.270       0.344         0.393   6.472         5.492        4.694     454      1586        2134
Jamaica                    1.15%           0.663       0.756         0.812   5.415         4.557        3.704     947      1029        1130
Dominican Republic         1.15%           0.229       0.313         0.380   6.734         5.273        4.090     717       850        1333
Portugal                   1.15%           0.297       0.398         0.505   2.911         2.680        2.313    1396      1153         628
Iran                       1.09%           0.228       0.241         0.263   6.514         6.552        5.978     619      1194        1072
Yugoslavia                 1.03%           0.507       0.552         0.671   2.883         2.516        1.887     889       507        1241
Haiti                      0.90%           0.793       0.750         0.720   6.052         6.015        5.783     476       692        1110
Peru                       0.90%           0.277       0.310         0.351   6.477         5.441        4.540     413       762        1190
Laos                       0.86%           0.824       0.826         0.827   6.150         6.585        6.522     270      1052         847
Other countries           22.71%           0.429       0.487         0.534   4.398         4.515        4.156   15660     18948       24621
Immigrant average        100.00%           0.445       0.509         0.566   4.473         4.332        3.663   69431     85810      111283

Notes: Countries are ranked by their weighted share of the sample of married women across all years, with only adult immigrants included. U.S.
values are weighted by the share of immigrants arriving in each year.
Table A-2: Selected Annual hours Regression Results Excluding Country Characteristics, Basic Specificationa

Variable                                                  All         All         Married Women              Married Men
                                                      Women          Men          Own       Spouse         Own       Spouse
Immigrant arrived between 1960 and 1964                 26.944     48.305*      -14.514     -35.555        4.543     50.701*
                                                      (17.990)     (22.354)    (26.288) (35.924)        (19.971) (24.670)
Immigrant arrived between 1965 and 1969               89.530**     65.866**     58.123*     -17.970       -2.895    58.761**
                                                      (29.228)     (21.743)    (25.538) (25.716)        (18.914) (14.069)
Immigrant arrived between 1970 and 1974               85.138*       73.144       47.726     -69.202      -22.294 94.916**
                                                      (38.907)     (38.223)    (39.215) (48.827)        (30.531) (33.217)
Immigrant arrived between 1975 and 1979                 67.072     81.880*       77.220     -79.726       -4.968     77.574*
                                                      (48.587)     (32.171)    (44.881) (54.028)        (27.852) (32.785)
Immigrant arrived between 1980 and 1984                 38.085      58.158       -6.362    -124.017      -59.149      95.237
                                                      (38.500)     (44.892)    (56.022) (83.546)        (43.528) (54.294)
Immigrant arrived between 1985 and 1990                -55.514    122.940**     -56.463 -153.050         -36.827 104.653*
                                                      (60.928)     (40.022)    (66.542) (81.296)        (41.943) (48.417)
Immigrant arrived between 1991 and 1994              -116.298       72.984     -142.242 -137.014       -102.280* 112.794*
                                                      (67.450)     (47.426)    (72.286) (89.877)        (49.522) (50.541)
Immigrant arrived between 1995 and 2000             -176.472**    179.781**   -170.262** -194.460*       -19.591 145.805**
                                                      (53.601)     (54.259)    (64.221) (86.589)        (42.818) (40.132)
0-5 years in U.S.                                   -192.654**   -270.898**   -336.120** 155.071      -308.123** -63.805
                                                      (44.291)     (76.685)    (61.125) (86.705)        (62.155) (36.615)
6-10 years in U.S.                                     56.763    137.132**      -20.652     176.434      69.896      -36.076
                                                      (45.383)     (39.565)    (79.002) (107.398)       (40.991) (41.608)
11-15 years in U.S.                                 109.388**    150.762**      56.947      114.198   106.128** -4.861
                                                      (38.099)     (27.531)    (69.610) (98.094)        (34.276) (34.428)
16-20 years in U.S.                                  124.967*    214.375**     129.600       70.381   166.851** 10.308
                                                      (48.576)     (23.771)    (69.438) (87.682)        (34.566) (40.952)
21-30 years in U.S.                                 183.397**    343.542**    137.280** 38.436        214.479** 84.071**
                                                      (41.485)     (24.115)    (42.216) (42.570)        (25.513) (19.396)
Wage and non-wage income × year                           No          No                 No                       No
Child and marriage dummies                                No          No                 No                       No
Observations                                           984908       967005            490939                   490939
R-squared                                                0.10        0.19               0.09                     0.15
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models
also include own (and for married couples spouse) variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 educ. dummies, 3
educ. dummies interacted with immigrant status, 3 race and Hispanic origin dummies, 8 regional dummies, 6 high
immigrant proportion state dummies and 2 year dummies.
    Table A-3: Selected Annual Hours Regression Results Excluding Source Country Interactions, Married
                                                Womena

Variable                                                      Model 1                    Model 2                    Model 3
                                                          Own       Spouse           Own       Spouse           Own       Spouse
Immigrant arrived between 1960 and 1964                  -9.651     -16.480          1.573     -21.494       -13.077      -38.832
                                                      (26.253) (29.021)          (25.675) (24.323)          (23.288) (24.770)
Immigrant arrived between 1965 and 1969                 29.513       -7.174        32.070       -2.328         -2.343     -20.555
                                                      (21.578) (20.071)          (19.733) (17.412)          (19.470) (19.723)
Immigrant arrived between 1970 and 1974                   8.900     -29.859          4.547     -27.382       -22.442      -54.129
                                                      (29.301) (35.216)          (24.550) (26.958)          (26.793) (29.482)
Immigrant arrived between 1975 and 1979                  -6.021     -53.368          0.264     -70.925       -24.496 -90.324*
                                                      (48.922) (43.343)          (40.963) (35.966)          (43.753) (40.119)
Immigrant arrived between 1980 and 1984               -112.697 -99.357            -68.484 -125.565*          -88.883 -159.449**
                                                      (60.071) (69.733)          (47.131) (54.117)          (50.608) (53.751)
Immigrant arrived between 1985 and 1990              -174.651* -151.133*         -118.470 -165.225**       -144.170* -187.488**
                                                      (77.947) (73.384)          (64.011) (61.925)          (66.316) (63.582)
Immigrant arrived between 1991 and 1994             -270.555** -157.413        -211.832** -178.651*       -237.903** -219.499**
                                                      (86.296) (88.639)          (74.270) (81.661)          (74.385) (77.487)
Immigrant arrived between 1995 and 2000             -320.270** -211.825*       -246.764** -205.252*       -293.104** -222.635*
                                                      (84.973) (82.619)          (75.395) (79.652)          (78.665) (86.355)
0-5 years in U.S.                                   -733.061** 410.467         -595.629** 320.678         -660.106** 234.764
                                                     (239.347) (230.179)        (206.227) (214.606)        (211.199) (211.926)
6-10 years in U.S.                                    -436.080 409.678           -325.577 331.629           -337.717 270.871
                                                     (239.948) (244.511)        (209.051) (223.996)        (198.348) (195.217)
11-15 years in U.S.                                   -357.515 360.008           -268.151 312.767           -303.876 255.648
                                                     (235.131) (236.906)        (204.664) (220.919)        (189.972) (184.567)
16-20 years in U.S.                                   -290.467 313.075           -211.720 281.812           -306.645 224.196
                                                     (229.342) (228.518)        (198.860) (208.140)        (184.588) (170.692)
21-30 years in U.S.                                   -281.009 290.433           -201.727 257.065           -304.976 162.891
                                                     (212.828) (187.670)        (181.276) (171.251)        (173.798) (147.975)
Immigrant × Exactly High School Degree              -149.971** 30.547*         -129.045** 0.333           -137.366** -16.129
                                                      (20.101) (14.160)          (19.682) (13.547)          (18.017) (11.329)
Immigrant × Some College                            -204.426** 25.761          -163.795** -2.169          -174.010** -25.146
                                                      (23.437) (23.036)          (23.002) (21.441)          (19.830) (18.463)
Immigrant × College Graduate                        -195.001** 15.517          -112.421** 10.089          -138.000** -28.459
                                                      (28.254) (31.050)          (25.133) (28.250)          (23.261) (26.083)
Total Fertility Rate                                      8.406    -42.725**         0.094    -41.785**       18.770     -22.960*
                                                      (18.937) (15.902)          (16.239) (15.366)          (14.572) (11.344)
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                             -0.013** -0.017**          -0.013** -0.012**          -0.010** -0.010**
                                                        (0.004)     (0.004)        (0.003)     (0.003)        (0.003)     (0.003)
Female LFP/Male LFP                                  383.192** 165.891**        330.814** 179.752**        326.824** 216.721**
                                                      (74.186) (46.182)          (68.349) (43.886)          (58.083) (34.532)
Percentage Refugees                                     53.817 -143.213**          39.285 -131.183**          49.239 -97.775**
                                                      (46.578) (42.257)          (44.748) (37.714)          (40.979) (33.148)
Primary School Enrollment Rate                          2.434*        0.161        2.114*        0.290        2.124*        0.285
                                                        (1.123)     (0.631)        (1.003)     (0.586)        (0.931)     (0.552)
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                          2.227      -1.042          1.534      -1.169          1.565      -0.767
                                                        (1.307)     (1.014)        (1.118)     (0.886)        (1.107)     (0.780)
English Speaking Country                               66.587*       18.426       67.879*       19.870      81.466**        0.582
                                                      (32.468) (27.193)          (29.633) (22.286)          (27.933) (22.422)
English Official Language (non-English Speaking) 192.843** 21.103               174.518** 25.560           170.105**        7.548
                                                      (40.987) (85.784)          (35.272) (68.482)          (35.023) (77.580)
Miles from Country                                       -0.011      -0.007         -0.010     -0.008*         -0.010      -0.006
                                                        (0.008)     (0.005)        (0.007)     (0.004)        (0.006)     (0.004)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                       No                        Yes                        Yes
Child dummies                                                    No                         No                        Yes
Observations                                                  490939                     490939                     490939
R-squared                                                       0.09                       0.13                       0.19
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models
also include age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic origin dummies, 8 regional dummies, 6 high
immigrant proportion state dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies. In Models 2 and 3, the
wage is instrumented by its decile in each year.
                                                                                                                          a
 Table A-4: Selected Annual Hours Regression Results Excluding Source Country Interactions, Married Men

Variable                                                     Model 1                   Model 2                 Model 3
                                                         Own       Spouse          Own      Spouse         Own       Spouse
Immigrant arrived between 1960 and 1964                 6.601      50.447*        8.076 48.832*           8.762      49.729*
                                                      (20.163) (21.337)         (20.535) (19.280)       (20.493) (19.359)
Immigrant arrived between 1965 and 1969                -10.134 65.245**          -11.194 64.107**        -10.782 66.325**
                                                      (26.342) (16.218)         (26.854) (16.638)       (26.920) (16.593)
Immigrant arrived between 1970 and 1974                -21.782 119.361**         -31.587 120.940**       -30.808 122.770**
                                                      (35.285) (24.978)         (33.321) (24.383)       (33.379) (24.371)
Immigrant arrived between 1975 and 1979                 1.442     115.219**      -13.231 110.415**       -12.377 112.095**
                                                      (31.750) (21.079)         (30.082) (20.803)       (30.070) (20.821)
Immigrant arrived between 1980 and 1984                -56.933 145.203**         -70.886 152.639**       -69.968 154.400**
                                                      (44.283) (31.773)         (38.197) (28.300)       (38.093) (28.108)
Immigrant arrived between 1985 and 1990                -59.176 145.892**         -68.784 157.325**       -67.649 159.395**
                                                      (49.598) (29.712)         (44.058) (28.302)       (43.926) (28.182)
Immigrant arrived between 1991 and 1994             -128.536* 148.217**       -143.712** 157.669**    -141.400** 157.828**
                                                      (53.699) (32.132)         (47.280) (29.907)       (47.321) (29.955)
Immigrant arrived between 1995 and 2000                -66.790 181.219**         -69.368 206.238**       -67.553 208.447**
                                                      (57.437) (32.531)         (52.100) (34.859)       (52.010) (35.086)
0-5 years in U.S.                                    -257.677 -13.277           -281.994 -16.473        -280.097 -20.616
                                                    (159.430) (114.888)        (155.093) (117.664)     (155.053) (118.560)
6-10 years in U.S.                                    126.986       24.051       126.448 28.044          125.750      24.919
                                                    (148.252) (119.977)        (143.462) (119.291)     (143.847) (120.472)
11-15 years in U.S.                                   157.630       53.478       161.190 63.616          160.890      63.656
                                                    (139.503) (115.249)        (135.482) (115.106)     (135.977) (116.154)
16-20 years in U.S.                                   219.820       71.706       228.299 82.109          229.469      82.355
                                                    (144.089) (122.471)        (139.087) (120.236)     (139.508) (120.967)
21-30 years in U.S.                                   266.120 143.499          274.559* 163.630        276.364* 162.515
                                                    (137.372) (103.524)        (134.175) (105.128)     (134.577) (105.850)
Immigrant × Exactly High School Degree              -71.583** -64.254**        -83.558** -72.563**     -83.935** -73.203**
                                                      (16.552) (14.125)         (16.432) (14.179)       (16.413) (14.138)
Immigrant × Some College                            -86.877** -104.177**       -93.900** -107.362**    -93.974** -107.675**
                                                      (21.348) (12.894)         (20.776) (12.213)       (20.694) (12.144)
Immigrant × College Graduate                          -64.388* -135.060**       -65.075* -138.102**     -64.140* -137.593**
                                                      (27.067) (20.155)         (25.592) (18.900)       (25.546) (18.864)
Total Fertility Rate                                  -24.758* -17.474          -26.618* -18.255        -27.038* -18.480
                                                      (12.435)     (9.250)      (12.956) (9.290)        (13.000)     (9.333)
GDP per capita (1995 US $)                              0.005        0.002        0.006* 0.003            0.006*       0.003
                                                       (0.003)     (0.002)       (0.003) (0.002)         (0.003)     (0.002)
Female LFP/Male LFP                                     56.372      -3.181        63.888 -9.348           63.023      -9.388
                                                      (73.822) (36.970)         (72.843) (37.987)       (72.995) (38.314)
Percentage Refugees                                 -163.212* -151.436**       -165.886* -152.416**    -165.944* -151.517**
                                                      (69.689) (49.466)         (72.260) (49.256)       (72.078) (49.318)
Primary School Enrollment Rate                          0.850        0.374        0.827 0.272             0.831        0.277
                                                       (0.803)     (0.568)       (0.770) (0.599)         (0.772)     (0.599)
Secondary School Enrollment Rate                        -0.615      -0.828        -0.625 -0.995           -0.630      -0.985
                                                       (0.803)     (0.567)       (0.812) (0.636)         (0.813)     (0.636)
English Speaking Country                                11.364      28.045        21.277 40.123           21.417      40.103
                                                      (29.039) (20.331)         (30.119) (21.960)       (30.213) (22.153)
English Official Language (non-English Speaking) 103.925*           45.253     112.020* 44.910         112.700*       44.744
                                                      (46.448) (35.801)         (49.924) (36.173)       (50.194) (36.249)
Miles from Country                                      -0.010       0.001        -0.010 0.001            -0.010       0.001
                                                       (0.007)      (0.008)      (0.007) (0.008)         (0.007)      (0.008)
Own and sp wage and non-wage income × year                      No                      Yes                      Yes
Child dummies                                                   No                       No                      Yes
Observations                                                 490939                    490939                  490939
R-squared                                                      0.15                     0.16                     0.16
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models
also include age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic origin dummies, 8 regional dummies, 6 high
immigrant proportion state dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies. In Models 2 and 3, wage
instruments are generated using decile dummies in each year.
           Table A5: Source Country Variable Coefficients for Models Including Source Country Interactions, All Womena
Variable                                                                                 Model 1
                                                         0-5 years    6-10 years      11-15 years      16-20 years       21-30 years
Fertility rate                                                1.350        -5.668          -21.665          -4.966            -16.855
                                                           (19.737)      (24.214)         (21.104)        (16.949)          (15.839)
GDP per capita                                             -0.016**      -0.026**         -0.033** †      -0.027**           -0.024**
                                                            (0.003)       (0.005)           (0.007)        (0.006)             (0.006)
Activity rate ratio                                      527.750**     658.794**        656.664**        582.171**         446.772**
                                                           (87.866)    (108.937)          (95.619)        (88.762)          (67.142)
Refugee proportion                                        -117.007      -127.809        -113.877*         -91.318*         -102.569*
                                                           (74.930)      (98.691)         (51.986)        (44.478)          (46.974)
Primary enrollment rate                                       1.868         1.306             2.212        3.018**              2.086*
                                                            (1.473)       (1.622)           (1.431)        (1.090)             (0.895)
Secondary enrollment rate                                     1.400         2.242             1.351          0.884               0.153
                                                            (1.424)       (1.630)           (1.206)        (1.096)             (0.831)
English speaking country                                 187.980**      157.126*        164.723**        123.505**         138.262**
                                                           (49.735)      (61.793)         (56.452)        (43.482)          (29.761)
English official country                                 273.045**      233.919*        234.184**        172.339** †        164.511* ††
                                                           (81.506)      (91.039)         (83.657)        (59.425)          (72.958)
Miles from home country                                    -0.036**       -0.022* †         -0.023*         -0.013 ††           -0.011 ††
                                                            (0.007)       (0.010)           (0.009)        (0.007)             (0.006)
Immigrant × high school                                 -248.498**    -218.568**       -212.800** †     -160.355** ††     -181.704** †
                                                           (20.853)      (27.314)         (23.173)        (24.235)          (24.367)
Immigrant × some college                                -353.118**    -250.994** ††    -244.310** ††    -161.128** ††     -144.210** ††
                                                           (31.874)      (33.161)         (29.401)        (27.891)           (26.256)
Immigrant × college                                     -431.454**    -230.778** ††    -230.756** ††    -177.849** ††     -121.414** ††
                                                           (43.032)      (41.168)         (34.562)        (34.077)           (30.833)
Own wage and non-wage income × year                                                           No
Marriage and child dummies                                                                    No
Observations                                                                               984908
R-squared                                                                                    0.10
a
  Immigrants are restricted to adult immigrants only.

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * and ** denote significance from zero at 5% and 1%, respectively. † and †† denote
significance from the 0-5 years coefficient at 5% and 1%, respectively. All models also include 8 regional dummies, 6 high immigrant
proportion state dummies and own variables for the following: age, age squared, 3 education dummies, 3 race and Hispanic origin
dummies, 5 years-since-migration dummies and 2 year dummies.
