NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN THE SAINTS COME MARCHING IN:
EFFECTS OF HURRICANES KATRINA AND RITA ON STUDENT EVACUEES
Bruce Sacerdote
Working Paper 14385
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14385

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

I thank Joshua Angrist, Amitabh Chandra, Alan Gustman, Doug Staiger and NBER Summer Institute
Participants for helpful suggestions and Celia Kujala for outstanding research assistance. I thank Fen
Chou (Louisiana Department of Education), Ann Payne (Data Recognition Corp), and Richard Reeves
(National Student Clearinghouse) for helping me assemble the data. The National Science Foundation
and the US Department of Educations' Institute for Education Sciences provided generous funding.
Data are provided by the Louisiana Department of Education, the East Baton Rouge School District
and the National Student Clearinghouse. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

When The Saints Come Marching In: Effects of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita on Student Evacuees
Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 14385
October 2008
JEL No. I2,J01,J24
ABSTRACT
I examine academic performance and college going for public school students affected by Hurricanes
Katrina and Rita. Students who are forced to switch schools due to the hurricanes experience sharp
declines in test scores in the first year following the hurricane. However, by the second and third years
after the disaster, Katrina evacuees displaced from Orleans Parish appear to benefit from the displacement,
experiencing a .15 standard deviation improvement in scores. The test score gains are concentrated
among students whose initial schools were in the lowest quintile of the test score distribution and among
students who leave the New Orleans MSA. Katrina evacuees from suburban areas and Rita evacuees
(from the Lake Charles area) eventually recover most of the ground lost during 05-06 but do not experience
long term gains relative to their pre-Katrina test scores. High school age Orleans evacuees have higher
college enrollment rates than their predecessors from the same high schools. Meanwhile, Katrina
evacuees from the suburbs experience a 3.5 percentage point drop in their rate of enrollment in four
year colleges. Those evacuees do not to make up for the decline in the subsequent two years. Later
cohorts of suburban New Orleans evacuees are unaffected. The results suggest that for students in
the lowest performing schools, the long term gains to achievement from switching schools can more
than offset even substantial costs of disruption.

Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

I.

Introduction
One of the many effects of Hurricane Katrina was to close temporarily and later to force the

reconstitution of schools in one of the nation's worst performing urban school districts. Many have
speculated that there may be a silver lining to the disaster in that adults were forced to exit a poor
labor market and students were forced to exit a poor performing school system. 1 A central question
in today's debate over the future of public education is whether failing schools should be shuttered
and their students enrolled elsewhere. But as of the time of this writing, few states and school
districts have taken such extreme measures. Hurricane Katrina may provide some insight into how
student outcomes evolve when schools are shut down and students are sent to different and in most
cases better performing schools.

Obviously the analogy is not a perfect one since Katrina

evacuees faced more sources of disruption than a simple school change. But in a sense, the
estimates provided here may be a lower bound on the positive effects that would be observed if
Orleans students were merely moved to different schools without all the other associated shocks.
Additionally, one of the motivations for the Moving to Opportunity experiments (Katz Kling and
Liebman [2001] and Ludwig, Duncan and Hirschfield [2001]) is that students may benefit from a
change in neighborhood and schools. And the experience of Katrina provides another shock that
we can contrast and compare to the experience of MTO movers.

Hurricane Katrina was one of the worst natural disasters in United States history. Roughly
1900 deaths are blamed on Katrina and estimates of the damage to homes and infrastructure are
roughly $80 billion. In addition, as of 2008, roughly $60 billion in Federal money has been
1

Vigdor [2007] finds little support for the former hypothesis.

2

allocated for disaster relief and recovery 2. Because Katrina destroyed so many homes and flooded
80% of New Orleans, nearly 1 million people were displaced from their homes. Thirty five
thousand Katrina evacuees relocated to Houston, Texas while 24,000 relocated to Mobile, Alabama
and 15,000 people moved to Baton Rouge. Rand Corporation estimates that of Louisiana's 760,000
public school students (pre-Katrina and Rita), 196,000 were displaced from their schools (Pane et
al. 2006).

This paper is a first attempt at analyzing the long term effects of dislocation from Katrina
and Rita on student achievement and college going. 3 The data are provided by the Louisiana
Department of Education and include reading and math test scores, basic student demographics,
school and school district for each student in each year and whether or not the student was
displaced by Hurricane Katrina or Rita. Data from the National Student Clearinghouse are used to
track four cohorts of high school students who reached high school graduation age pre-and post
Katrina.

The existing literature suggests at least two different effects that may be at work. First, the
literature on the disruptive effects of moving schools (e.g. Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin [2004],
Alexander Norc and Entwistle [1996]) would suggest modest sized negative effects from switching
schools.

Having one's family displaced by a hurricane is likely far more disruptive than a

conventional move between schools. Vigdor [2007] estimates that evacuees on average lost three
weeks of work and that evacuees who do not return home lost closer to ten weeks of work. Pane et
2

CNN, 2008. Department of Homeland Security web page:
http://www.dhs.gov/xprepresp/programs/gc_1157649340100.shtm
3
After starting this research, I learned of Pane at al [2008], part of which looks at the effects on test scores in the first
year following the hurricanes. Results on peer effects on non-movers in Lousiana and Houston, Texas will be
forthcoming in joint work by Scott Imberman , Adriana Kugler and me.

3

al [2006] finds that the median student evacuee missed five weeks of school. Second, the literature
on school quality and teacher quality (for example Rivkin Kain and Hanushek [2005], Kane,
Staiger Rockoff [2006]) would suggest that some New Orleans natives could actually benefit from
being forced to move out of their low performing schools. The motivating question for this paper
is whether the severe costs imposed by moving students from low performing to different schools
can be offset by any gains. 4

I attempt to look this question by using disruption by Katrina and Rita as the key source of
variation.

On average, Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish experience many sources of

disruption and a large increase in school quality as measured by average test scores. Rita evacuees
and Katrina from New Orleans suburbs (Jefferson, Saint Bernard, Saint Tammany, Plaquemines
Parishes) experience similar disruptions without large changes in average school quality.

In the spring of 2006, following the hurricanes, I find reasonably large (.10 to .25 standard
deviation) declines in test scores for all students who are displaced by the hurricanes. 5 These
declines are relative to all other Louisiana students in the same grade and are consistent with Pane
at al [2008]. For students from suburban New Orleans (Jefferson Parish) and Lake Charles (in
Calcasieu Parish), the negative effect moderates gradually during 2007 and 2008.

In contrast, students from Orleans Parish see the negative effect of the hurricane disappear
fully by 2007. And by 2008 these students are experiencing gains of .10-.20 standard deviations
4

Of course these hurricanes were such massive events that studying the impacts may be interesting in its own right
whether or not we can use the impacts from the hurricanes to inform the educational literature more broadly.
5
This effect is roughly 1-2x the size of being assigned a teach with test score value added that is one standard deviation
below the mean of all teachers in a state. (Kane, Staiger Rockoff [2008] and Hanushek Kain O'Brien and Rivkin
[2005]).

4

relative to their pre-Hurricane test score. This suggests that long run academic achievement for
Orleans students might have been improved by the closing of their schools and the forced move
that this implied. Presumably any improvement in achievement comes on top of all the challenges
that evacuees and their families faced.

College enrollment was disrupted for evacuees in graduating classes just prior and just after
the hurricanes, i.e. the classes of 2005 and 2006. Evacuees from suburban New Orleans see a
reduction of 3.5 percentage points in their rate of college going. 6 And the negative effect for these
cohorts appears to be permanent rather than temporary in nature. But the subsequent cohort, ie the
class of 2007, does not show signs of the same effect. Evacuees from Orleans parish (i.e. the City
of New Orleans) see very small negative effects, and when measured relative to other Lousiana
students, the Orleans evacuees actually have statistically significant gains in college enrollment.

The Existing Literature on Hurricane Katrina

Several papers have examined labor market effects from Hurricane Katrina. One of the
most in depth of these is Vigdor [2007] which asks whether evacuees benefit in the medium run
from being forced out of New Orleans which was high in poverty and unemployment and had
lower income than other cities in the South. This hypothesis is similar in spirit to the investigations
of the Moving to Opportunity Program (Katz Kling and Liebman [2001]) and the demolitions of
public housing in Chicago (Jacob [2004]).

6

Vigdor [2007] finds that evacuees are hurt by the

This is for enrollment in four year colleges.

5

dislocation, both in terms of income and weeks worked.

McIntosh [2007] finds that the in

migration of evacuees hurt native wages and employment in Houston, Texas.

Several studies including Paxson and Rouse [2008], Groen and Polivka [2008], and Sastry
[2007] investigate patterns of population movement caused by Katrina. Katrina has reduced the
size of New Orleans proper from roughly 480,000 to about 255,000 (as of the 2006 American
Community Survey). Paxson and Rouse find that whites and homeowners were the most likely to
return. Those whose homes faced the worst flooding were the least likely to return.

Most relevant for this paper are Rand Corporation studies by Pane at al (2006 and 2008)
that document the number of displaced students, where they went, and how many days of schools
were lost. The first study finds that 196,000 public school students in Louisiana were displaced.
This represents roughly one quarter of Louisiana's total enrollment. About 81 percent of the
evacuees came from just three parishes (Orleans, Jefferson and Calcasieu.). Orleans is coterminous
with the city of New Orleans. Jefferson contains much of the suburban portion of the New Orleans
metro area and includes 21 cities, towns and unincorporated areas. Calcasieu contains the city of
Lake Charles and is in the southwest corner of New Orleans which was devastated by Hurricane
Rita.

Pane et al [2006] shows that the median evacuee missed five weeks of school.
Thirty eight percent of evacuees were out of school and then returned to their original school.
Thirty one percent relocated to another Louisiana school while another 31 percent disappeared
from the data set. The second paper studies one year effects on attendance, mental health and test

6

scores. They find one year effects from disruption similar to the effects I find and they find that
those negative effects are smaller for those evacuees who enter better schools.

II.

Data Description

The main data set consists of student level test scores and demographics for Louisiana
public school students during 2004-2007. Under Louisiana's accountability program, students in
grades 4, 8, and 10 are tested in March of each year. These tests are known as the LEAP or
Louisiana Educational Assessment Program (grades 4 and 8) and the GEE or Graduation Exit
Examination. The subjects tested include math and english language arts (ELA) for grades 4, 8 and
10. Science and social studies are tested in grades 4,8 and 11. For brevity I do not report results
for science and social studies tests below.

The LEAP and GEE tests are high stakes tests with the following set of rules: To be
promoted to the next grade, students in grades 4 and 8 must score "Basic" on at least one of the
math and ELA tests and at least "Approaching Basic" on the other exam. In order to be eligible for
a standard high school diploma, high school students must receive "Approaching Basic" or better
on both the ELA and math exams and "Approaching Basic" or better on either of the science or
social studies exams. High stakes testing policies were suspended for all 4th and 8th grade students
during the 05-06 school year due to the hurricanes.

7

In spring 2006 tests known as the ILEAP (Integrated Louisiana Educational Assessment of
Progress) were added for grades 3, 5, 6, 7, and 9. (The Iowa Test of Basic Skills was previously
used for these students. I do not have the Iowa test scores.) Students in these five grades are tested
in both math and english language arts. Students in grades 3,5,6, and 7 are tested in science and
social studies. The tests in the ILEAP grades do not have a high stakes component at the student
level.

Appendix Table I shows the number of student level observations I have for each year. I
only observe students if they take a LEAP, ILEAP or GEE exam. Thus in 2005, I observe most
students in grades 4, 8, 10 and 11. I observe a small number of students in grade 12 who re-took
various exams. I observe a total of 210,755 students for all of Louisiana for 2004. If I inflate this
number by 13/4 to account for the fact that I am only observing 4 grades of the possible 13 grades
in the k-12 system, I infer that there were roughly 685,000 public school students Louisiana in
2004. Starting in 2006, the data add students in grades 3, 5, 6, 7, and 9 (because of the ILEAP
testing) making the dataset much more complete.

Since I do not observe all students in all years, one of the challenges of the data analysis is
making the tradeoff between running specifications that control for a student's lagged test score and
running specifications that make use of all of the observations. Below I try several different
approaches. But my most robust specification is one in which I follow two separate cohorts that I
observe both pre-Katrina (2004 or 2005) and in each of the post Katrina years (2006-2008).

8

I have a randomly generated ID number which allows me to link a given student across
years in the data set. For the spring of 2006, I also have a field which tells me which students are
evacuees and whether they were displaced from a public school or private school and whether they
were displaced by Katrina or Rita. This was collected by teachers and principals and then reported
to the state at the time the exams were taken. For each year, I know a student's school and district,
race, gender, and free lunch status.

My analysis sample is constructed by taking all students in Appendix Table I and then
limiting the data to students observed in 2006 since that is the year during which the Louisiana
required schools to provide information on a student's evacuee status.

Student evacuees are

classified as displaced by Katrina or Rita and also as displaced from a public or private school or
out of state school. This reduces the number of observations from 1.3 million to 1.0 million. My
results are robust to other approaches including inferring a student's evacuee status from her 2004
or 2005 location. Fundamentally I can only study test score outcomes for students who remain in
Louisiana, meaning that there is unobserved selection that creates the sample. My analysis of
college going outcomes does not suffer from this bias since I follow entire cohorts of students who
were in 10th grade prior to Katrina.

In all cases in the tables and text, when I refer to a single year, I mean March of that year.
Hence "2005" refers to March 2005 which is the spring of the 04-05 school year. Thus any
references to 2005 test score data are pre-hurricanes.

9

The parishes most affected by Hurricane Katrina are Orleans, Jefferson, Plaquemines, and
Saint Bernard. These parishes comprise most of the Greater New Orleans Metropolitan Statistical
Area. Appendix Table II shows a frequency tabulation of students in grades 4, 8 and 10 in 2005
tabulated by their eventual (2006) evacuee status. There are 135,316 students in these three grades
in the analysis sample, 14,400 of whom were in one of the affected parishes in 2005. Ninety
percent of the students in the affected parishes become evacuees. And, of the Katrina evacuees,
ninety-three percent come from the most affected parishes.

Even after the hurricanes, the bulk of Katrina evacuees who remain in Louisiana remain in a
school in one of the four most affected parishes.

Appendix Table III shows, by year, the

percentage of eventual evacuees who attend school in one of the affected parishes. This percentage
is 93 percent in 2004 and 2005 (again the spring of these years which is pre-hurricane). This dips
to 68% in the spring following Katrina but rises back to 76% by 2007. Many of the evacuees move
from Orleans Parish to Jefferson.

Appendix Tables IV and V document the fact that Katrina evacuees are more likely to
disappear from the Louisiana public school sample relative to non-evacuees. In Appendix Table
IV I take the set of evacuees from Orleans Parish who were in the 8th grade in 2005. I ask whether
they are still in the sample in 2007. Roughly 50% of the evacuees remain in the sample versus
roughly 80% for all other students. Obviously selection out of the sample makes it more difficult
to estimate the effect of the hurricanes on student achievement.

10

Appendix Table VI shows which school districts are sending and receiving evacuees after
Katrina. 7 I show the number of eventual evacuees located in each parish by year. (In other words I
classify students by their eventual (2006) evacuee status.) I limit the table to students in grades 4,
8, and 10 since those three grades are tested consistently throughout 2004-2007.

Pre-hurricane,

the vast majority of these evacuees are located in Jefferson and Orleans Parishes, with an additional
700-800 evacuees in each of St. Tammany, Plaquemines, and St. Bernard in 2005.

Post-hurricane, the count of evacuees (in grades 4,8,10) in Jefferson Parish grows by about
1200 evacuees and East Baton Rouge School District gains about 1,000 of these evacuees. Since I
am counting only three grades, this implies that East Baton Rouge gained roughly 3300 student
evacuees in all grades. The remaining school districts in the state each gain 0-150 evacuees. The
number of evacuees in Orleans itself shrinks dramatically post-Katrina. The Recovery School
District (RSD) in Orleans was set up to administer most of the schools in the former Orleans Parish
School District. The RSD has roughly 1100 4th ,8th ,and 10th graders by 2007.

In Table I, I show the summary statistics at the student level for the year 2006 (as opposed
to the student*year level). And I show summary statistics separately for the Katrina and Rita
evacuees. Ten and one half percent or roughly 45,400 of the students are Katrina evacuees. Thirty
percent of those evacuees are originally from Orleans Parish. Five point four percent or roughly
23,000 students are Rita evacuees. Since I only observe students in grades 3-11 and since I only
observe students who remain in Louisiana public schools, the actual number of evacuees is higher.

7

For many parishes the school district and the parish coincide, but this is not always the case. Orleans now has the
Orleans Parish School District and the Recovery School District and several academy and charter districts.

11

Forty four percent of all students are black, while 56 percent of the Katrina evacuees are
black and 31 percent of the Rita evacuees are black.

I standardized math and ELA scores to be mean zero standard deviation one within each
year and grade level (for the entire state). This standardization is apparent in the average math and
ELA scores for all observations in Table I. Overall, the Katrina evacuees have math scores that are
.268 standard deviations below the state average and ELA scores that are .222 standard deviations
below. The Rita evacuees have math scores that are .108 standard deviations above and ELA
scores that are .140 standard deviations above the state average.

Appendix Table VI has more

detail about how average test scores vary by school district over time. Pre-Katrina the Orleans
Parish School district is among the worst performing in the state with the average student scoring
a half standard deviation below the state average.

Pre-hurricane, Jefferson is.18 standard

deviations below while Plaquemines and St. Tammany are substantially above the state averages.
Figure I shows the estimated 2005 (pre-Hurricane) math test score distribution for Orleans
evacuees versus all of the non-evacuees in 2005.

As mentioned above, I also have data on college enrollments and degrees for a sample of
32,000 Louisiana students. The data are from the Student Loan Clearinghouse database and were
created in an a collaboration between myself, the State of Louisiana's Department of Education's
Office of Assessment and Accountability, Data Recognition Corp which organizes and warehouses
certain portions of the student level data, and the Clearinghouse.

12

Thus far we have pulled Clearinghouse data for a random sample of 8,000 students from the
parishes of Orleans, St. Bernard, Jefferson, Plaquemines, East Baton Rouge, and Iberia. The first
four parishes are the Katrina affected ones and the latter two are intended to serve as controls. Our
sample is roughly a 50% sample of all students who took GEE exams in 2002-2005. Most students
take the exams in their 10th grade. The first two cohorts graduated prior to the hurricanes and the
second two were entering 11th and 12th grade at the time the hurricanes struck. One advantage of
the Clearinghouse data is that it allows me to track students across state lines and to obtain fairly
clean measures of college going for an entire sample, whether or not a student moves or fails to
graduate from high school.

For the analysis, I consider whether or not a given student enrolled in a college or a four
year college.

(In the long run there exists the potential to study college retention, college

selectivity, and graduation rates.) Appendix Table X shows a breakdown of the raw data by cohort
and by 2,4, less than 2 year college or no enrollment. Technically the "no-enrollment" students are
the ones that cannot be found in the Clearinghouse database using various combinations of social
security number, date of birth, and last name. Appendix Table X implies that more recent cohorts
have fewer enrollments. Most of this difference appears to an age effect: as the cohort ages,
additional students enroll for the first time each year. To control for the age effect, I look at college
enrollments within the first twelve months from the implied year of high school graduation. 8

Using this measure, the mean enrollment rate for any college is 41 percent and the mean
enrollment rate for a four year college is 30 percent. Prior to the hurricanes, Orleans had a four
year college enrollment rate of 26 percent versus 36 percent and 37 percent for East Baton Rouge
8

I infer high school class year by assuming that students are taking the GEE exam in their 10th grade.

13

and Iberia respectively. Interesting, despite having significantly lower test scores, Orleans and all
of the greater New Orleans parishes had an overall college going rate higher than that of Iberia or
East Baton Rouge. Orleans was at 44 percent and Jefferson at 51 percent relative to Iberia's 41
percent. This may reflect the greater supply of two year colleges in the New Orleans metro area.

III.

Empirical Framework
My main interest is estimating the effect of the hurricanes on the academic performance of

the evacuees. And I ask how this effect varied for different types of evacuees and by the average
achievement of the school the evacuee left.

The structure of the data set presents several

challenges. First, because I do not observe every student both before and after the hurricanes, I do
not necessarily want to limit myself to models in which I control for a student's lagged test score on
the right hand side. Thus in addition to test score growth regressions, I also run simpler models in
which I simply ask how test score levels change for the eventual evacuees over time.

Second, large numbers of students leave the State as a result of the hurricanes. In theory I
could bring in Houston test score data for the students who go to Houston, but it is not clear how I
would scale the Texas scores before merging them with Louisiana scores in a regression. My
preferred solution is to also use college going as the outcome rather than just test scores. As noted
above, the Clearinghouse data allow me to track students who leave Louisiana both before and after
the hurricanes.

Third, the hurricanes did not hit a random set of students but instead Katrina affected a
group of students who were disproportionately poor and low scoring while Rita affected a group of

14

students who were disproportionately richer and higher scoring. In most specifications my control
for this selection into evacuee status is to follow a fixed cohort of evacuees both before and after
the hurricanes.

Thus the evacuees provide their own control group by using their relative

performance before the hurricane. Any grade effects or year effects are estimated including all the
non-evacuees.

My preferred specification is a difference in difference approach in which I examine how
performance for the evacuees changed from a base year (2004 or 2005) to each post-Hurricane year
(2006, 2007,2008) all relative to the performance change for non-evacuees.

For most students I

have only a single year of pre-hurricane data. For this reason, I can run a difference in difference
or I can include lagged (pre-hurricane) test score on the right hand side but I can not combine these
two strategies.

My simplest OLS specification asks how the test scores of the eventual evacuees varies
over time. I run the following regression for each year in the dataset:

(1) Math Scoreit = α + β1*Katrina Evacuee Statusi + β2*Rita Evacuee Statusi + γ*Xi + λ*Grade
Effects + εit
This is for student i in year t. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the current school, but
my results are robust to clustering at the level of the pre-hurricane school.

I also include grade

effects and dummies for race, gender, and free lunch status with the latter three effects represented
by γ*Xi .

15

β1 and β2 tell me the relative position of the Katrina and Rita evacuees within the test score
distribution in a given year. I then look across the four regressions and examine the pattern in
coefficients. One advantage of this approach is that I can use every observation in the analysis
sample, rather than limiting myself to observations with both pre- and post hurricane test scores. I
use this same specification when considering the college enrollment rate as the outcome.

A more sophisticated version of the above specification is to pool all five years and
introduce a dummy for post-hurricane and the interaction of evacuee status and each post-hurricane
year. This is the difference in difference approach in which I ask how the relative position of the
evacuees in the test score distribution has changed from before the hurricanes to each year after.

(2) Math Scoreit = α + β3*Year is 2006*Katrina Evacuee Statusi + β4*Year is 2007*Katrina
Evacuee Statusi + β5*Year is 2008*Katrina Evacuee Statusi + β6*Year is 2006*Rita
Evacuee Statusi + β7*Year is 2007*Rita Evacuee Statusi + β8*Year is 2008*Rita
Evacuee Statusi + β1*Katrina Evacuee Statusi + β2*Rita Evacuee Statusi + ξ* initial
school effects+ ρ*Year Effects+ γ*Xi + λ*Grade Effects + εit

This estimates the effect of being an evacuee (β3) as the difference in evacuee test scores from prehurricane to 2006 relative to the difference in test scores for non evacuees for the same two years. 9
The inclusion of initial school effects adds precision to the estimates and has only a small effect on
the point estimates.

9

The inclusion of year effects and grade effects is not essential since the data are already demeaned at this level. But I
demeaned at the level of the whole data set while I run the regression for a specific cohort within the data set. In the
tables below I also split the Katrina evacuees into those from Orleans Parish (City of New Orleans) and all others
which refers mostly to those from the New Orleans suburbs.

16

For ease of interpretation, I run equation (2) for a fixed cohort of students over time. My
three cohorts are 1.) the students who were fourth graders in 2004, 2.) the students who were fourth
graders in 2005 and 3.) the students who were eighth graders in 2005. The latter group can only be
followed reliably for two years post-hurricane, namely their ninth and tenth grade years in 2007
and 2008. Some fraction of the eighth grade cohort is still taking the Graduate Exit Exam in their
11th grade, but this is a non-random subset and I exclude the coefficients based on this group. 10

I include fixed effects for initial school. In the case of the Orleans Parish schools, there is
perfect collinearity between evacuee status and the school effect and so I drop the evacuee status
dummy for those schools. This is fine because the object of interest is not the level effect of
evacuee status (or of individual schools) but rather the interaction of evacuee status and the posthurricane years (i.e. . β3-β7).

A third approach is to run a more standard growth in test scores regression in which I
control for the student's pre-Katrina test score.

(3) Math Scoreit = α + β6*Pre-Katrina Math Scorei + β3*Year is 2006*Katrina Evacuee Statusi +
β4*Year is 2007*Katrina Evacuee Statusi + β5*Year is 2008*Katrina Evacuee
Statusi + β6*Year is 2006*Rita Evacuee Statusi + β7*Year is 2007*Rita Evacuee
Statusi + β8*Year is 2008*Rita Evacuee Statusi + ρ*Year Effects + γ*Xi + λ*Grade
Effects+ εit

10

For the sake of brevity I calculated but did not report in tables the results for students who were in 8th grade in 2004.
Most students who were in 10th grade in 2004 and 2005 have aged out of test taking post-hurricane. The above list is
the full set of students for whom I have pre-hurricane scores.

17

I estimate equation (3) for the same three cohorts as above.

I include only post-Katrina

observations since the one pre-Katrina observation for each student is needed as the pre-Katrina
score on the right hand side. This eliminates my ability to include fixed effects for initial school.

My final technique to estimate the effect of the hurricanes on the evacuees is to use
propensity score matching (Rosenbaum and Rubin). I estimate the propensity to be treated (an
evacuee) using demographics and pre-hurricane test scores. I then match each evacuee observation
to the non-evacuee observation with the closest estimated propensity score.

I estimate the

treatment effect as the difference in outcomes between the treatment (evacuee) group and the
matched control group.

IV.

Results
Table II displays the results from estimating equation (1) for math test scores, i.e. the

repeated cross sections with Katrina and Rita evacuee status on the right hand side. I separate out
Katrina evacuees who are initially from the City of New Orleans (i.e. Orleans Parish) from all other
evacuees. In 2004 and 2005, controlling for demographics, eventual Orleans evacuees have math
test scores that are .18 to .20 standard deviations below the math scores of other Louisiana students.
After the hurricanes this gap widens to -.30 standard deviations in 2006. The gap then narrows
dramatically by 2007 to -.13 and to -.10 by 2008. This suggests that the Orleans evacuees saw an
initial decline of .13 standard deviations immediately following the hurricane. However, these
same students then made gains so that they ended the period only -.10 standard deviations behind
other Louisiana students and thereby cut their pre-hurricane disadvantage (of -.20) in half.

18

The Rita evacuees and the Katrina evacuees from the suburbs see a different pattern.
Controlling for demographics, the suburban Katrina evacuees have pre-hurricane test scores that
are roughly in line with the rest of Louisiana students. Much like the Orleans evacuees, they
experience a drop of -.12 standard deviations in the year immediately following the hurricane. 11
This decline persists into 2007 and then largely disappears by 2008. The Rita evacuees begin the
period at .09 standard deviations above the state average. They then experience the same initial
(2006) drop as the other two groups of evacuees and then do not recover much of the loss by 2007
or 2008.

Table III repeats this exercise using the English Language Arts scores. The pattern is quite
similar to that observed for Math scores. Before the hurricane, the Orleans evacuees are about -.25
standard deviations below the state average and experience a drop of .10 standard deviations in
2006. By 2007, the Orleans evacuees are already ahead of where they started and they make
further gains in 2008. The Orleans evacuees end the period -.15 standard deviations below the state
average which means they have made up about half of the pre-hurricane gap. The Rita evacuees
again start the period significantly above the state average and lose a portion of their advantage.
And they do no appear to make it back. Pre-hurricane the Rita evacuees are .09-.10 standard
deviations above the state average and fall to being .05 standard deviations below by 2008. The
non-Orleans Katrina evacuees have ELA test scores that are in line with the state average. They
experience a decline of -.09 standard deviations in 2006. 2007 brings a further decline, but by 2008
the non-Orleans Katrina evacuees are nearly back to where they started.

11

The size of the 2006 decline for all three groups of evacuees is consistent with Pane et al's [2008] finding of a decline
of -.09 to -.20 standard deviations.

19

The effects over time are graphed for both groups of evacuees in Figures II-V. Figures II
and III compare the Rita evacuees to all Katrina Evacuees (coefficients for the latter combination
not shown in the tables) while Figures IV and V graph the effects for Orleans versus non-Orleans
Katrina evacuees.

Certainly one possible interpretation of these facts is that the new schools for the New
Orleans evacuees have such higher value added relative to the old schools that within two years the
evacuees have more than made up for the large costs of the dislocation imposed by the hurricane.
The Jefferson students do not see an increase possibly because they receive no benefits from the
disruption and possibly because there are negative externalities from the large numbers of Orleans
students who arrive at their schools.

Table IV proceeds to the estimation of equation (2) in which I limit the sample to a specific
cohort and identify the effects of evacuee status for each of the three post-hurricane years. Table
IV is for math scores. These effects are estimated relative to the base year of 2004 or 2005. All
regressions include initial school, year and grade effects. (The non-evacuees in the sample are
included to identify these latter effects as well as to identify the coefficients on the demographic
variables.) Column (1) contains results for students who were fourth graders in 2004. In 2006, i.e.
immediately following the hurricane, the Orleans evacuees from this cohort are -.174 standard
deviations behind where they started. By 2007, the Orleans evacuees are back to their original
position in the test score distribution and by 2008 the Orleans evacuees are .11 standard deviations
above where they started.

20

Column (2) repeats this for the cohort of fourth graders in 2005. Orleans evacuees in the
2005 cohort lose .25 standard deviations in 2006 relative to their initial position in the test score
distribution. Like the earlier cohort, these evacuees then catch back up in 2007 and move ahead of
their initial position by 2008. Finally in column (3) I examine math scores for students who were
eighth graders in 2005. The Orleans students among them experience a drop of .114 standard
deviations in 2006 but gain enough in 2007 to be .14 standard deviations above their initial
position. I do not follow the eighth grade cohort into 2008 since most of the students are 11
graders by that year and have placed out of the testing requirements.

Table IV also contains separate coefficients for each post-hurricane year for the Rita
evacuees and the non-Orleans Katrina evacuees within the three cohorts. The message is quite
similar to the simple cross sections in Tables II and III. The fourth grade non-Orleans evacuees
experience a big decline in scores in 2006. This decline is -.18 for the 2004 cohort and -.11 for the
2005 cohort. The 2004 cohort then gains back about half the decline by 2007 and makes further
progress by 2008 to end the period with a statistically insignificant loss of -.032 standard
deviations. The 2005 fourth grade cohort of non-Orleans evacuees fares a bit worse. They
experience further declines in 2007 but then rally in 2008 to end the period about -.07 standard
deviations lower than when they started.

The eighth graders from 2005 who are non-Orleans

evacuees are a bit different. The eighth graders experience a small initial decline in 2006 of -.03
which increases to a decline of -.052 by 2007.

All three cohorts of Rita evacuees have initial declines in 2006 which become gradually
smaller over the subsequent years. For example, the Rita evacuees who are fourth graders in 2004

21

have a decline of .12 standard deviations in the first year after the hurricane. This falls to -.09 in
2007 and a statistically insignificant -.04 by 2008.

Table V performs the exact same analysis but using ELA scores as the outcome. The
pattern in coefficients is nearly identical to that of Table IV. Orleans evacuees experience large test
score declines in 2006. For the fourth graders of 2004, these amount to -.21. This disadvantage is
whittled to -.05 by 2007 and by 2008 the Orleans evacuees in this cohort have ELA scores that are
.11 standard deviations above their pre-hurricane scores. Non-Orleans Katrina evacuees from the
same cohort (2004 fourth graders) have a 2006 decline of -.10 standard deviations. They do not
make much progress on this gap in 2007 but they eliminate the gap (between their current and their
2004 relative performance) by 2008. Rita evacuees among the 2004 fourth graders see an initial
decline of .11 standard deviations. This decline persists into both 2007 and 2008.

A slightly different way to estimate the effects of the hurricanes over time is to use equation
(3) which uses initial/ baseline test score on the right hand side. The disadvantage of this strategy
is that due to the limited length of my panel, adding initial test score eliminates my ability to
include pre-treatment observations and school effects.

Table VI is for math scores and contains

the estimates from equation (3) for the same three cohorts, namely fourth graders in 2004, fourth
graders in 2005 and eighth graders in 2005. The coefficient on baseline (pre-hurricane) test score is
.76-.84 which is consistent with test score growth regressions such as those in Kane, Staiger,
Rockoff [forthcoming]. The pattern of coefficients for the Orleans evacuees is the same as that
found in the earlier tables: In 2006, the fourth graders from Orleans experience a large negative
effect from the hurricane equal to -.20 to -.25 standard deviations. By 2007 they have eliminated

22

much of this disadvantage and by 2008 the estimated effects of displacement by the hurricane are
positive. The positive effects of the hurricane are smaller than the effects estimate with equation
(2) and are not statistically significant. However, the eighth grade cohort from 2005 does show
statistically significant positive effects of the hurricane by 2007.

The effect of displacement for

the Orleans evacuees in that cohort is estimated to be +.13 standard deviations.

Effects on math scores for Rita and non-Orleans evacuees from Katrina generally show an
initial negative effect in 2006 followed by recovery back to the baseline level of performance by
2008. In column (1) the non-Orleans evacuees have an effect of -.15 standard deviations in 2007
which lessens to -.07 in 2007 and becomes a statistically insignificant -.02 by 2008. For the nonOrleans evacuees who were in fourth grade in 2005, the effect of the hurricanes becomes more
negative from 2006 to 2007, but again becomes small, negative and insignificant by 2008.

Table VII shows coefficients from equation (3) for English Language Arts scores. The
results are much the same as with the math scores. The Orleans from the fourth grade cohorts start
out with a large decline in 2006 followed by rapid growth in 2007 and 2008. The net increase by
2008 from the baseline is positive but not statistically significant. The eighth graders from Orleans
have an effect of +.16 standard deviations in 2007 and this effect is statistically significant.

My final strategy for estimating the effects of the hurricane is using propensity score
matching. I take the sample of fourth graders from 2005. I estimate the propensity to be an
Orleans evacuee and the propensity to be a non-Orleans Katrina evacuee (relative to non-evacuees).
Coefficients are in Appendix Table VIII. The only observables on which I can match are 2005 test

23

scores, race, and free lunch status. I can't include school effects since the treatment generally
occurs at the school level. 12 I use the Becker and Ichino matching algorithm to perform nearest
neighbor matching on the propensity score and to calculate the estimate treatment effects of being
and evacuee on math scores in 2006-2008.

The results (shown in Appendix Table IX) are quite similar to those found using the test
score growth regression of equation (3).

Specifically, the fourth grade Orleans evacuees

experience a large negative effect in 2006 of -.12 standard deviations. They then recover in 2007
and show positive but statistically insignificant effects by 2008. The non-Orleans evacuees have a
negative effect of -.08 standard deviations in 2006. They then recover slowly over the next two
years and finish 2008 with an effect of -.016.

In Table VIII, I attempt to provide more detailed results on which evacuees showed the
largest effects from the hurricanes. In columns (1) and (2) I re-run equation (2) for math scores. I
divide the sample by schools that are initially in the bottom quintile of average math scores in 2005
(column 1) versus all other schools (column 2). I show this for the students who were fourth
graders in 2005, but results are similar for the 2004 cohort of fourth graders. The Orleans evacuees
from schools in the bottom quintile of Louisiana schools (based on average math scores) have a
negative impact from the hurricane on math scores of -.19 in 2006.

And by 2008 these students

(Orleans evacuees from the worst schools) show strong growth of .14 standard deviations relative
to their baseline. In contrast, Orleans evacuees from all other schools (schools in the upper 4
quintiles) show larger negative effects in 2006 and show no positive effects stemming from the
hurricanes. Non-orleans Katrina evacuees from the worst quintile of schools have no negative
12

For this reason, I actually prefer the within school estimates from equation (2).

24

effects by 2008. In contrast, the non-Orleans Katrina evacuees from the other quintiles show
statistically significantly negative effects in 2008.

In column (3), I control directly for the average test score in the student's current school. I
cluster at the level of the current school (by means of the initial school fixed effects which are
always included). The goal is to ask whether students who move to higher scoring schools show
better performance, controlling for the student's initial school. I include both current school's
average 2005 math score and this variable interacted with Orleans evacuee status. For the whole
sample, there is a very strong association between the current school's average 2005 score and the
student's score.

The coefficient is .48. The interaction of current school average and Orleans

evacuee status is small, positive and insignificant. This indicates that the association between
current school performance and own performance is just as strong for the Orleans evacuees as for
non-evacuees.

That means either that current school "quality" helps the evacuees as much as

everyone, or evacuees sort as strongly based on school quality as everyone else, or both.
Furthermore, the addition of current school's 2005 math average reduces the large positive
coefficient usually found for Orleans evacuees in 2008 (e.g. Table IV). This suggests that current
school quality can in some sense account for the positive effects on achievement that Orleans
evacuees experience.

Effects on College Going

In addition to test scores, I also consider whether college enrollment rates for the evacuees
are affected. Table IX shows the enrollment rate in four year colleges by school district and cohort.

25

As mentioned above, I limit enrollments to those that take place within one year following implied
high school graduation year, i.e. within three years after taking the GEE exam. I do this to make
enrollment rates for all four cohorts comparable to the enrollment rate for the most recent (2007)
cohort.

East Baton Rouge and Iberia are intended to be my "control" districts since students in these
districts experience the statewide effects of the hurricanes but are not themselves displaced. In
2004, 2006, and 2007 East Baton Rouge students had a .351 to .358 four year college enrollment
rate. Those numbers imply a fair amount of stability across the hurricane years. However, 2005
East Baton Rouge students had what looks like an anomalously high enrollment rate of .390.

In contrast, students in Jefferson experience drops in enrollment rates for the 2005 and 2006
cohorts followed by recovery by the 2007 cohort. Jefferson has a four year enrollment rate of .304.
This falls to .262 for both the 2005 and 2006 cohorts and then the enrollment rate rises back to
.304. This is shown graphically in Figure VI. 13

This suggests two hypotheses. First, the hurricane affected college enrollment both for
students entering their senior year of high school AND for students who had recently graduated.
There are significant effects in Jefferson for the 2005 cohort. While some students in that group
may be misclassified in my data they all were scheduled to graduate prior to the hurricane. They
are either from the 2005 or 2004 high school classes (not the 2006 or 2007 high school class.)

13

While Orleans students appear to experience a drop in enrollment rates (in the raw data) this turns out to be a
compositional effect driven by the changing weighting of high schools within my random sample of Orleans students.
This "drop" disappears when I add school fixed effects.

26

Second, while the hurricane impacted both the 2005 and 2006 graduating classes, there are
no effects observed for the 2007 class. In Jefferson, Plaquemines, and Orleans, the four year
college enrollment rates for the class of 2007 all achieved the same level as the 2004 class.

Neither of these conjectures can be accepted with absolute certainty. There are significant
difficulties in deciding upon an appropriate control group against which the Katrina evacuees
should be measured. Certainly having a longer time series and students from more districts would
be useful.

It does appear that the negative effects experienced by the Jefferson cohorts right around the
hurricanes are permanent rather than temporary effects. I say this because I have also investigated
the time path of cumulative enrollment as the cohorts age.

In Figure VII, I display cumulative

four year college enrollment over time for four cohorts from suburban New Orleans. The 2004 and
2007 cohorts appear to be on similar paths. Immediately after graduation, the college enrollment
rate is roughly 28 percent and this rises to roughly 30 percent one year after graduation. (These
effects are cumulative so that this is the percent ever enrolled). In contrast the time paths for
suburban New Orleans students from the classes of 2005 and 2006 start from a lower base of less
than 26 percent enrolled and the cumulative enrollment rate stays low.

Table X shows the effects in a regression setting. I run a panel at the individual student
level and I include initial high school fixed effects in each regression. I identify the coefficients on
the interactions between the parishes directly affected by Katrina and the graduation years of 2005,
2006 and 2007. In columns (1) and (2) the outcome of interest is a dummy for enrolling in a four

27

year college. In column (3) the outcomes is enrollment in a four year college ranked by US News
and in column (4) the outcomes is the 75th percentile of SAT scores for the student's college. 14

In column (1), inclusion of school fixed effects shows the strong negative effects among the
students who attended tenth grade in Jefferson, St. Bernard and Plaquemines. The 2005 cohort
from these parishes has an enrollment rate in four year colleges that is 3.2 percentage points behind
the rate for the 2004 cohort. The 2006 cohort for these parishes is 3.5 percentage points lower.
The negative effect disappears by the 2007 cohort.

In column (2), I add year effects and the

negative effects of Katrina remain for the students originating in Jefferson/St. Bernard/
Plaquemines. The effect for the class of 2005 becomes -5.7 percentage points and the effect for
the class of 2006 becomes a statistically insignificant -1.4 percentage points. For the class of 2007,
the effect turns positive and statistically significant.

In contrast, once I control for the initial high school and year effects, the Orleans students
show positive effects from the hurricanes. Among students who originated in Orleans, the class of
2006 has a college enrollment rate that is 4.2 percentage points higher than the base year class of
2004. And the class of 2007 has a college enrollment rate that is 4.5 percentage points higher.

In column (3), I switch the outcome from attending any four year college to attending a four
year college that is ranked by US News in 2008. This variable has a mean of about 17 percent in

14

In column (1) I am not including year effects. Thus the effect on college going rate for students is being identified
from the within school differences in outcomes between the classes of 2005-2007 relative to the base year of 2004.
Columns (2)-(4) add year effects and thus identify the coefficients of interest as the difference in outcomes within
schools in the hurricane affected districts relative to the difference in outcomes for the unaffected (or at least not
directly affected) districts. The year effects pick up the negative time trend in college going in the "control" parishes.
There is also a strong negative time trend in enrollment in US News ranked colleges in all parishes (column 4).

28

the sample. Controlling for initial school effects and year effects, the hurricane has a strong
positive effect on the likelihood of attending a US News ranked school for students in Orleans.
Students who were in 10th grade in Orleans in 2004 (labeled as the class of 2006) are 2.8
percentage points more likely to attend a US News ranked college relative to their peers in the
classes of 2004. Again students from the other Katrina affected parishes show negative effects for
the class of 2005 and these negative effects disappear.

To summarize the results, there is a negative effect on college going for students the
suburban parishes among the cohorts who graduate immediately before the hurricanes. There is
actually a large and statistically significant positive effect for the students from Orleans parish who
graduate in 2006 and 2007. The size and timing of the positive effect for Orleans Parish students
depends on whether or not I include year dummies, which are themselves estimated from the
inclusion of data from two relatively unaffected parishes. One reasonable interpretation of the
results are that Orleans evacuees are greatly helped in their college going decision by their
relocation to schools with a different set of peers, guidance counselors, and teachers than they
would have in the absence of the hurricane. But given the large magnitude of the effect sizes and
the sensitivity to year effects/ choice of controls, I am somewhat cautious in pushing this
interpretation.

Effects on Crime in Receiving Communities
During 2005 and 2006, the US media gave a great deal of attention to the alleged increases
in crime in the communities where the evacuees relocated.

Both the New York Times and

Washington Post ran stories about evacuee related crime increases in Houston. One Washington

29

Post story was titled, "After Welcoming Evacuees, Houston Handles Spike in Crime Population
Swell Fills Apartments and Strains Police Force." One of the key statistics cited in several stories
was that in the six months following Katrina, evacuees were involved in 17% of Houston's 153
murders during that period. This figure is not as shocking when one realizes that evacuees
comprised nearly 10 percent of Houston's population at the time. And evacuees were likely a
larger fraction of Houston's lowest income citizens.

My objective is to ask whether crime and crime per capita in Houston actually spiked
following the hurricanes. I perform two sets of analysis. First, I compare monthly crime rates in
Houston to monthly crime rates in Texas' other large cities. Second, I look at crime rates within 65
Houston zip codes and ask whether zip codes with more Katrina evacuees experienced greater
increases in crime.

The first data set consists of monthly data from the Uniform Crime Reports Return A
Master File. I use monthly data from January 2004 through December 2006. (A longer time series
is probably desirable but it was necessary to read in and reshape the data for each year separately.)
My comparison cities in Texas are Arlington, Austin, Dallas, El Paso, Fort Worth, Harris,
Montgomery, and San Antonio. These are all of the cities with more than 300,000 people in 2000.
The mean monthly crime rates per 10,000 people are shown in Table Ib.

Figures Ib, IIb, and IIIb plot the time series of the monthly numbers of burglaries, murders
and robberies. The most striking fact is shown in Figure Ib. There is a large increase in the
number of burglaries in Houston in the month that the evacuees arrive (September 2005).

30

Burglaries jump from 2400 per month to 2900 per month. However, that increase disappears by
October 2005 and does not return. One story is that a number of evacuees arrived in Houston and
either temporarily became professional burglars or temporarily continued their former profession in
Louisiana. But these evacuee burglars either quickly were caught or found other employment.
Note that 30-50 productive burglars could produce an extra 500 burglaries in a month.

In Figure IIb, murders do appear to experience a level shift up that lasts through September
2006. The number of murders falls by October 2006. (Looking separately at the block level data
from the Houston Police, I found that the decline in murders in October 2006 was temporary and
murders again hit 37 per month in April 2007.) The picture for robberies is muddled (Figure IIIb).
Robberies appear to trend up before the hurricanes and remain high throughout the post-hurricane
period.

Table IIIb shows two different specifications using monthly UCR data across large Texas
cities. In all cases the dependent variable is monthly crimes per 10,000 people. In columns (1),
(3), (5) and (7) the right hand side includes a dummy for "After August 2005" and the interaction of
that dummy with a dummy for Houston. In the even numbered columns I include a dummy for
"Month Equals September 2005" and interact that dummy with the Houston dummy. In all cases I
include city effects and month effects.

The evidence is mixed.

Murders and robberies per 10,000 people are statistically

significantly higher following September 2005.

The coefficient for murders is .039 which

represents a 40 percent increase relative to the mean for the whole period. The coefficient for

31

robberies is roughly 17% of the mean value. But violent crime appeared to be trending upwards in
Houston (both absolutely and relative to the rest of Texas) before the hurricanes. Burglaries show
no evidence of a long run increase following the hurricanes.

To learn more about this issue, I also obtained the monthly block level crime data from the
Houston Police Department. 15 I know the location of student evacuees, or at least the location of
their schools from the Houston Independent School District Data. I aggregated both data sets to the
zip code level since that appeared to be the smallest common geographic unit across the two data
sets. The means for my zip code level data set are shown in Table IVb. For each zip code, I
calculate percentage of students who are evacuees. The mean "percent katrina" is 7 percent, with a
range from 0 percent to 50 percent. There are 65 zip codes and the data cover January 2005September 2007.

In Table Vb, I report regressions of monthly crimes per 10,000 people on the "percent
katrina" among students in the zip code. I include zip code fixed effects and a dummy for
September 2005 or later.

This enables me to identify the coefficient on "After August

2005"*"Percent Katrina." Looking across five different types of crimes, I found no evidence that
crime was differentially higher in zip codes with a higher fraction of Katrina evacuees.

V.

Discussion and Conclusion

Hurricanes Katrina and Rita had significant impacts on the academic performance of
evacuees. In the first year following the hurricanes, evacuee math scores dropped between .10 and
15

http://www.houstontx.gov/police/cs/stats2.htm

32

.25 standard deviations relative to other Louisiana students. This is not terribly surprising given the
massive disruptions caused by the hurricanes and the fact that the median student lost around five
weeks of school.

Perhaps what is more surprising is how quickly the Orleans Parish evacuees recovered from
the experience and actually began to experience gains. In most of my specifications, by 2007, the
Orleans evacuees are doing as well academically as they were in 2004 and 2005. And by 2008 the
Orleans evacuees were about .10 standard deviations ahead of their 2004 position in the test score
distribution. While not every specification shows statistically significant gains for every single
cohort, my preferred specification which uses school fixed effects and has the most precision
always shows large and significant gains. And in results not reported, I obtain the same finding if I
included student fixed effects in the panel rather than initial school fixed effects. Conversely Rita
evacuees from Lake Charles and Katrina evacuees from Jefferson experience test score drops that
persist into 2007 and show signs of recovery by 2008. For example, looking at fourth graders from
2005, Katrina evacuees not from Orleans scored .11 standard deviations worse in math in 2006
relative to baseline.

They scored .17 standard deviations worse in 2007, and .07 standard

deviations worse in 2008.

One natural explanation is that the New Orleans schools were so deficient, that in the
medium run the New Orleans evacuees have seen increased academic achievement as a result of
being kicked out of their original schools. The averages for the New Orleans evacuees actually
include those evacuees who have enrolled in the Recovery School District in New Orleans which
by many accounts has struggled and which according to the data has low levels of average

33

achievement. In contrast, Jefferson and Lake Charles evacuees experienced only the massive
disruption of the hurricanes without any benefit. In particular the increased presence of the Orleans
evacuees in the Jefferson schools could provide negative class size externalities and negative peer
effects.

The Katrina evacuees from Orleans also appear to benefit in terms of college enrollment
rates. The 2006 and 2007 graduating classes experience a 4 percentage point increase in four year
enrollments. The evacuees from suburban New Orleans Parishes show a negative effect on college
enrollments for the class of 2005, but this negative effect disappears by the class of 2006 or 2007
depending on the specification.

One frequently repeated fact about the evacuees is that they brought crime to the receiving
cities and towns. I investigated this using both city level UCR data and zip code level data within
Houston. Its clear that robberies and murders are higher in Houston 2006 than in 2004 and early
2005. But is not clear how much of this trend predates the hurricanes. The big spike in burglaries
in Houston in September 2005 faded within one month, leaving the number of burglaries per capita
lower (since population rose by 10 percent.)

Overall these results provide one of the first looks at how students were affected by one of
the largest relocations in recent US history. The test score and college enrollment results suggest
that for students in particular poor performing schools, the cost to achievement from relocating can
be fairly quickly be made up for by the benefits from being in a different school.

34

35

References
Alexander, Karl L., Susan L. Dauber Norc, and Doris R. Entwisle (1996), “Children in Motion:
School Transfers and Elementary School Performance,” The Journal of Educational Research,
90(1), 3-12.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Kevin Lang (2002), “How Important are Classroom Peer Effects? Evidence
from Boston’s Metco Program” NBER Working Paper #9263.
Engec, Nacati (2006), “Relationship between Mobility and Student Performance and Behavior”
The Journal of Educational Research, 99(3), 167-178.
Gabe, Thomas, Gene Falk, Maggie McCarty, and Virginia W. Mason (2005), “Hurricane Katrina:
Social-Demographic Characteristics of Impacted Areas” CRS Report for Congress.
Groen, Jeffrey A. and Anne E. Polivka (March 2008), “Hurricane Katrina Evacuees: Who they are,
where they are, and how they are faring” Monthly Labor Review, 32-51.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain and Steven G. Rivkin (2004), “Disruption Versus Tiebout
Improvement: The Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools” Journal of Public Economics, 88,
1721-1746.
Hanushek, Eric, John F. Kain, Daniel O’Brien and Steven G. Rivkin. (2005) “The Market for
Teacher Quality,” NBER Working Paper 11154, February 2005.
Heinlein, Lisa M. and Marybeth Shinn (2000), “School Mobility and Student Achievement in an
Urban Setting” Psychology in the Schools, 37(4), 349-357.
Jacob, Brian A. (2004), “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence
from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago” The American Economic Review, 94(1), 233-258.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, "Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CXVI (2001), 607-654.
Kane Thomas, Douglas Staiger and Jonah Rockoff). “What Does Certification Tell Us About
Teacher Effectiveness?: Evidence from New York City”, forthcoming in Economics of Education
Review.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jens Ludwig, Lawrence F. Katz. (2005) Neighborhood Effects on Crime for
Female and Male Youth: Evidence From a Randomized Housing Voucher Experiment. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120:1, 87-130

36

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Paul Hirschfield. (2001) Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics
116:2, 655-679
Nelson, Perry S., Jane M. Simoni, and Howard S. Adelman (1996), “Mobility and School
Functioning in the Early Grades” The Journal of Educational Research, 89(6), 365-369.
Pane, John F., Daniel F. McCaffrey, Shannah Tharp-Taylor, Gary J. Asmus, Billy R. Stokes
(2006), Student Displacement after the Hurricanes of 2005: Experiences of Public Schools and
Their Students, Rand Gulf States Policy Institute: Santa Monica, CA.
Pane, John F., Daniel F. McCaffrey, Nidhi Kalra, Annie J. Zhou (2008), "Effects of Student
Displacement in Louisiana During the First Academic Year After the Hurricanes of 2005", Journal
of Education for Students Placed at Risk, Volume 13, Issue 2-3, 168-211.
Paxson, Christina and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2008), “Returning to New Orleans after Hurricane
Katrina” Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #522.
Pribesh, Shana and Douglas B. Downey (1999), “Why are Residential and School Moves
Associated with Poor School Performance?” Demography, 36(4), 521-534.
Rumberger, Russell W. and Katherine A. Larson (1998), “Student Mobility and the Increased Risk
of High School Dropout” American Journal of Education, 107(1), 1-35.
Rivkin, Steven G. Eric A. Hanushek, John F. Kain, "Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement," Econometrica, Vol. 73, No. 2, (Mar., 2005), pp. 417-458.
Sastry, Narayan (2007), “Tracing the Effects of Hurricane Katrina on the Population of New
Orleans: The Displaced New Orleans Residents Pilot Study,” Rand Gulf States Policy Institute
Working Paper.
Swanson, Christopher B. and Barbara Schneider (1999), “Students on the Move: Residential and
Educational Mobility in America’s Schools,” Sociology of Education, 72(1), 54-67.
Temple, Judy A. and Arthur J. Reynolds (1999), “School Mobility and Achievement: Longitudinal
Findings from an Urban Cohort,” Journal of School Psychology, 37(4), 355-377.
Vigdor, Jacob L. (2007), “The Katrina Effect: Was There a Bright Side to the Evacuation of
Greater New Orleans?” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(1) Advances, Articles
64.
Wood, David, et. al. (1993), “Impact of Family Relocation on Children’s Growth, Development,
School Function, and Behavior” Journal of American Medical Association, 270, 1334-1338.

37

Wright, Dan (1999), “Student Mobility: A Negligible and Confounded Influence on Student
Achievement,” The Journal of Educational Research, 92(6), 347-353.

38

Table I
Student Level Summary Statistics for 2006
This table shows the means for all student level observations in the analysis sample for 2006. To determine whether an evacuee is originally from New Orleans, I need additionally to
observe the student in 2004 or 2005. I show means and sample sizes separately for Katrina and Rita Evacuees.

Variable
Katrina Evacuee in Public School
Katrina Evacuee Who Left Affected Parishes
Katrina Evacuee from New Orleans in 04 or
05
Katrina Evacuee Not from New Orleans in 04
or 05
Katrina Evacuee Temporarily Was in Private
School
Katrina Evacuee Temporarily Was Out of
State
Rita Evacuee in Public School
Rita Evacuee in Private School
Rita Evacuee Temporarily Out of State
Free Lunch Eligible
Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Math Score (Standardized)
English Language Arts Score (Standardized)

Entire State
Obs
Mean
431,996
431,996
213,272

0.105
0.033
0.035

Std.
Dev.
0.307
0.178
0.184

213,272

0.071

431,996

Katrina Evacuees
Obs
Mean

Rita Evacuees
Obs
Mean

45,412
45,412
21,882

1.000
0.311
0.303

23,136
23,136
11,959

0.000
0.000
0.006

0.258

21,882

0.697

11,959

0.000

0.004

0.063

45,412

0.000

23,136

0.000

431,996

0.004

0.066

45,412

0.000

23,136

0.000

431,996
431,996
431,996
431,995
431,996
431,996
431,996
431,996
362,200
362,751

0.054
0.000
0.000
0.561
0.508
0.440
0.020
0.013
0.000
0.000

0.225
0.008
0.022
0.496
0.500
0.496
0.139
0.113
-1.000
-1.000

45,412
45,412
45,412
45,412
45,412
45,412
45,412
45,412
34,702
34,611

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.637
0.511
0.560
0.060
0.036
-0.268
-0.222

23,136
23,136
23,136
23,136
23,136
23,136
23,136
23,136
19,801
19,824

1.000
0.000
0.000
0.528
0.513
0.308
0.008
0.008
0.108
0.140

39

Table II
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on Math scores
Repeated Cross Sections
I regress test scores on dummies for ever being a Rita or a Katrina evacuee in a public school. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Test scores are standardized to be
mean zero variance 1 at the year*grade level. Exams are taken in March of each year. In March 2004 and March 2005, tests were administered to 4th, 8th, and 10th graders. In
2006 through 2008 the exams were administered to all grades 3-10. Students labeled as "New Orleans" Evacuees are from Orleans Parish while the Non-New Orleans Evacuees are
mainly from the suburban part of the New Orleans MSA including Jefferson, St Bernard, Plaquemines Parishes.

New Orleans Evacuee In
Public School
Non New Orleans
Evacuee In Public School
Rita Evacuee in Public School
Student is Black
Student is Asian
Student is Hispanic
Student is Male
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(2004)

(2)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(2005)

(3)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(2006)

(4)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(2007)

(5)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(2008)

-0.197
(0.052)**

-0.175
(0.064)**

-0.302
(0.033)**

-0.131
(0.049)**

-0.101
(0.051)*

-0.002
(0.027)

-0.041
(0.028)

-0.157
(0.025)**

-0.146
(0.040)**

-0.053
(0.047)

0.091
(0.035)*

0.083
(0.029)**

-0.026
(0.029)

-0.000
(0.033)

0.005
(0.030)

-0.591
(0.015)**
0.325
(0.044)**
-0.193
(0.036)**
-0.033
(0.008)**
0.000
(0.000)
0.566
(0.144)**
54787
0.0980

-0.557
(0.013)**
0.396
(0.046)**
-0.162
(0.036)**
0.005
(0.007)
0.000
(0.000)
0.584
(0.231)*
73630
0.0898

-0.605
(0.014)**
0.429
(0.042)**
-0.142
(0.025)**
0.013
(0.006)*
-0.316
(0.016)**
-0.343
(0.030)**
163897
0.1814

-0.533
(0.015)**
0.471
(0.045)**
-0.096
(0.034)**
0.025
(0.006)**
-0.376
(0.017)**
0.443
(.)
118626
0.1991

-0.502
(0.019)**
0.493
(0.055)**
-0.043
(0.034)
0.074
(0.008)**
-0.409
(0.020)**
0.610
(.)
80528
0.2201

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

40

Table III
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on English Language Arts scores: Repeated Cross Sections
I regress test scores on dummies for ever being a Rita or a Katrina evacuee in a public school. Standard errors are clustered at the school level. Test scores are standardized to be
mean zero variance 1 at the year*grade level. Exams are taken in March of each year. In March 2004 and March 2005, tests were administered to 4th, 8th, and 10th graders. In
2006 through 2008 the exams were administered to all students in grades 3-10.
(1)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(2004)
-0.287
(0.058)**

(2)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(2005)
-0.245
(0.063)**

(3)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(2006)
-0.346
(0.040)**

(4)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(2007)
-0.182
(0.053)**

(5)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(2008)
-0.147
(0.051)**

0.019
(0.029)

0.003
(0.026)

-0.086
(0.023)**

-0.120
(0.036)**

-0.048
(0.043)

Rita Evacuee
In Public School

0.097
(0.040)*

0.090
(0.031)**

0.016
(0.028)

-0.027
(0.032)

-0.032
(0.033)

Student is Black

-0.405
(0.016)**
0.138
(0.054)*
-0.086
(0.045)
-0.381
(0.009)**
0.000
(0.000)
0.145
(2,546.476)
53639
0.0831

-0.435
(0.013)**
0.127
(0.047)**
-0.158
(0.041)**
-0.308
(0.008)**
0.000
(0.000)
0.708
(0.215)**
72637
0.0756

-0.505
(0.015)**
0.276
(0.041)**
-0.133
(0.024)**
-0.278
(0.006)**
-0.360
(0.017)**
0.743
(0.050)**
164317
0.1832

-0.440
(0.016)**
0.338
(0.041)**
-0.093
(0.032)**
-0.285
(0.006)**
-0.410
(0.017)**
1.370
(0.224)**
118476
0.2005

-0.392
(0.020)**
0.336
(0.056)**
-0.009
(0.033)
-0.284
(0.008)**
-0.454
(0.020)**
0.148
(0.086)
79833
0.2177

New Orleans Evacuee In
Public School
Non New Orleans Evacuee
In Public School

Student is Asian
Student is Hispanic
Student is Male
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

41

Table IV
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on Math scores
Analysis of Three Different Cohorts Before and After Katrina
I follow a fixed cohort of students over time from 2004 or 2005 through 2008. I distinguish between Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish
School District and Katrina evacuees from all other districts. I include fixed effects for initial school, year effects and grade effects in each
regression. I identify the coefficients on the interaction terms between evacuee status and each of the post-Katrina years. Column (1) is for
students who were fourth graders in 2004. Column (2) is for students who were fourth graders in 2005 and Column (3) is for eighth graders
in 2005. The final group can only be followed reliably through 2007 since many students pass out of the math and ELA testing requirements
during 10th grade.

Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2006
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2007
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2008
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2006
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2007
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2008
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2006
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2007
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2008
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Student is Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(4th Graders in
2004)

(2)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(4th Graders in
2005)

(3)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score
(8th Graders in
2005)

-0.174
(0.039)**
0.005
(0.039)
0.111
(0.039)**
-0.175
(0.025)**
-0.086
(0.025)**
-0.032
(0.025)
-0.124
(0.028)**
-0.091
(0.028)**
-0.040
(0.028)
-0.302
(0.006)**
0.044
(0.005)**
-0.460
(0.007)**
-0.053
(0.020)**
0.432
(0.024)**
0.352
(0.143)*
127981
0.2608

-0.242
(0.040)**
-0.041
(0.040)
0.101
(0.040)*
-0.107
(0.024)**
-0.165
(0.024)**
-0.069
(0.024)**
-0.097
(0.027)**
-0.083
(0.027)**
-0.047
(0.027)+
-0.322
(0.006)**
0.036
(0.005)**
-0.454
(0.007)**
-0.052
(0.019)**
0.408
(0.024)**
0.039
(12,110.935)
141288
0.2530

-0.114
(0.048)*
0.136
(0.048)**
-0.034
(0.026)
-0.052
(0.026)*
-0.065
(0.033)*
-0.041
(0.033)
-0.221
(0.007)**
0.065
(0.006)**
-0.530
(0.008)**
-0.289
(0.023)**
0.375
(0.025)**
-1.770
(21,638.051)
83752
0.2674

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

42

Table V
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on ELA scores
Analysis of Three Different Cohorts Before and After Katrina
I follow a fixed cohort of students over time from 2004 or 2005 through 2008. I distinguish between Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish
School District and Katrina evacuees from all other districts. I include fixed effects for initial school, year effects and grade effects in each
regression. I identify the coefficients on the interaction terms between evacuee status and each of the post-Katrina years. Column (1) is for
students who were fourth graders in 2004. Column (2) is for fourth graders in 2005 and Column (3) is for eigth graders in 2005. The final
group can only be followed reliably through 2007 since many students pass out of the math and ELA testing requirements during 10th grade.

Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2006
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2007
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2008
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2006
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2007
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2008
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2006
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2007
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2008
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Student is Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(1)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(4th Graders in
2004)

(2)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score
(4th Graders in
2005)

(3)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score (8th
Graders in 2005)

-0.212
(0.039)**
-0.050
(0.039)
0.110
(0.039)**

-0.265
(0.040)**
-0.083
(0.040)*
0.082
(0.040)*

-0.090
(0.048)+
0.189
(0.048)**

-0.095
(0.024)**
-0.085
(0.024)**
0.020
(0.024)

-0.010
(0.024)
-0.116
(0.024)**
-0.073
(0.024)**

-0.079
(0.026)**
-0.049
(0.026)+

-0.111
(0.028)**
-0.141
(0.028)**
-0.112
(0.028)**
-0.338
(0.006)**
-0.271
(0.005)**
-0.328
(0.007)**
0.020
(0.020)
0.328
(0.024)**
-0.237
(0.257)
128621
0.2593

-0.056
(0.027)*
-0.193
(0.027)**
-0.161
(0.027)**
-0.371
(0.006)**
-0.261
(0.005)**
-0.324
(0.007)**
-0.068
(0.019)**
0.316
(0.023)**
-1.429
(18,556.399)
141333
0.2528

-0.063
(0.033)+
-0.036
(0.033)
-0.248
(0.007)**
-0.220
(0.006)**
-0.434
(0.008)**
-0.245
(0.024)**
0.142
(0.025)**
0.104
(17,873.761)
86622
0.2585

43

Table VI
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on Math scores
Growth from 04/05 Baseline: Orleans vs Non-Orleans Evacuees
I follow a fixed cohort of students over time from 2006 through 2008. I distinguish between Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish School
District and evacuees from all other districts. I include pre-Katrina test score, year effects and grade effects in each regression. (I cannot
include school fixed effects due to the perfect collinearity between initial school being in Orleans and the school effects combined with the
fact that I am only including post Katrina observations.) I identify the coefficients on evacuee status for each of the post-Katrina years. In
each column I follow a different cohort of students. Column (1) is for students who were fourth graders in 2004. Column (2) is for fourth
graders in 2005 and Column (3) is for eigth graders in 2005. The final group can only be followed reliably through 2007 since many students
pass out of the math and ELA testing requirements during 10th grade. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the initial school.

Initial Test Score (2004 or 2005)
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2006
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2007
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2008
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2006
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2007
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2008
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2006
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2007
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2008
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Student is Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(1)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score (4th Grade
in 2004)
0.763
(0.007)**
-0.199
(0.042)**
-0.048
(0.041)
0.040
(0.041)
-0.152
(0.024)**
-0.068
(0.025)**
-0.016
(0.024)
-0.052
(0.026)*
-0.013
(0.030)
0.033
(0.024)
-0.173
(0.009)**
-0.009
(0.006)
-0.195
(0.013)**
0.088
(0.030)**
0.305
(0.033)**
100359
0.5640

(2)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score (4th Grade
in 2005)
0.744
(0.007)**
-0.250
(0.040)**
-0.093
(0.045)*
0.036
(0.041)
-0.050
(0.021)*
-0.117
(0.026)**
-0.040
(0.028)
-0.049
(0.028)+
-0.017
(0.030)
0.003
(0.031)
-0.180
(0.010)**
-0.001
(0.006)
-0.216
(0.013)**
0.042
(0.027)
0.247
(0.030)**
110508
0.5673

(3)
Standardized
Value of Math
Score (8th Grade
in 2005)
0.848
(0.006)**
-0.026
(0.031)
0.134
(0.045)**
0.001
(0.025)
-0.020
(0.033)
-0.024
(0.023)
0.003
(0.036)
-0.084
(0.009)**
0.002
(0.006)
-0.097
(0.011)**
0.008
(0.022)
0.151
(0.027)**
64248
0.6903

44

Table VII
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on ELA scores
Growth from Baseline: Orleans vs Non-Orleans Evacuees
I follow a fixed cohort of students over time from 2006 through 2008. I distinguish between Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish School
District and evacuees from all other districts. I include pre-Katrina test score, year effects and grade effects in each regression. (I cannot
include school fixed effects due to the collinearity between initial school being in Orleans and the school effects combined with the fact that I
am only including post Katrina observations.) I identify the coefficients on evacuee status for each of the post-Katrina years. In each column
I follow a different cohort of students. Column (1) is for students who were fourth graders in 2004. Column (2) is for fourth graders in 2005
and Column (3) is for eigth graders in 2005. The final group can only be followed reliably through 2007 since many students pass out of the
math and ELA testing requirements during 10th grade. Standard errors are clustered at the level of the initial school.

Initial Test Score (2004 or 2005)
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2006
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2007
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2008
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2006
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2007
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year is 2008
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2006
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2007
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2008
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Student is Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Observations
R-squared
Robust standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(1)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score (LEAP or
ILEAP)
0.722
(0.007)**
-0.225
(0.046)**
-0.099
(0.048)*
0.042
(0.047)
-0.065
(0.022)**
-0.059
(0.022)**
0.044
(0.018)*
-0.070
(0.023)**
-0.092
(0.025)**
-0.068
(0.023)**
-0.171
(0.008)**
-0.127
(0.006)**
-0.228
(0.012)**
0.037
(0.027)
0.260
(0.027)**
100854
0.5516

(2)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score (LEAP or
ILEAP)
0.750
(0.006)**
-0.251
(0.044)**
-0.120
(0.041)**
0.032
(0.044)
-0.003
(0.021)
-0.113
(0.021)**
-0.089
(0.023)**
0.001
(0.029)
-0.115
(0.027)**
-0.099
(0.027)**
-0.194
(0.009)**
-0.110
(0.006)**
-0.212
(0.011)**
0.029
(0.024)
0.232
(0.027)**
110577
0.5750

(3)
Standardized
Value of ELA
Score (LEAP or
ILEAP)
0.791
(0.007)**
-0.026
(0.049)
0.162
(0.053)**
-0.046
(0.024)+
-0.017
(0.022)
-0.012
(0.033)
0.029
(0.028)
-0.102
(0.009)**
-0.049
(0.006)**
-0.111
(0.010)**
-0.001
(0.026)
0.167
(0.024)**
66286
0.6124

45

Table VIII
Effects of Katrina or Rita Displacement on Math scores
Split By Initial Schools Quintile of 2005 Math Scores
I follow a fixed cohort of students over time from 2006 through 2008, specifically those who were in 4th grade in 2005. I distinguish
between Katrina evacuees from Orleans Parish School District and evacuees from all other districts. I include fixed effects for initial school,
year effects and grade effects in each regression. I identify the coefficients on the interaction terms between evacuee status and each of the
post-Katrina years. Column (1) is for students whose initial (2005) school was in the bottom quintile of the distribution of average math
scores. Column (2) is for all other schools. Column (3) is for all schools and adds controls for the current school's average math scores and
that variable interacted with Orleans evacuee status.
(1)
Standardized Value of Math
Score
Sample:
Initial School in Bottom of
2005 Distribution
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2006
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2007
Orleans Evacuee* Year is 2008
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year
is 2006
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year
is 2007
Non Orleans Katrina Evacuee* Year
is 2008
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2006
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2007
Rita Evacuee* Year is 2008
Current School's 2005 Math
Distribution
Orleans Evacuee*Current School's
Average 2005 Math Score
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(2)
Standardized Value of Math
Score Sample:
Initial School in Quintile 25 of 2005 Distribution

-0.195
(0.050)**
-0.007
(0.050)
0.139
(0.050)**
-0.107
(0.046)*
-0.113
(0.046)*
-0.001
(0.046)
-0.150
(0.070)*
-0.126
(0.070)+
0.007
(0.070)

-0.401
(0.067)**
-0.187
(0.067)**
-0.089
(0.067)
-0.111
(0.028)**
-0.184
(0.028)**
-0.094
(0.028)**
-0.087
(0.030)**
-0.078
(0.030)**
-0.047
(0.030)

-0.006
(25,542.133)
33523
0.134

0.562
(11,626.295)
107765
0.217

(3)
Standardized Value
of Math Score (LEAP
or ILEAP)
All
-0.314
(0.056)**
-0.108
(0.057)+
0.049
(0.060)
-0.101
(0.032)**
-0.178
(0.033)**
-0.075
(0.037)*
-0.117
(0.034)**
-0.119
(0.041)**
-0.079
(0.036)*
0.468
(0.042)**
0.046
(0.091)
-0.187
(0.106)+
136514
0.262

46

Table IX
Four Year College Going Rate By Graduation Cohort and School District
I take a random sample (roughly 50%) of 10th graders who take LEAP exams during 2002-2005 in six different districts. (I infer their senior
based on the year the student takes the LEAP exam). I use Student Clearinghouse data matched to the students (regardless of post-Katrina
location) to determine whether or not the student enrolled in a 4 year college within 3 years after taking the LEAP exam. The table shows the
percent enrolled in a four year college and the number of students.
Cohort
District
2004
2005
2006
2007
East Baton Rouge
0.358
0.39
0.353
0.351
2,332
2,318
2,363
1,984
Iberia

0.366
544

0.335
543

0.299
662

0.291
584

Jefferson

0.304
1,870

0.262
2,057

0.262
2,309

0.304
2,062

Orleans

0.26
2,667

0.259
2,466

0.218
1,981

0.258
2,733

Plaquemines

0.321
246

0.295
237

0.34
247

0.322
233

St. Bernard

0.317
341

0.34
379

0.269
438

0.282
404

47

Table X
Effects on College Going Outcomes
The data set includes four cohorts of 10th graders including two that were scheduled to graduate before the hurricane and two scheduled to graduate after. (2004 and 2005). I regress
three different college going outcomes on a full set of school effects and the interaction between dummies for hurricane affected parishes and post-hurricane years. In columns (1), (2),
and (4) the coefficients are identified strictly off within school changes in the outcomes, before and after the hurricanes. In column (2) I also include year effects and thus am
identifying the difference in outcomes for students originating in hurricane affected schools relative to the difference in outcomes for students in East Baton Rouge and Iberia Parishes.
(1)
Enrolled in a 4 Year
College

(2)
Enrolled in a 4 Year
College

(3)
Attends A College
Ranked By US News

(4)
College's 75
Percentile of SAT
Distribution for
Incoming Class

In Orleans Parish in 10th Grade * 2003

0.042
(0.012)**

0.017
(0.016)

-0.002
(0.013)

38.456
(27.025)

In Orleans Parish in 10th Grade * 2004

0.021
(0.013)+

0.042
(0.017)*

0.028
(0.014)*

-18.372
(31.274)

In Orleans Parish in 10th Grade * 2005

0.005
(0.012)

0.045
(0.017)**

0.004
(0.014)

-37.906
(29.446)

In Jefferson/St. Bernard/Plaquemines in 10th
Grade * 2003

-0.032
(0.012)**

-0.057
(0.016)**

-0.042
(0.013)**

18.954
(25.807)

In Jefferson/St. Bernard/Plaquemines in 10th
Grade * 2004

-0.035
(0.012)**

-0.014
(0.016)

0.003
(0.013)

16.938
(26.619)

In Jefferson/St. Bernard/Plaquemines in 10th
Grade * 2005
year== 2003.0000

-0.005
(0.012)

0.035
(0.017)*
0.026
(0.011)*
-0.021
(0.011)+
-0.040
(0.012)**
0.304
(0.005)**
32000
0.141

0.009
(0.014)
-0.034
(0.009)**
-0.091
(0.009)**
-0.094
(0.010)**
0.225
(0.004)**
32000
0.147

-3.242
(27.514)
7.212
(16.853)
11.432
(18.206)
20.949
(18.880)
1,134.772
(7.167)**
5420
0.085

year== 2004.0000
year== 2005.0000
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.301
(0.004)**
32000
0.140

48

Appendix Table I
Structure of the Uncut Dataset
The data contain four years worth of test scores (2004-2007). In 2004-2005 for Math and English Language Arts,
students are tested in grades 4,8,10 under the LEAP (Louisiana Education Assessment Program). These are all high
stakes test. Grade 4 and 8 students need to score "Approaching Basic" in both reading and math in order to progress to
the next grade level. Grade 10 students need to score "Approaching Basic" in order to be eligible for a regular high
school diploma. The high stakes policies were suspended for one year during 05-06 due to the Hurricanes.
(Additionally Students are tested in Social Science and Science in grade 11. In 2006 and 2007, ILEAP tests are added
for grades 3, 5, 6, 7, 9.
These are the raw data. The analysis sample limits the data to those students I observe in 2006 since that is the year for
which I have an indicator of evacuee status. Note that for 2006-2007 I have 9 grades of students, adding up to about
450,000. I am missing grades 1,2, 12. If we multiply the 450k*12/9 we get 600,000 which is roughly the total number
of public school students in Louisiana.

grade

2004

year
2005

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
HS

0
59,171
0
0
0
58,356
0
46,562
40,000
6,644
22

0
61,346
0
0
0
58,592
0
46,291
39,590
1,674
14

2006

2007

Total

48,074
52,412
46,732
47,859
50,393
50,113
56,837
41,745
36,082
1,747
2

51,057
51,773
49,829
51,655
50,971
50,130
61,280
43,877
37,498
1,752
152

99,131
224,702
96,561
99,514
101,364
217,191
118,117
178,475
153,170
11,817
190

Total 210,755 207,507 431,996 449,974 1,300,232

49

Appendix Table II
Frequency Tabulation of Lousiana Students Observed in 2005 (Grades 4,8,10)
By Their Future Evacuee Status And Whether They Attend School In One of
the Four Heavily Affected Parishes
I take pre-Hurricane data in Spring 2005. This is observed for students in grades 4,8,10. I then limit the data to those
students I observe in 2006 (grades 3-11) since 2006 is the year in which I have an accurate indicator of evacuee status.
I cut the data by being in one of the most affected parishes and being an evacuee in 2006. The most affected parishes
are Orleans, Jefferson, Plaquemines, and St. Bernard. Ninety three percent of Katrina evacuees come from these
parishes. And 90 percent of the students in these affected parishes are evacuees.

Displaced
from
Public
School Due
to Katrina

In A Katrina
District in 2005
No

Yes

Total

No
Yes

119,928
988

1,379 121,307
13,021 14,009

Total

120,916

14,400 135,316

Frequency Tabulation of Lousiana Students Observed in 2006 (Grades 3-11) By
Evacuee Status And Whether They Attend School In One of the Four Heavily
Affected Parishes
For 2006, I observe all students in grades 3-11 and their evacuee status that Spring. Sixty nine percent of evacuees
remain in one of the four affected Parishes.

Displaced
from
Public
School Due
to Katrina

In A Katrina
District in 2006
No

Yes

Total

No
Yes

383,836
14,115

2,748 386,584
31,298 45,413

Total

397,951

34,046 431,997

50

Appendix Table III
Percent of Eventual Evacuees Attending School In One of Most Affected
Parishes
I take all students who are evacuees in 2006. I calculate the fraction living in the affected parishes (Orleans, Jefferson,
Plaquemines, and St. Bernard) by year.

Year

Fraction
In
Affected
Parishes

N

2004
2005
2006
2007

0.931
0.929
0.689
0.759

9,743
14,009
45,413
35,325

51

Appendix Table IV
Evacuees Highly Likely To Be Missing From Sample Relative to Other Students
(8th Graders in 2005)
I take the set of 8th graders observed during 2005 and ask whether they are in the sample in 2007. I cut the data by
evacuee versus not.
Orleans

Evacuee

No

Yes

Total

No
Yes

42,107
10,884

2,719
2,883

44,826
13,767

Total

52,991

5,602

58,593

Drop from
Sample 05 to 07

52

Appendix Table V
Orleans Students More Likely to Disappear From Dataset Relative to Other
Louisiana Students
I identify all eighth graders in 2005. I check to see whether they disappear from the data set by 2007. I run an OLS
regression of dropping from the sample on student characteristics.

(1)
Eigth Graders in 2005 Who
Disappear From Sample By 2007
(All Students)
Attends School in Orleans
in 2005

0.308
(0.006)**

Math Score 2005

-0.072
(0.002)**
-0.028
(0.004)**
0.028
(0.003)**
0.079
(0.013)**
0.025
(0.014)
0.158
(0.003)**
52274
0.094

Black (0-1)
Male
Hispanic (0-1)
Asian (0-1)
Constant
Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

(2)
Eigth Graders in 2005 Who
Disappear From Sample By 2007
(Orleans Students)

-0.050
(0.008)**
0.045
(0.047)
0.020
(0.014)
0.097
(0.086)
-0.063
(0.072)
0.414
(0.046)**
4969
0.012

53

Appendix Table VI
Where Evacuees Come From and Go To
I classify students by their eventual status as an evacuee. I count only the 4th, 8th, 10th graders since these are the only grades tested in all years of the dataset (2004-2007). I limit the
sample to students observed in 2006 which is the year for which I know evacuee status. I only show districts with 30 or more evacuees in some year. Districts are sorted by the
number of evacuees in 2006, except for the Recover School District in New Orleans.
Number of Eventual Evacuees
district_name
Jefferson Parish
Orleans Parish
Recovery School Districts
East Baton Rouge Parish
St. Tammany Parish
Plaquemines Parish
Tangipahoa Parish
Lafayette Parish
Caddo Parish
Rapides Parish
Ascension Parish
St. Bernard Parish
St. John The Baptist Parish
St. Landry Parish
Terrebonne Parish
St. Charles Parish
City Of Baker School District
Belle Chasse Academy, Inc.
Ouachita Parish
Livingston Parish
St. Mary Parish
Bossier Parish
Lafourche Parish
Washington Parish
Iberia Parish
City Of Monroe School District
Milestone Sabis Academy Of New Orleans
Natchitoches Parish
West Baton Rouge Parish
Avoyelles Parish
Concordia Parish
St. Martin Parish

2004
4755
3297

2005
6965
4004

2006
8219
1252

22
425
453
22
3
4
4
6
495
26
5
6
28
1
18
1
7
10
1
20
9
2

35
677
738
27
2
6
2
7
781
28
2
14
39
0
54
2
9
5
1
15
21
2
2
25
1
2
2
0
0

1026
967
596
210
198
166
163
158
158
138
108
103
93
88
85
84
80
79
73
68
65
47
45
45
44
44
43
41
40

16
0
2
2
1
2

Average Standardized Math Score
2007
6750
849
1074
645
861
631
143
118
81
72
109
360
111
32
55
78
28
65
39
102
30
35
48
52
32
15
33
20
21
21
24
16

2004
-0.13
-0.532

2005
-0.188
-0.519

2006
-0.28
-0.783

-0.293
0.401
0.179
-0.048
0.201
-0.111
0.063
0.26
0.241
-0.257
-0.007
-0.02
0.372
-0.455
-0.006
0.287
0.325
-0.039
0.166
-0.101
-0.02
-0.009

-0.277
0.392
0.225
-0.093
0.232
-0.143
0.058
0.296
0.245
-0.293
0.013
-0.07
0.305
-0.637
0.061
0.336
0.248
0.072
0.101
-0.048
-0.115
0.021
-0.226
-0.345
-0.184
-0.136
-0.006
-0.254
-0.144

-0.29
0.316
0.261
-0.194
0.2
-0.043
0.043
0.27
0.081
-0.317
0.058
-0.123
0.214
-0.659
-0.016
0.322
0.228
-0.012
0.145
0.018
-0.173
0.052
-0.067
-0.794
-0.229
-0.023
-0.144
-0.233
-0.031

-1.247
-0.195
-0.168
-0.037
-0.28
-0.093

2007
-0.225
-0.041
-0.5409
-0.264
0.346
0.233
-0.198
0.162
-0.136
0.099
0.295
0.059
-0.171
0.042
-0.144
0.256
-0.754
0.329
0.293
0.254
0.039
0.058
0.058
-0.156
0.115
-0.113
-0.469
-0.251
-0.1
-0.074
-0.291
-0.091

54

Iberville Parish
St. James Parish
Vermilion Parish
Acadia Parish
Lincoln Parish
City Of Bogalusa School District

3
2
2
0
0

6
2
3
0
0
33

38
35
31
30
30
28

26
16
7
11
14
32

-0.235
-0.096
0.156
0.109
0.045

-0.251
0.102
0.1
0.032
0.135
-0.343

-0.278
0.058
0.132
0.095
0.11
-0.428

-0.37
0.099
0.058
0.024
0.068
-0.456

55

Appendix Table VII
Effects of Katrina on Orleans and Non Orleans Evacuees: Breakdown By Current Location

Initial Math Score (04 or 05)
Orleans Evacuee Currently In Orleans
Parish District
Orleans Evacuee Currently In Recovery
District
Orleans Evacuee Currently Outside N.O. MSA
Orleans Evacuee Currently in N.O. Suburban Districts
Non Orleans Evacuee Currently In Orleans Parish District
Non Orleans Evacuee Currently In Recovery District
Non Orleans Evacuee Currently Outside N.O. MSA
Non Orleans Evacuee Currently in N.O. Suburban Districts
Free/Reduced Lunch Eligible
Student is Male
Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
Constant
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Standardized Value of
Math Score
(2008)
0.738
(0.009)**
0.141
(0.109)
-0.104
(0.081)
0.130
(0.032)**
-0.023
(0.088)
0.264
(0.054)**
0.121
(0.132)
-0.004
(0.035)
-0.049
(0.036)
-0.196
(0.011)**
0.024
(0.006)**
-0.187
(0.015)**
0.075
(0.023)**
0.336
(0.031)**
0.566
(0.092)**
69466
0.545

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

56

Appendix Table VIII
Estimates of Propensity Score For Being an Orleans Parish or other Katrina Evacuee
I use the 2005 data to estimate the propensity to be an evacuee. The right hand side variables include test scores and demographics but not school dummies since in many cases the
treatment occurs at the school level. I run probit regressions and report dy/dx.

(1)
New Orleans Evacuee In
Public School
-0.000
(0.001)

(2)
Non New Orleans
Evacuee In Public School
-0.006
(0.001)**

Standardized Value of ELA Score

-0.007
(0.001)**

0.005
(0.001)**

Student is Male

-0.002
(0.001)**
0.076
(0.001)**
0.207
(0.020)**
0.385
(0.024)**
-0.040
(0.026)
-0.036
(0.019)+
-0.024
(0.009)*

0.001
(0.002)
-0.015
(0.002)**
0.272
(0.011)**
0.246
(0.014)**
0.022
(0.015)
0.025
(0.016)
0.023
(0.018)
0.016
(0.089)

Standardized Value of Math Score

Student is Black
Student is Hispanic
Student is Asian
grade==04
grade==08
grade==10
grade==12
grade==11
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

-0.005
(0.019)
110361

114210

57

Appendix Table IX
Estimated Effects of Hurricane Katrina on Math Scores Using Propensity Score Matching
I use the estimated propensity scores in Appendix Table IX and the algorithm by Becker and Ichino to perform nearest neighbor matching of each treatment observation to one or
more control observations. Standard errors in parentheses. Sample sizes for the [treatment,control] groups are in square brackets.

(1)
Orleans
Parish Evacuees
-0.115
(0.016)**
[5323, 8899]

(2)
Other Katrina
Evacuees
-0.078
(0.013)**
[9247, 14420]

Math Score in 2007

-0.024
(0.019)
[4033, 6390]

-0.071
(0.015)**
[7317, 10678]

Math Score in 2008

0.017
(0.022)
[3248, 4886]

-0.016
(0.018)
[5561, 8014]

Math Score in 2006

58

Appendix Table X
Student Clearinghouse Data: College Type By High School Class Year
I start with a random sample of Louisiana High School students who took the LEAP exams prior to the hurricanes. I infer high school class year from the year the exam was taken. I
use the Clearinghouse Data to ask whether these students are enrolled in college and type of college.

high_schoo
l_cohort

college_type
2
4

L

None

Total

2004
2005
2006
2007

1,340
1,142
1,055
988

3,097
2,680
2,367
2,387

36
30
25
24

3,527
4,148
4,553
4,601

8,000
8,000
8,000
8,000

Total

4,525

10,531

115

16,829

32,000

59

Appendix Table XI
New Enrollments Over Time in Most Popular Four Year Colleges in The Sample
I show enrollments by year in the most popular four year colleges for the sample. I also show total enrollments and enrollments in a few selective schools and a few Texas
universities.
high_sch ool_cohort
College_Name
2004
2005
2006
2007
Total
Louisiana State Unive
512
496
390
361
1759
University Of New Orl
630
266
241
282
1,419
Southeastern Louisian
272
296
341
335
1,244
Southern University A
0
341
333
300
974
University Of Louisia
204
220
216
189
829
Nicholls State Univer
118
96
65
72
351
Northwestern State Un
102
80
49
41
272
Dillard University
87
33
26
69
215
Xavier University Of
0
16
48
148
212
Grambling State Unive
39
44
53
56
192
Louisiana Tech Univer
57
55
36
42
190
Tulane University
67
38
33
46
184
Loyola University In
42
24
30
56
152
The University Of Lou
29
42
30
28
129
Texas Southern Univer
10
42
35
21
108
Mcneese State Univers
25
28
20
13
86
Rice University
4
3
1
3
11
Texas A&M University
1
4
3
3
11
University Of Texas A
0
6
3
1
10
University Of Houston
1
0
1
6
8
Boston College
2
1
1
0
4
George Washington Uni
2
2
0
0
4
Boston University
2
0
1
0
3
Georgetown University
1
1
0
1
3
Harvard University
2
1
0
0
3
Lehigh University
3
0
0
0
3
New York University
0
2
0
1
3
Princeton University
3
0
0
0
3
Stanford University
0
0
2
0
2
Yale University
0
1
1
0
2
Cornell University
0
1
0
0
1
Dartmouth College
0
0
0
1
1
Total

2,483

2,461

2,270

2,387

9,601

60

Table Ib
Means for Uniform Crime Reports Data
These are monthly crime rates for cities in Texas with more than 300,000 people. The data are for January 2004-December 2006. The cities are listed below.
Variable

Obs

Mean

Murders Per 10,000
Burglaries Per 10,000
Robberies Per 10,000
Larcenies Per 10,000

324
324
324
324

0.06
9.03
2.07
29.20

Std.
Dev.
0.06
3.81
1.59
10.15

Min

Max

0.00
2.26
0.12
8.82

0.24
19.03
6.39
51.93

Table IIb
City
Arlington
Austin
Dallas
El Paso
Fort Worth
Harris
Houston
Montgomery
San Antonio

Population in
2000
366,479
681,406
1,162,522
603,772
615,709
1,246,814
2,013,461
311,858
1,261,276

61

Table IIIb
Did Houston Crime Rates Rise After Katrina?
Data are from the Uniform Crime Reports. The unit of analysis is monthly crime rates for cities in Texas with more than 300,000 people. The data are for January 2004-December
2006. All regressions include city fixed effects and month effects. "After Sept 05" includes the month of September 2005.
(1)
Murders Per
10000 People
Houston*After Sept 05
After September 2005

(2)
Murders Per
10000 People

(3)
Robberies Per
10000 People

(4)
Robberies Per
10000 People

(5)
Burglaries Per
10000 People

(6)
Burglaries Per
10000 People

0.039
(0.011)**

0.351
(0.119)**

-0.008
(0.319)

(7)
Larcenies
Per 10000
People
1.581
(0.819)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.000
(0.042)

-0.032
(0.111)

-2.455
(0.286)**

(8)
Larcenies
Per 10000
People

Houston*Month is Sept 05

-0.009
(0.032)

-0.063
(0.367)

2.594
(0.941)**

-4.220
(2.751)

Month is Sept 05

0.007
(0.013)

0.007
(0.145)

0.694
(0.372)

-0.273
(1.088)

Constant
Observations
R-squared
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

0.060
(0.006)**
324
0.733

0.066
(0.006)**
324
0.721

2.124
(0.070)**
324
0.958

2.028
(0.066)**
324
0.957

9.190
(0.186)**
324
0.948

9.168
(0.168)**
324
0.951

31.370
(0.452)**
324
0.952

29.008
(0.492)**
324
0.941

62

Table IVb
Means for Houston Zip Code Level Crime Data
I take monthly block level crime data from the Houston Police Department and aggregate to the zip code level. Below are the means for the month of September 2005. The data set
runs from January 2005 through September of 2007. The percent of students who are Katrina evacuees is calculated using data from the Houston Independent School District. I
aggregate the data to the zip code level using the zip code of the school that the student attends. The percent Katrina evacuees is measured in the Spring of 2006.

Variable
Percent Students Katrina Evacuees in Zip
Code
Burglaries Per 10,000 People
Assaults Per 10,000 People
Murders Per 10,000 People
Auto Thefts Per 10,000 People
Narcotics Crimes Per 10,000 People
Population in Zip Code

Obs
65

Mean
0.070

Std. Dev.
0.082

Min
0.000

Max
0.500

65
17.230
12.090
0.000
51.921
65
5.633
5.299
0.000
31.788
65
0.165
0.393
0.000
2.668
65
10.032
7.530
0.000
33.907
65
4.395
5.213
0.000
26.445
65 28,535.91 13,256.32 7,496.00 76,146.00

63

Table Vb
Regression of Zip Code Level Crime Rates on Percent Katrina
I take monthly block level crime data from the Houston Police Department and aggregate to the zip code level. The number of crimes is divided by the population in the zip
code*10000. The data set runs from January 2005 through September of 2007. The percent of students who are Katrina evacuees is calculated using data from the Houston
Independent School District. I aggregate the data to the zip code level using the zip code of the school that the student attends. The percent Katrina evacuees is measured in the
Spring of 2006.
The percent of students who are evacuees is held constant for a given zip code throughout the time series. All regressions include zip code fixed effects and I identify the coefficient
on "after Sept 2005"*"percent Katrina students" in the zip code.

After Sept 05* Fraction of
Students in Zip Code Who Are Evacuees

(1)
Burglaries
Per 10,000
People

(2)
Assaults Per
10,000 People

(3)
Murders
Per 10,000 People

(4)
Auto Thefts Per
10,000 People

(5)
Narcotics
Violations Per
10,000 People

-11.306
(6.575)

-0.142
(3.884)

-0.130
(0.256)

-2.258
(5.275)

-1.026
(7.747)

After September 2005

1.575
0.036
0.037
0.769
1.600
(0.706)*
(0.417)
(0.027)
(0.566)
(0.832)
Constant
13.226
6.052
0.164
10.237
5.637
(0.465)**
(0.275)**
(0.018)**
(0.373)**
(0.548)**
Observations
2137
2137
2137
2137
2137
R-squared
0.452
0.432
0.123
0.460
0.344
Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include zip code fixed effects. Data consist of 65 zip codes in Houston * 33 months
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

64

Figure I
Distribution of Math Scores (2005) For Eventual Evacuees From New Orleans Versus All NonEvacuees
Math scores are standardized at the grade*year level. The red line is the distribution for those New Orleans students who become evacuees in
2006. The blue line is for Louisiana students who do not become evacuees. The mean difference between the two groups is roughly .5
standard deviations.

.4

kdensity mathSTD

.3

.2

.1

0
-4

-2

0

2

4

x

65

Figure II
Repeated Cross Sectional "Effects" on Math Scores
For Katrina and Rita Evacuees
I regress math scores (all grades) on dummies for eventual Katrina or Rita Evacuee Status. The 2006 and 2007 scores are post hurricane.
Students are tested in March of each year.

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
2004

Rita Evacuees

2005

2006

2007

2008

-0.05
-0.10
-0.15

Katrina Evacuees

-0.20
-0.25
-0.30

66

Figure III
Repeated Cross Sectional "Effects" on ELA Scores
For Katrina and Rita Evacuees
I regress ELA scores (all grades) on dummies for eventual Katrina or Rita Evacuee Status. The 2006 and 2007 scores are post hurricane.
Students are tested in March of each year.

0.20

0.15

0.10

Rita Evacuees

0.05

0.00
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

-0.05

Katrina Evacuees
-0.10

-0.15

-0.20

67

Figure IV
Repeated Cross Sectional "Effects" on Math Scores
New Orleans Versus Non New Orleans Evacuees
I regress math scores (all grades) on dummies for eventual Katrina Evacuee Status. The latter is split by evacuees who are in Orleans Parish
in 2004 or 2005 versus all others. The 2006 and 2007 scores are post hurricane. Students are tested in March of each year.

0.10
0.05
0.00
2004
-0.05

2005

2006

2007

2008

Non New Orleans Evacuees

-0.10
-0.15

Orleans Parish Evacuees

-0.20
-0.25
-0.30
-0.35
-0.40

68

Figure V
Repeated Cross Sectional "Effects" on ELA Scores
New Orleans Versus Non New Orleans Evacuees
I regress English Language Arts scores (all grades) on dummies for eventual Katrina Evacuee Status. The latter is split by evacuees who are
in Orleans Parish in 2004 or 2005 versus all others. The 2006 and 2007 scores are post hurricane. Students are tested in March of each year.

0.20

0.10

Non New Orleans Evacuees
0.00
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

-0.10

-0.20

Orleans Parish Evacuees
-0.30

-0.40

-0.50

69

Figure VI
Four Year College Going Rate For Three Large Districts
The sample is drawn from 10th graders who took the LEAP exam. This is their pre-Katrina district. High school cohort is simply test year+
2.

0.40
0.38
0.36

East Baton Rouge

0.34
0.32

Jefferson

0.30
0.28
0.26

Orleans

0.24
0.22
0.20
2004

2005

2006

2007

Implied Year of High School Graduation

70

.

Figure VII
Cumulative Four College Enrollement Rate
Four Suburban New Orleans Cohorts Over Time

0.32

2007

0.30

2004

2005

0.28

2006
0.26

0.24

0.22

0.20

0

1

2

3

4

Years Since Graduation

71

Figure Ib
Number of Burglaries in Houston
Data are from the Uniform Crime Reports and run from January 2004 to December 2006.
3000

Burglaries

2500

2000

Jan-07

Nov-06

Sep-06

Jul-06

May-06

Mar-06

Jan-06

Nov-05

Sep-05

Jul-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Nov-04

Sep-04

Jul-04

May-04

Mar-04

Jan-04

1500

Month

72

Figure IIb
Number of Murders in Houston
Data are from the Uniform Crime Reports and run from January 2004 to December 2006.

40

35

Murders

30

25

20

Jan-07

Nov-06

Sep-06

Jul-06

May-06

Jan-06

Mar-06

Nov-05

Sep-05

Jul-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Nov-04

Sep-04

Jul-04

May-04

Mar-04

Jan-04

15

Month

73

Figure IIIb
Number of Robberies in Houston
Data are from the Uniform Crime Reports and run from January 2004 to December 2006.

1100

900

800

700

Jan-07

Nov-06

Sep-06

Jul-06

May-06

Mar-06

Jan-06

Nov-05

Sep-05

Jul-05

May-05

Mar-05

Jan-05

Nov-04

Sep-04

Jul-04

May-04

Mar-04

600
Jan-04

Robberies

1000

Month

74

