                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS UNDER DISPERSED INFORMATION:
                         THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                             Cédric Tille
                                          Eric van Wincoop

                                        Working Paper 14390
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14390


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Cedric Tille gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation
and the National Centre of Competence in Research "Financial Valuation and Risk Management"
(NCCR FINRISK). van Wincoop gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science
Foundation (grant SES-0649442), the Bankard Fund for Political Economy, the Hong Kong Institute
for Monetary Research and the Netherlands Central Bank. We thank Philippe Bacchetta, Paul Bergin,
Casper de Vries, Bernard Dumas, Robert Kollmann, Frank Warnock, participants at the CEPR Third
Annual Conference on the Macroeconomics of Global Interdependence, the 2008 NBER summer institute,
the 2008 meetings of the Society for Economic Dynamics and the European Economic Association,
Cornell University, the IMF, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve, the Netherlands Central Bank, Hong Kong Authority Authority, UC Davis and the
University of Amsterdam for valuable discussions and comments on an earlier draft. We thank Simone
Meier for valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Cédric Tille and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
International Capital Flows under Dispersed Information: Theory and Evidence
Cédric Tille and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 14390
October 2008
JEL No. F32,F36,F41

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a new theory of international capital flows based on dispersed information across individual
investors. There is extensive evidence of information heterogeneity within and across countries, which
has proven critical to understanding asset price behavior. We introduce information dispersion into
an open economy dynamic general equilibrium portfolio choice model, and emphasize two implications
for capital flows that are specific to the presence of dispersed information. First, gross and net capital
flows become partially disconnected from publicly observed fundamentals. Second, capital flows (particularly
gross flows) contain information about future fundamentals, even after controlling for current fundamentals.
We find that these implications are quantitatively significant and consistent with data for industrialized
countries.


Cédric Tille
Graduate Institute for International and Development Studies
Department of Economics
University of Geneva
Pavillon Rigot, Avenue de la Paix 11 A
1202 Geneve, Switzerland
cedric.tille@graduateinstitute.ch

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu
1       Introduction
The sharp increase in both gross and net international capital ‡ows over the past
two decades has lead to a renewed interest in understanding their driving forces.
Until not long ago most models of international capital ‡ows were ill-equipped
to address these developments because they either limited international trade to a
riskfree bond or assumed complete …nancial markets. A new literature has recently
emerged to connect better with the empirical evidence through the development of
models that introduce portfolio choice into open economy DSGE environments.1
These models shed light on both net and gross capital ‡ows (capital in‡ows and
out‡ows), and emphasize the role of time-varying risk and expected returns in
driving capital ‡ows.
    While these models represent substantial progress, they remain signi…cantly at
odds with the data in one key respect. They assume that all agents have exactly
the same information, and therefore the same expected returns and perceived risk.
This is a major limitation for two reasons. First, there is extensive evidence on the
heterogeneity of information across investors. Most directly, survey evidence shows
that expectations about future macro fundamentals and asset prices di¤er widely
across …nancial institutions and individuals. A substantial literature has also doc-
umented information di¤erences across countries, with local investors having more
reliable information than foreign investors.2 Second, this heterogeneity plays a
central role in driving asset prices. Many features, such as the close link between
exchange rates and cumulative order ‡ow documented by Evans and Lyons (2002),
can only be understood in the presence of dispersed information. The large market
microstructure literature in …nance has emphasized the implications of information
heterogeneity for asset prices and trading volume.3
    The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we develop a general equi-
librium theory of international capital ‡ows under dispersed information that in-
tegrates key elements of the market microstructure literature in …nance and the
    1
     Devereux and Sutherland (2007), Tille and van Wincoop (2008) and Evans and Hnatkovska
(2008) have developed tractable methods for solving such models.
   2
     See for example Bae, Stulz and Tan (2007), who document that earnings forecasts are more
precise for local than foreign analysts. Section 2 of that paper provides a review of the evidence
on information asymmetries across countries. There is also evidence that agency problems are
better monitored by locals, e.g. Leuz, Lins and Warnock (2008).
   3
     See Brunnermeier (2001) for a nice review of the literature.


                                                1
DSGE literature in macroeconomics. We adopt the two key features of noisy
rational expectations (NRE) models from the market microstructure literature.
First, agents have private information about future fundamentals. Second, there
is “noise” in the form of unobserved portfolio shifts, which prevent asset prices
from fully revealing the private information. We integrate these features into a
two-country DSGE model where agents make decisions about portfolio allocation,
physical investment and saving.
    Our second contribution is to confront the main implications of the theory to
the data. In the absence of private information capital ‡ows are entirely driven by
publicly observed fundamentals (e.g. GDP growth, the budget de…cit, in‡ation).4
In our model capital ‡ows are also driven by private information as it a¤ects ex-
pectations of asset payo¤s and portfolio allocation. This leads to two implications
that we confront to the data. First, capital ‡ows are partially disconnected from
current publicly observed fundamentals. Second, capital ‡ows help forecast future
fundamentals, even after controlling for their current values. This re‡ects the role
of private information about future fundamentals. We con…rm the quantitative
relevance of these implications through a calibration of the model. We also show
that these implications are consistent with data on aggregate capital ‡ows for
industrialized countries.
    Figure 1 provides the essence of the theoretical contribution. The model con-
tains four ingredients: information dispersion, portfolio choice, non-linearity and
general equilibrium structure. Standard macro DSGE models only contain the last
two ingredients. The recent contributions introducing portfolio choice in DSGE
models include the last three ingredients, but not the …rst one. By contrast, the
models in the market microstructure literature in …nance only contain the …rst two
ingredients. In particular, NRE models are not general equilibrium frameworks,
as they assume that there is an in…nite supply of an asset with a constant riskfree
return.5 Moreover, they are entirely linear. While these aspects of NRE models
facilitate their solution, they do not …t well with the open economy DSGE setups
within which the literature on international capital ‡ows is framed.
   4
     This also includes public news variables that are featured in the literature on the impact of
news shocks, such as Beaudry and Portier (2003), Devereux and Engel (2006), Jaimovich and
Rebelo (2008) and Lorenzoni (2007).
   5
     Even when assets with a riskfree return exist (e.g. Treasury bonds), in a general equilibrium
framework the demand for such assets must equate their …nite supply.



                                                2
    We also make a methodological contribution by solving a DSGE model with
portfolio choice and information dispersion. We cannot directly rely on the re-
cently developed approximation methods for solving DSGE models with portfolio
choice, as they abstract from information dispersion. Neither can we directly ap-
ply the standard methods for solving NRE models because of the linear, partial
equilibrium, nature of these models. We develop a solution that extends the ap-
proximation methods used for solving DSGE models to encompass the key elements
from the method used for solving NRE models. Even though the combined pres-
ence of DSGE and NRE features makes the model quite rich, we are nonetheless
able to obtain an analytical solution. This facilitates transparency of the results.
    The paper is related to a small set of papers that have introduced NRE asset
pricing features into open economy models. These include Albuquerque, Bauer and
Schneider (2007,2008), Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2004,2006), Brennan and Cao
(1997), Gehrig (1993) and Veldkamp and van Nieuwerburgh (2008). These papers
focus on a variety of issues, ranging from exchange rate puzzles to international
portfolio home bias and the relationship between asset returns and portfolio ‡ows.
Together they show that information dispersion within and across countries can tell
us a lot about a wide range of stylized facts related to international asset prices and
portfolio allocation. However, none of these papers have implications for aggregate
capital in‡ows and out‡ows or even net capital ‡ows (the current account). This
is not just because the focus is on other questions but more fundamentally because
these are not true general equilibrium models due to the presence of a riskfree asset
that is in in…nite supply.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model. The solution
method is discussed in section 3. Section 4 derives implications for asset prices,
portfolio allocation and capital ‡ows. This leads to two testable implications that
are confronted to the data in section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2     The Model
There are two countries, Home and Foreign, with a unit mass of atomistic agents in
each country. Both countries produce the same good using labor and capital. The
good can be used for consumption or investment, the latter entailing an adjustment
cost. We adopt a standard overlapping generation setup with agents living two


                                          3
periods. Young agents earn labor income and make consumption and portfolio
decisions. They can invest in claims on capital in both countries. While these
are claims on aggregate capital rather than residual claims, we refer to them as
Home and Foreign equity for convenience. Old agents consume the return on their
investment.


2.1    Production, Investment and Assets
The consumption good is taken as the numeraire. It is produced in both countries
using a constant returns to scale technology in labor and capital:

                                       1 ! !
                          Yi;t = Ai;t Ki;t Ni;t            i = H; F             (1)

where H and F denote the Home and Foreign country respectively. Yi is the
output in country i, Ai is a country-speci…c exogenous stochastic productivity
term, Ki is the capital input and Ni the labor input that we normalize to unity.
Log productivity follows an autoregressive process:

                         ai;t+1 = ai;t + "i;t+1             i = H; F

where "i;t+1 has a N (0; 2a ) distribution and is uncorrelated across countries.
   The dynamics of the capital stock re‡ects depreciation at a rate and invest-
ment Ii;t :
                       Ki;t+1 = (1       ) Ki;t + Ii;t i = H; F                  (2)
A share ! of output is paid to labor, with the remaining going to capital. The
wage rate in country i is then

                         Wi;t = !Ai;t (Ki;t )1       !
                                                            i = H; F            (3)

     Capital is supplied by a competitive installment …rm. In period t the install-
ment …rm produces Ii;t units of new capital and sells them at a price Qi;t that the
…rm takes as given. The production of Ii;t units of capital good requires purchasing
Ii;t units of the consumption good and incurring a quadratic adjustment cost, so
the total cost in units of the consumption good is:

                                            (Ii;t        Ki;t )2
                               Ii;t +                                           (4)
                                        2           Ki;t


                                               4
The pro…t of installing Ii;t units of capital in country i is then Qi;t Ii;t minus the
cost (4). Pro…t maximization by the installment …rm implies a standard Tobin’s
Q relation:
                                 Ii;t        Qi;t 1
                                      = +                                          (5)
                                 Ki;t
    A unit of Home equity is a claim on a unit of Home capital. The equity price
is equal to the cost of purchasing one unit of capital from the installment …rm,
QH;t . An investor purchasing a unit of Home equity at the end of period t gets a
dividend of (1 !)YH;t+1 =KH;t+1 in period t + 1, and can sell the remaining 1
units of equity at a price QH;t+1 . The returns on Home and Foreign equity are
then
                                                       !
                           (1   !) AH;t+1 (KH;t+1 )        + (1      ) QH;t+1
              RH;t+1 =                                                            (6)
                                             QH;t
                                                       !
                           (1   !) AF;t+1 (KF;t+1 )        + (1     ) QF;t+1
              RF;t+1 =                                                            (7)
                                              QF;t

2.2    Private Information and Noise
We import the two key elements of NRE models: private information about future
fundamentals and noise that prevents asset prices from completely revealing the
private information. We introduce these elements to the model as follows.

Private Information

    Each agent receives private signals about next period’s productivity innovations
in both countries. The signals observed by Home investor j about respectively the
log of Home and Foreign productivity are:
                H;H                H;H                 H;H               2
               vj;t = "H;t+1 +     j;t                 j;t        N 0;   HH       (8)
                H;F                H;F                H;F                2
               vj;t = "F;t+1 +     j;t                j;t     N 0;       HF       (9)

Each signal consists of the true innovation and a stochastic error. Similarly, agent
j in the Foreign country observes the signals:
                F;H                F;H                 F;H               2
               vj;t = "H;t+1 +     j;t                 j;t    N 0;       HF      (10)
                F;F                F;F                F;F                2
               vj;t   = "F;t+1 +   j;t                j;t     N 0;       HH      (11)

As is standard in NRE models, we assume that the errors of the signals average
                                             R1          R 1 H;F
to zero across investors in a given country ( 0 H;H
                                                j;t dj =  0 j;t
                                                                 dj = 0).

                                          5
    Our setup is symmetric as the variance of signals on domestic productivity
is the same for agents in the two countries, and so is the variance of signals on
productivity abroad. We allow for an information asymmetry with agents receiving
more precise signals about shocks in their own country than abroad: 2HH       2
                                                                              HF .

Noise

    Noise takes the form of unobserved portfolio shifts between assets for reasons
unrelated to expected returns. In the NRE literature the noise is usually simply
introduced exogenously in the form of noise trade or liquidity trade. Some papers
have introduced it endogenously in various forms of hedge trade and liquidity
trade.6 For our purposes the existence of a source of noise is more important than
the exact nature of it.
    We introduce the noise through a time-varying cost of investing abroad. A
Home agent j investing in the Foreign country receives the return (7) times an
iceberg cost e Hj;t < 1. Similarly, a Foreign agent j investing in the Home country
receives the return (6) times an iceberg cost e F j;t < 1. The cost of investment
abroad does not represent a loss in resources but is instead a fee paid to brokers
from the investor’s country.
    This cost of investing abroad ‡uctuates around a level that is the same for
all investors. The average cost generates portfolio home bias in the steady state
of the model, with agents tilting their holdings toward domestic assets. There are
two reasons for introducing portfolio home bias. First, it is a well known feature of
the data. Second, we will see that the impact of information dispersion on capital
‡ows depends on the extent of portfolio home bias.
    Fluctations around include both agent-speci…c and country-speci…c compo-
nents. The costs faced by Home investors in period t are distributed around an
average value H;t = (1 + "t ), where "t has a N (0; 2a ) distribution. This av-
erage cost H;t is unobserved. An individual investor making a portfolio decision
at time t knows her own cost Hj;t , but we assume that this individual cost is
an in…nitely noisy signal of the average cost. This assumption can be relaxed but
simpli…es the analysis.7 The average cost in the Foreign country is F;t = (1 "t ),
which is also unobserved. For simplicity, our speci…cation implies that the average
  6
    See for example Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006), Dow and Gorton (1995), Spiegel and
Subrahmanyam (1992) and Wang (1994).
  7
    See Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) for a similar assumption.


                                           6
of H;t and F;t is constant, and focuses on movements in the relative cost between
the two countries. For instance, an increase in D   t = H;t      F;t = 2 "t leads to
a portfolio shift towards Home equity, as it is relatively more expensive for Home
investors to invest abroad than for Foreign investors. Such unobserved portfolio
shifts prevent the relative equity price from revealing private information.


2.3    Consumption and Portfolio Choice
Our assumption of an overlapping generation structure simpli…es the model in
two ways. First, it removes the well-known pitfall in open economy models that
temporary income shocks can have a permanent e¤ect on the distribution of wealth
across countries when agents have in…nite lives. The …nite life assumption of OLG
models leads to a stationary distribution of wealth. Second, investors have only
a one period investment horizon and therefore do not face the issue of hedging
against changes in future expected returns.
   A young Home agent j at time t chooses her consumption and portfolio to
maximize
                                1                    1
                             Hj                  Hj
                           Cy;t               Co;t+1
                                    + EtHj                                     (12)
                            1                    1
where Cy;t is consumption when young and Co;t+1 is consumption when old. We
assume      > 1. Agent j maximizes (12) subject to the budget constraint and
                   p;Hj
portfolio return, Rt+1  :
                      Hj                 Hj    p;Hj
                     Co;t+1 = (WH;t     Cy;t )Rt+1
                      p;Hj
                     Rt+1  = zHj;t RH;t+1 + (1        zHj;t )e     Hj;t
                                                                          RF;t+1   (13)

where zHj;t is the fraction of wealth invested in Home equity.
   The …rst-order conditions for consumption and portfolio choice are:
                                                                               1
                     Hj                         Hj
                    Cy;t     =     WH;t        Cy;t      EtHj Rt+1
                                                               p;Hj
                                                                                   (14)

                   EtHj Rt+1
                         p;Hj
                                      RH;t+1     RF;t+1 e        Hj;t
                                                                          =0       (15)

(14) is the consumption Euler equation that links the marginal utility of current
consumption with the expected marginal utility of future consumption, including
the rate of return. (15) is the portfolio Euler equation that equates the expected


                                          7
discounted return (the expected product of the asset pricing kernel and asset re-
turns) across assets. The asset pricing kernel is the marginal utility of future
consumption, which is proportional to the return on the agent’s portfolio. A cen-
tral aspect of our model is that (14)-(15) are evaluated with expectations that can
di¤er across individual agents.
    Foreign agents face an analogous decision problem with portfolio return
                       p;F j
                      Rt+1   = zF j;t e   F j;t
                                                  RH;t+1 + (1       zF j;t )RF;t+1           (16)

The corresponding optimality conditions for a Foreign investor j are:
                                                                                  1
                          Fj                             Fj
                         Cy;t      =      WF;t          Cy;t       EtF j Rt+1
                                                                          p;F j
                                                                                             (17)

                       EtF j Rt+1
                              p;F j
                                           RH;t+1 e        F j;t
                                                                   RF;t+1 = 0                (18)

The average portfolio shares invested by Home and Foreign investors in Home
                         R1                    R1
equity are denoted zH;t = 0 zHj;t dj and zF;t = 0 zF j;t dj.


2.4     Asset and Goods Market Clearing
We assume that the brokers who receive the fees on investment abroad fully con-
sume it. Owners of the installment …rms also consume pro…ts each period. The
goods market equilibrium condition is:
                                                           Z 1              Z 1
                                                                   Hj            Fj
      YH;t+1 + YF;t+1 = QH;t+1 IH;t+1 + QF;t+1 IF;t+1 +         Cy;t+1 dj +     Cy;t+1 dj
                                                            0                0
        Z 1
                      Hj
      +     (WH;t Cy;t    ) (zHj;t RH;t+1 + (1 zHj;t )RF;t+1 ) dj
         0
        Z 1
                      Fj
      +     (WF;t Cy;t   ) (zF j;t RH;t+1 + (1 zF j;t )RF;t+1 ) dj
           0

The left hand side is world output. The …rst two terms on the right hand side rep-
resent investment.8 The next two terms represent consumption by young agents.
The …nal two terms represent consumption by old agents and the brokers.9
   8
      The installation cost does not enter. On the one hand it raises demand for the good (from
the installation process itself). On the other hand it reduces pro…ts, and therefore consumption,
of the owners of installment …rms.
    9
      The cost of investing abroad does not enter, as the income of the brokers exactly o¤sets the
cost for old agents.


                                                    8
   Asset market clearing requires that the value of capital in a country is equal
to the value of holdings of the country’s equity by young agents. The …nancial
                                                               Hj               Fj
wealth of respectively a Home and Foreign agent j is WHt Cy;t       and WF t Cy;t  .
The asset market clearing conditions are then
                          Z 1                        Z 1
                                      Hj                        Fj
        QH;t KH;t+1 =         (WHt Cy;t )zHj;t dj +      (WF t Cy;t )zF j;t dj (19)
                           0                          0
                          Z 1
                                      Hj
         QF;t KF;t+1 =        (WHt Cy;t  )(1 zHj;t )dj +
                           0
                          Z 1
                                      Fj
                              (WF t Cy;t )(1 zF j;t )dj                        (20)
                           0



3    Solution Method
The solution combines and extends methods for solving standard NRE models
with a recently developed local approximation methods for solving DSGE models
with portfolio choice. NRE models are usually solved in three steps. The …rst step
involves a conjecture for the equilibrium asset price. The second step computes the
expectation of future asset payo¤s by solving a signal extraction problem that uses
public and private information as well as information from the equilibrium asset
price. The last step invokes asset market equilibrium. The main di¢ culty here
will be in the last step as we need to impose not just asset market equilibrium but
the complete general equilibrium of the model in a highly non-linear environment.
    We handle the last step by extending the local approximation method recently
developed by Devereux and Sutherland (2007) and Tille and van Wincoop (2008)
for DSGE models with portfolio choice. The method iteratively solves for the
various components of the variables. A variable xt can be decomposed into its
components of all orders. The zero-order component, denoted x(0), is the level of
xt when a ! 0. The …rst-order component xt (1) is linear in model innovations,
or in the standard deviation a of model innovations. Higher orders are de…ned
analogously.
    We discuss each of these three steps in broad terms. The algebra is described
further in the Appendix, with complete details left to a Technical Appendix that
is available on request. We use lower case letters for logs and superscripts A and
D to denote respectively the average and di¤erence of a variable across the two
countries (xD = xH xF , xA = (xH + xF )=2).

                                         9
3.1     Asset Price Conjecture
Only the relative equity price is a¤ected by private information. The average
equity price is driven by global asset demand and therefore global saving, which
is not a¤ected by private information. We make the following conjecture for the
relative log equity price qtD = qH;t qF;t :

                                  qtD = f (St ; xD
                                                 t )                            (21)

where
                               St = (aD    A    D    A
                                      t ; at ; kt ; kt )                        (22)
is the vector of publicly observed state variables and

                                xD    D
                                 t = "t+1 +
                                                  D
                                                  t =                           (23)

depends on the unobserved state variables "D             D
                                               t+1 and t . Since we adopt a local
approximation method, described below, the conjecture (21) is veri…ed locally up
to quadratic terms in observed and unobserved state variables.
    The logic behind this conjecture is as follows. As in any DSGE model, the
solution for control variables (including asset prices) will be a function of state
variables. Usually these state variables are publicly observed. In our model this is
the case for the variables St . However, there are now also unobserved state vari-
ables, on which agents get noisy signals. We conjecture that the unobserved state
variables jointly a¤ect the asset price through xD
                                                 t . The relative future productivity
             D
innovation "t+1 should a¤ect the relative asset price through private information.
The relative asset price should depend on D     t as time variation in this relative
friction leads to portfolio shifts between Home and Foreign equity.


3.2     Signal Extraction
This conjecture signi…cantly simpli…es signal extraction. While the function f (:)
will be non-linear in xD
                       t , two aspects make simple linear signal extraction feasible.
First, we have conjectured (and will verify) that the relative asset price depends
on a variable xD                                   D         D
                t that is linear in the unknowns "t+1 and t . Second, locally qt
                                                                                   D

will depend on xD                                                            D
                 t with a positive slope. This means that we can extract xt from
knowledge of the relative asset price qtD and the publicly observed state space St .


                                          10
The asset price signal therefore translates into a signal that is linear in the future
fundamental D  t+1 and the “noise” t .
                                      D

    We then have three linear signals about next period’s technology innovations:
(i) the price signal, which tells us the level of "D t+1 +
                                                              D
                                                              t = from (23), (ii) the
private signals (8)-(11) and (iii) the public signals that "H;t+1 and "F;t+1 are drawn
from independent N (0; 2a ) distributions. We solve this signal extraction problem
in Appendix B. It gives conditional normal distributions of "H;t+1 and "F;t+1 that
vary across agents. The expectation of future productivity innovations by agent j
in the Home country takes the form
                                       Hj      D       Hj     H;H        Hj      H;F
                       "H;t+1          "H;xD xt    +   "H;vH vj;t   +    "H;vF vj;t
               EtH;j             =      Hj     D       Hj     H;H        Hj     H;F            (24)
                       "F;t+1           "F;xD xt   +   "F;vH vj;t   +    "F;vF vj;t

All coe¢ cients are de…ned in Appendix B. The average expectation across Home
agents, denoted by EtH , is:

                         Hj          Hj                   Hj            Hj                 Hj         D
      "H;t+1             "H;xD   +   "H;vH   "H;t+1 +     "H;vF         "H;xD   "F;t+1 +   "H;xD      t =
EtH             =        Hj          Hj                    Hj           Hj                 Hj
      "F;t+1             "F;xD   +   "F;vH   "H;t+1 +      "F;vF        "F;xD   "F;t+1 +   "F;xD
                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                   t =
                                                                               (25)
where we used (8)-(11) and (23). Analogous results apply to Foreign agents. Av-
erage expectations of future productivity therefore depend on future productivity
levels themselves and on the noise D t . Through rational confusion an increases in
  D                            D                               D
  t raises the expectation of "t+1 . This is because a rise in t leads to a higher
relative price of Home equity, which agents use as a signal of future relative pro-
ductivity.


3.3    General Equilibrium
The …nal step in the solution of NRE models involves imposing asset market equi-
librium. In a DSGE model this step is more involved since we will need to invoke
the full general equilibrium of the model, including multiple asset market and
goods market clearing conditions and Euler equations for portfolio choice and con-
sumption. Moreover, we need to do so in a highly non-linear environment.
    We adopt and extend the local approximation method for DSGE models with
portfolio choice developed by Devereux and Sutherland (2007) and Tille and van
Wincoop (2008), from hereon DS and TvW. It provides an exact solution to the


                                               11
zero, …rst and second-order components of control and state variables. The only
exception is ztD = zH;t zF;t , for which the method delivers the zero and …rst-order
components.
    The method distinguishes between the di¤erence across countries in portfolio
Euler equations and all “other equations”and similarly between the di¤erence ztD
across countries in portfolio allocation and all “other variables”. It …rst solves
for the zero-order component of ztD and the …rst-order component of the “other
variables”by jointly imposing the second-order component of the di¤erence across
countries in portfolio Euler equations and the …rst-order component of the “other
equations”. This step is subsequently repeated one order higher for all equations
and variables in order to obtain the …rst-order component of ztD jointly with the
second-order component of all “other variables”. We refer to DS and TvW for
detailed descriptions of the method.
    In implementing and extending the method to our model, three issues need to
be addressed that are speci…c to the introduction of information dispersion. These
involve the order component of the errors of the private signals, the computation
of expectations of equations and the computation of the parameter that captures
the noise to signal ratio in the relative asset price in equation (23).

Errors in Private Signals

    We assume that 2HH and 2HF are zero-order. It is important to distinguish
between the volatility of the innovations in the model, captured by 2a , and the
uncertainty of the private signals about these innovations, captured by 2HH and
  2
  HF . We keep these two dimensions distinct. A reduction in the volatility of
innovations is then not accompanied by an increased precision of the signals on
the innovations.
    This assumption implies that the private signals (8)-(11) entail a zero-order
component (the errors of the signals) and a …rst-order component (the true future
productivity innovations). In Appendix B we show that it implies that the coef-
…cients on the private signals in (24), Hj        Hj       Hj      Hj
                                         "H;vH , "H;vF , "F;vH , "F;vF , are of order
two. Di¤erences in expected returns across individual investors are then second
order, as they combine these second-order coe¢ cients with the zero-order errors of
the private signals in (8)-(11). The di¤erences in expected returns being small, of
order two or higher, ensures that the cross-sectional distribution of portfolio shares
does not explode when risk becomes small. This is because expected returns are

                                         12
divided by the variance of the excess return in the optimal portfolios. If errors in
private signals were …rst-order, di¤erences in expectations would be …rst-order as
well and the distribution of portfolio shares would explode for low levels of risk.
For the same reason we assume that the average cost of investment abroad is
second-order.

Computing Expectations

    Consider the expected value of a term eq, which consists of one or several
variables, E eq. In common knowledge models, computing the second-order com-
ponent of this expectation simply entails taking the expectation of the second-order
component of eq, so that [E eq](2) = E[eq(2)]. This is no longer the case here
though,10 and we need to be careful to …rst compute expectations of equations be-
fore splitting them into components of di¤erent orders. To compute expectations
of equations, both the equations and the solution of control variables need to be in
polynomial form. It is su¢ cient to use an o-order polynomial approximation when
the goal is to compute the o-order component of an equation or variable.
    Equations are written as polynomials in St , xD    D                                0
                                                  t , xt+1 and "t+1 = ("H;t+1 ; "F;t+1 ) .
Control variables are conjectured as polynomial solutions in the observed and
unobserved state variables St and xD t . A quadratic polynomial conjecture for the
control variables is su¢ cient as we will only solve zero, …rst and second-order
components of control variables. We therefore conjecture (for h = D; A)11
                                                                                      2
           qth =      qh St   +         D
                                  5;qh xt   + St0 Aqh St +          D
                                                             qh St xt   +   qh   xD
                                                                                  t       +   qh    (26)
                                                                                    2
           chyt =     ch St   +         D
                                  5;ch xt   + St0 Ach St +          D
                                                             ch St xt   +   ch   xD
                                                                                  t       +   ch    (27)
          h                             D                                           2
         kt+1 =       kh St   +   5;kh xt   + St0 Akh St +          D
                                                             kh St xt   +   kh   xD
                                                                                  t       +    kh   (28)

    Expectations of equations are computed using the results from signal extrac-
tion. Invoking the order components of equations as in DS and TvW will then give
the zero and …rst-order components of the parameters (with various subscripts)
in (26)-(28) and the zero-order component of all the other parameters.
  10
     As an example, "H;t+1 (2) = 0, so that Et ["H;t+1 (2)] = 0. But Et ("H;t+1 ) has a non-zero
second-order component as the weight attached to private signals is of order two and higher.
  11
     No conjectures will be needed for ztD and ztA . After all “other variables” are solved up to
second order, ztD (1) follows from the third-order component of the di¤erence in portfolio Euler
equations and ztA (1), ztA (2) follow from the …rst and second-order components of the di¤erence
of the asset market clearing conditions.


                                                  13
Computing

    In NRE models the signal to noise ratio in (23) can be solved by imposing
asset market equilibrium. A version of that applies here as well. We need to
impose the di¤erence between the two asset market clearing conditions (19)-(20).
This relates the average share invested in Home equity, ztA , to the share of Home
equity supply. Combining the …rst-order components of (26)-(28) with that of
(19)-(20) solves ztA (1) by equating it to the …rst-order component from the supply
side. In order to actually impose market equilibrium we need to compute ztA (1)
from a portfolio or demand perspective as well. This is done by using the third-
order component of the average of the Euler equations for portfolio choice, (15)
and (18). Equating ztA (1) from the demand side to the Home equity share from
the supply side yields a solution for , as shown in Appendix C.


4     Asset Prices, Portfolio Allocation and Capital
      Flows
In this section we discuss the …rst-order solution of asset prices, optimal portfolio
shares and capital ‡ows.


4.1    Asset Prices
The …rst-order solution of the relative asset price is

      qtD (1) =    q;D (0)St (1)   +            D
                                       5;qD (0)xt (1)

              =    1;qD   (0) aD
                               t +     3;qD   (0) ktD (1) +   5;qD   (0) "D
                                                                          t+1 +
                                                                                  D
                                                                                  t (3)=   (29)

with all parameters positive. The relative asset price is therefore driven by both
publicly observed state variables, aD      D                                      D
                                    t and kt , and by unobserved state variables "t+1
and D t . Both of these unobserved state variables generate a disconnect between
asset prices and publicly observed fundamentals, a fact that is widely documented.
    In the absence of information dispersion the relative asset price would, to the
…rst-order, be entirely determined by the publicly observed state variables St . This
is because future productivity innovations cannot a¤ect current equilibrium asset
prices, and shocks to D t only have a third-order e¤ect on asset prices. Recall that
a rise in D t = 2 "t is third-order. This leads to a third-order increase in the


                                                 14
expected excess return on Home equity. In order to clear …nancial markets there
needs to be a third-order drop in the expected excess return on Home equity, which
takes place through a third-order rise in the Home equity price.
    At …rst it may seem surprising that D              D
                                              t and "t+1 have a …rst-order e¤ect on
asset prices when we introduce information dispersion. As discussed above, shocks
to D t are third-order. (25) also shows that private information alone leads to
third-order changes in average expectations about "D     t+1 , as …rst-order innovations
are combined with the second-order coe¢ cients on private signals.
    The …rst-order impact of D              D
                                 t and "t+1 in (29) re‡ects the role of the relative
asset price as an information coordination mechanism. Imagine that agents ig-
nored qtD as a source of information. The impact of D                 D
                                                             t and "t+1 would then be
third-order as discussed above. But because both are of the same order in their
impact on the relative asset price, it would imply that the price contains much
more precise information about "D    t+1 than the private signals. After all, in the
private signals the error terms are much larger (zero-order) than the productivity
innovations themselves (…rst-order). It is this feature that explains why in equilib-
rium the weight attached to the price signal in expectations of future productivity
innovations is much larger (zero-order) than the weight attached to private signals
(second-order).
    The zero-order weight attached to the price signal implies that changes in D          t
and "Dt+1 have a …rst-order e¤ect on  the  expectation of " H;t+1 and " F;t+1 , which leads
                                        12
to a …rst-order e¤ect on asset prices. It is through the information coordination
role of the price signal that agents learn a lot more about "D       t+1 , amplifying its
                                                                D
impact from third to …rst-order. The impact of the noise t is also ampli…ed from
third to …rst-order as it a¤ects the expectation of future productivity innovations
through the price signal (rational confusion). This ampli…ed e¤ect of the noise
can make a huge di¤erence. For example, Gennotte and Leland (1990) provide
evidence that during the U.S. stock market crash of October 19, 1987, the impact
of non-informational trade (noise) on the U.S. stock price was ampli…ed by a factor
greater than 100 as a result of the information content of the stock price.
  12                                                         Hj           Hj
    In (24) this take place through zero-order coe¢ cients   H;xD   and   F;xD   that multiply xD
                                                                                                t
in the expectations of future productivity innovations.




                                              15
4.2       Portfolio Allocation
We now discuss the implications of the model for portfolio allocation, a key deter-
minant of international capital ‡ows. We present the results in terms of the average
portfolio share invested in Home equity, ztA , and the di¤erence across countries in
the portfolio share invested in Home equity, ztD , considering both their zero and
…rst-order components.
   In terms of zero-order components, the asset market clearing conditions (19)-
(20) imply that z A (0) = 0:5. The di¤erence in zero-order portfolio shares, z D (0),
which represents portfolio home bias, is computed from the second-order compo-
nent of the di¤erence in portfolio Euler equations (15) and (18), and re‡ects the
mean level of international …nancial frictions:
                                                   2
                                 z D (0) =                                                  (30)
                                              Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

where ert+1 = rH;t+1 rF;t+1 is the di¤erence in log returns or excess return.
   We obtain expressions for the …rst-order component of the average and di¤er-
ence in optimal portfolio shares from the third-order component of respectively
the average and di¤erence in portfolio Euler equations (15) and (18)13 :
                                D
                                t (3)              EtA ert+1 (3)
           ztA (1) =                         +                                              (31)
                        2   Et (ert+1 )2 (2)       Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                              1 [vart (rHt+1 )] (3) [vart (rF t+1 )] (3)
                                          2 Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                        EtH ert+1 (3)      EtF ert+1 (3)              [vart (ert+1 )](3)
          ztD (1)   =                                       z D (0)                         (32)
                                [vart (ert+1 )] (2)                   [vart (ert+1 )] (2)

where EtA denotes the average expectation across agents from both countries and
Eth the average expectations across agents from country h (h = H; F ).
    The …rst-order component of ztA is driven by three intuitive elements in (31).
First, a rise in D
                 t (3) leads to a portfolio shift towards Home equity as the cost of
investment abroad rises for Home relative to Foreign investors. Second, a higher
average expected excess return ert+1 on Home equity net of …nancial frictions also
leads to a portfolio shift towards Home equity. The last term in (31) represents
time-variation in second moments, which are captured by their third-order compo-
 13
      See Appendix C and D and the Technical Appendix for full derivations.



                                              16
nents.14 A rise in the variance of the Home return relative to that of the Foreign
equity return leads to a shift towards Foreign equity (assuming > 1).
    The expression (32) for the di¤erence ztD (1) in portfolio shares captures time-
variation in portfolio home bias. It is driven by two factors. First, an increase in
the expected excess return on Home equity by Home investors relative to Foreign
investors will lead to increased home bias. Second, an increase in the variance
of the excess return reduces home bias. There is a tradeo¤ between investing at
home due to the friction and achieving the gains from portfolio diversi…cation. A
higher variance of the excess return makes diversi…cation more attractive, reducing
home bias.
    In the Technical Appendix we show that these moments a¤ecting ztD (1) take
the form:

                                                          2    1       1
                [EH;t ert+1 ](3)   [EF;t ert+1 ](3) =   1 a   2        2
                                                                             "A
                                                                              t+1        (33)
                                                              HH       HF
                                         2
                [vart (ert+1 )](3) =   2 a St (1)                                        (34)

where the parameters i are zero-order and follow from the …rst and second-order
solutions of the “other variables”. To understand (33), assume that 2HH < 2HF , so
that agents have better quality signals about their domestic equity market. When
productivity levels rise in both countries next period, agents from both countries
expect that productivity in their own country will rise more because they have
better quality information about their own productivity. As a result they both
expect the return on their own country’s equity to rise relative to that of the other
country, which leads to increased portfolio home bias ( 1 > 0). (34) implies that
changes in the variance of the excess return over time are driven only by changes
in publicly observed state variables.15


4.3     International Capital Flows
After some straightforward balance of payments accounting outlined in Appendix
E, and using the results on portfolio allocation discussed above, we obtain the
  14
    See Tille and van Wincoop (2008) for a further discussion of this.
  15
    Only the second and fourth elements of 2 are non-zero, so that only global state variables
a¤ect the variance of the excess return.




                                              17
following expressions for capital out‡ows and in‡ows:
                                              z D (0)     [vart (ert+1 )] (3)
  outf lowst (1) = (1     zH (0)) sH
                                   t (1) +                                                 (35)
                                                 2        Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                          EtA ert+1 (3)IS       1       EtH ert+1 (3)           EtF ert+1 (3)
                          Et (ert+1 )2 (2)      2                Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                                              z D (0)     [vart (ert+1 )] (3)
   inf lowst (1) = (1     zH (0)) sFt (1) +                                                (36)
                                                 2        Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                          EtA ert+1 (3)IS       1       EtH ert+1 (3)           EtF ert+1 (3)
                     +
                          Et (ert+1 )2 (2)      2                Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

The terms on the right hand side are related to saving, expected returns and risk.
For each of them we now discuss their intuitive meaning and determinants.

Portfolio Growth

   The …rst term on the right hand side of (35)-(36) represents portfolio growth,
which measures out‡ows and in‡ows when Home and Foreign saving are invested
abroad at the steady state portfolio share 1 zH (0). The portfolio growth compo-
nent depends entirely on Home and Foreign saving, which can be written as

                    sH
                     t (1) =     sH   St (1)        0:5z D (0) qtD (1)                     (37)
                    sFt (1) =    sF   St (1) + 0:5z D (0) qtD (1)                          (38)

where sH and sF are zero-order vectors. Home and Foreign saving depend both
on changes in publicly observed state variables and changes in relative asset prices.
The latter generate wealth e¤ects that impact consumption of the old generations.
When the relative price of Home equity rises, the old generation in the Home
country will be relatively wealthy and will consume this additional wealth. This
lowers Home saving.

Time-Varying Risk

    The other three terms driving capital in‡ows and out‡ows (35)-(36) are a result
of portfolio reallocation due to changes in risk and expected returns. The second
term represents capital ‡ows due to changes in the variance of the excess return.
An increase in the variance of the excess return makes portfolio diversi…cation
more attractive and therefore leads to an increase in both capital in‡ows and
out‡ows. As can be seen from (34), the variance of the excess return only depends

                                         18
on publicly observed state variables. Time variation in the variance of the Home
return relative to that of the Foreign return does not a¤ect capital ‡ows. From
(31), we see that these moments only a¤ect average portfolio shares. When there
is an average shift towards Home equity, the market will equilibrate through a
third-order rise in the relative Home equity price. This leads to a third-order drop
in the expected excess return on Home equity, causing a …rst-order portfolio shift
back towards Foreign equity.16 In the end capital ‡ows remain una¤ected.

Average Expected Excess Return

    The third term on the right hand side of (35)-(36) represents capital ‡ows due to
the average change in the expected excess return. As discussed in detail in Tille and
van Wincoop (2008), not all changes in expected excess returns generate capital
‡ows. We have already discussed the example above where changes in expected
returns equilibrate asset markets when there are time-varying second moments.
No capital ‡ows result from this. Another example is the adjustment following a
rise in the relative price of Home equity. This raises the relative supply of Home
equity and a third-order increase in the expected excess return on Home equity is
necessary for investors to be willing to accept this shift in the composition of their
portfolio. But no capital ‡ows take place as a rise in the relative Home asset price
automatically changes the portfolio composition without any asset trade.
    The Technical Appendix derives all of the components determining changes in
the equilibrium expected excess return. The only one that a¤ects capital ‡ows is
denoted with an IS superscript in (35) and (36). It is related to changes in saving
and investment and is equal to

                                       Et (ert+1 )2 (2) D
                EtA ert+1 (3)IS =                       it (1)      z D (0)sD
                                                                            t (1)           (39)
                                             4
When relative investment is high in the Home country, it raises the relative supply
of Home equity. A higher expected excess return on Home equity is then needed
to clear asset markets. This leads to increased capital in‡ows and lower capital
out‡ows. When relative saving in Home is high, there will be an excess demand for
Home equity due to portfolio home bias. A lower expected excess return is then
needed to clear asset markets, which leads to larger out‡ows and smaller in‡ows.
  16
    As can be seen from (31) and (32), third-order changes in expected returns lead to …rst-order
portfolio shifts as they are divided by a second-order variance of the excess return.


                                               19
       Cross-country di¤erences in saving and investment are equal to

                 sD
                  t (1) =          aD
                                    t (1) + (1    !) ktD (1)    z D (0) qtD (1)              (40)
                               1
                  iD
                   t (1) =         qtD (1)                                                   (41)

Relative asset prices a¤ect relative saving through a wealth e¤ect and relative
investment through a standard Tobin’s Q equation.

Di¤erences in Expected Returns across Countries

    The last term driving capital out‡ows and in‡ows in (35) and (36) represents
changes in the average expected excess return of Home investors relative to Foreign
investors. When investors from both countries become more optimistic about the
expected excess return on their domestic equity, both capital out‡ows and in‡ows
will drop. As can be seen from (33), this will happen when there is a positive future
world productivity innovation "A t+1 and investors have better quality information
about domestic productivity innovations. Investors from both countries then be-
lieve that their own relative productivity will rise as they have better information
on that, leading to a retrenchment towards domestic assets.

Impact of Information Dispersion on Capital Flows

    In analyzing the impact of information dispersion on capital ‡ows we will dis-
tinguish between gross capital ‡ows, de…ned as out‡ows plus in‡ows, and net
capital ‡ows, de…ned as out‡ows minus in‡ows. The latter is also equal to the
current account.17 In the absence of information dispersion capital ‡ows (35)-(36)
are entirely determined by the publicly observed state variables St (1). Even unob-
served portfolio shifts associated with Dt do not have a …rst-order e¤ect on capital
‡ows in that case. A …rst-order portfolio shift from Foreign to Home leads to a
third-order increase in the Home relative equity price. This leads to a third-order
drop in the expected excess return on Home equity, which generates an entirely
o¤setting …rst-order portfolio shift back from Home to Foreign.
    With dispersed information both gross and net capital ‡ows are also a¤ected
by state variables that are not publicly observed. Figure 2 illustrates the channels
through which this happens. The arrows on the left hand side of Figure 2 illustrate
  17
    It is easily seen from (35)-(36) that outf lowst (1) inf lowst (1) = 0:5(sD
                                                                              t (1) iD
                                                                                     t (1)). Using
               H     F    H     F                   H      H
the equality s + s = i + i , this is equal to st (1) it (1), which is the current account.



                                                 20
the impact of the unobserved state variables D          D
                                                t and "t+1 on net capital ‡ows. We
have already seen that they have a …rst-order e¤ect on the relative asset price qtD
in the presence of private information. This a¤ects saving and investment through
a wealth e¤ect and a Tobin’s Q e¤ect, which in turn a¤ects net capital ‡ows both
through changes in the equilibrium expected excess return and through portfolio
growth.18
    The right hand side of Figure 2 illustrates the impact of the unobserved state
variable "A                                     A
          t+1 on gross capital ‡ows. A rise in "t+1 leads agents from both countries
to become more optimistic about the relative return on the asset from their own
country. The resulting retrenchment leads to a drop in both capital in‡ows and
out‡ows and therefore gross ‡ows.
    We can summarize these results in the form of two implications that capture
the impact of dispersed information on both gross and net capital ‡ows:

Implication 1 Capital ‡ows are partially disconnected from current publicly ob-
served fundamentals.

Implication 2 Capital ‡ows help forecast future fundamentals, even after control-
ling for current fundamentals.


Discussion

    Implications 1 and 2 are broader than the speci…cs of our model. They do not
really depend on assumptions we made about the production side of the economy
or preferences. The OLG assumption is not key either. It is only a tractable device
to generate stationarity of the equilibrium. The implications also do not depend on
how we introduced the noise in the economy through the cost of investing abroad;
we could simply have introduced exogenous noise traders. The key assumption
that drives Implications 1 and 2 is dispersed information. The speci…cs of how we
introduced dispersed information are not important. We could for example have
assumed that agents have private information about fundamentals further than
  18
    To some extent these e¤ects depend on portfolio home bias, which a¤ects the impact of
relative asset price changes on Home and Foreign saving and the impact of relative saving on the
average expected excess return. See (37), (38) and (39).




                                              21
one period into the future, as in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006, 2008),19 or
that within each country there are informed and uninformed agents (e.g. Wang
(1994)).
    While generalizing the model should not qualitatively change the impact of
dispersed information as summarized in Implications 1 and 2, additional channels
through which these implications come about are certainly possible. One example
is an extension where agents work both periods of their life and have private
information about their future labor income. Expectations of future labor income
a¤ect saving decisions, which a¤ects capital ‡ows through portfolio growth and
the average expected excess return. Implication 1 will hold as this is private
information. Implication 2 will hold as well as it is information about future labor
income. This example also illustrates that asset prices are not necessarily the only
channel through which private information can a¤ect net capital ‡ows.
    One may also ask whether there are other models, without information disper-
sion, that lead to Implications 1 and 2. We have already seen that unobserved
exogenous portfolio shifts D  t do not have a …rst-order e¤ect on asset prices and
capital ‡ows in the absence of private information. It is possible though to generate
a disconnect by allowing for asset price bubbles, which we have ruled out. But this
would only impact net, not gross capital ‡ows. Moreover, it would be inconsistent
with the second implication of the model as bubbles have no information content.
    A …nal possibility may be that there is publicly available news about future
fundamentals that is not controlled for by the econometrician. In that case Impli-
cations 1 and 2 would appear to hold even when there is no information dispersion.
Such an argument has long been around to explain the disconnect been exchange
rates and publicly observed fundamentals. However, this argument has been put
to rest by the contributions of Evans and Lyons (2002) and others that document
a close connection between exchange rates and order ‡ow. This connection would
not exist if all information is public as order ‡ow aggregates private information.
Public news a¤ects asset prices without any order ‡ow at all.20
  19
     Such an extension, as well as others, does not fundamentally change the solution method
other than that a larger model with more state variables would call for a numerical rather than
analytic solution. As shown in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006,2008), when agents have private
information about fundamentals more than one period into the future asset prices are e¤ected by
higher order expectations of future fundamentals, but this does not change the solution method.
  20
     Public news can lead to order ‡ow if agents disagree about the interpretation of the news.
But that is another example of private information, in this case about the nature or parameters


                                              22
5     Quantitative Assessment
We now evaluate the quantitative relevance of the two implications of the model,
taking two complementary approaches. We …rst calibrate the model to data for
6 industrialized countries. This gives a good quantitative sense of the two impli-
cations within the context of the model and of the sensitivity to key parameters
(extent of information dispersion, extent of information asymmetry and the extent
of noise). The precise results will of course be sensitive to a variety of simpli-
fying assumptions we made to obtain analytic tractability and transparency of
the results. We therefore compliment the calibration results with an additional
quantitative assessment that does not rely on the speci…c functional forms of the
model.
    The second approach uses regression analysis and Granger causality tests for
the same 6 industrialized countries to quantify the extent of disconnect between
capital ‡ows and publicly observed fundamentals and the ability of capital ‡ows to
predict future asset payo¤s conditional on observed fundamentals. This model free
approach is useful because we have argued that Implications 1 and 2 of dispersed
information apply more generally than to the speci…c model used here. Therefore
we do not limit ourselves to the observed state variables St in the model, but
instead consider a broader set of observed macro variables.
    It is also useful to explain what we will not do when evaluating the empirical
relevance of the model. First, we do not take the expressions (35)-(36) for capital
out‡ows and in‡ows to the data. Such expressions can also be derived in the
absence of information dispersion.21 Information dispersion is only relevant to the
extent that it impacts the various components of capital ‡ows in (35)-(36), which
leads to the two implications that we will focus on. Second, we do not use data on
order ‡ow. While such data have convincingly shown that asset prices aggregate
private information, data on capital ‡ows are not available at a daily frequency
that would make such an analysis fruitful.
of the model.
  21
     In the absence of information dispersion the last terms in (35)-(36) are obviously zero as
expectations are identical across Home and Foreign agents.




                                              23
5.1     Calibration Results
We calibrate the model to annual data over the period 1977-2006 for the United
States, Japan, Canada, United Kingdom, Germany and France, with the data
sources described in Appendix F. Starting with the parameters related to produc-
tion, we set the labor share ! equal to 0.54, which is the average ratio of employee
compensation to GDP in our sample. We estimate the persistence in the sto-
chastic process for productivity by computing the Solow residuals and estimating
a panel regression of ait on its own lag and country-speci…c constants. This yields
an estimate of of 0.91. It also yields an estimate of the standard deviation a of
productivity innovations, but all moments we report below will be independent of
the scale a of innovations.
    The last two parameters associated with the supply side of the economy are
the adjustment cost parameter and the rate of depreciation . We set equal
to 2.7 in order to match the standard deviation of annual real investment growth
relative to the standard deviation of annual real GDP growth. This ratio is 2.8
in the data when averaged across the 6 countries and the sample 1977-2006. We
set the rate of depreciation equal to 0.1, which is the standard assumption for
annual data in the entire real business cycle literature (e.g. Backus, Kehoe and
Kydland (1992)).
    We choose the average cost of investment abroad in order to match the
observed portfolio home bias in the data. The standard measure of portfolio home
bias is
               share of f oreign equity in portf olio of domestic investors
          1
                       share of f oreign equity in world portf olio

Fidora, Fratzscher and Thimann (2007) report this measure of home bias for a wide
range of countries based on 2001-2003 data. This includes 5 of our industrialized
countries (all but Canada). The average measure of home bias for those 5 countries
is 0.73. They also report a measure of home bias for debt securities, which is
virtually identical. We therefore set the cost of investment abroad such that the
zero-order component of portfolio home bias in the model is equal to 0.73.22 The
level of depends on the rate of relative risk-aversion, which we set at 5. Holding
  22
    In the steady state of our symmetric setup this measure of home bias is also equal to z D (0).
We set in the expression (30) for z D (0) to match the 0.73 home bias in the data. It implies
that both countries invest a fraction 0.865 in domestic equity.


                                               24
the home bias constant, a change in the rate of risk-aversion has little e¤ect on the
results reported below.
    While the parameters outlined above are standard in the literature, we also
need to set values for three parameters that are speci…c to our model. These
are the average dispersion of private signals across investors, ( HH + HF )=2, the
relative precision of signals on domestic and foreign innovations, HF = HH , and
the volatility of noise shocks relative to productivity innovations, .
    We set the average dispersion of private signals, ( HH + HF )=2, to generate a
cross-sectional dispersion of expected asset price changes that matches the evidence
from surveys of forecasters. More speci…cally, we match the standard deviation of
the cross-sectional distribution of EtHj qt+1
                                          H
                                              , scaled by the unconditional variance of
   H
  qt . The advantage of scaling the cross-sectional distribution this way is that the
result in the model does not depend on the scale of model innovations measured
by a .
    We measure the dispersion of expected asset price changes by using a survey
from the International Center for Finance at the Yale School of Management that
reports expected stock price changes by a large number of …nancial institutions.23
The survey has data for two countries, the United States and Japan. For both
countries the survey asks about expected percentage change in the stock price
(respectively Dow Jones Industrial Index and Nikkei Dow) over the next 1, 3, and
12 months, with our parametrization focusing on the 1-year ahead forecasts. For
each country the survey is based on about 400 …nancial institutions.24 The survey
starts in 1989 with six-month interval surveys until 1998, after which monthly
surveys are conducted.25 We have collected the data through October 2004.
    Since it is important to compare expectations at the same point in time, and
…nancial institutions do not all respond to the survey on the same day, we only
consider the cross sectional distribution of responses that take place on the same
  23
     We would like to thank the International Center for Finance for making these data available
to us.
  24
     For Japan the survey is mailed to most of the major …nancial institutions, including 165
banks, 46 insurance companies, 113 security companies and 45 investment trust companies. For
the U.S. about 400 randomly drawn institutions are selected from “Investment Managers ”in the
“Money Market Directory of Pension Funds and their Investment Managers ”.
  25
     See Shiller et al. (1996) and http://icf.som.yale.edu/con…dence.index/explanations.html for
more details.




                                              25
day.26 The average cross-sectional standard deviation of the expected one-year
percentage stock price change across respondents is 0.1278 for the U.S. and 0.1341
for Japan. This is scaled by the variance of stock price changes. Here we use
historical numbers of the standard deviation of stock price changes from Jorion
and Goetzmann (1999), which are respectively 0.1584 and 0.1579 for the U.S. and
Japan. Our scaled measure of dispersion of expected stock price changes is then
4.99 for the U.S. and 5.23 for Japan. In the model we set ( HH + HF )=2 = 0:22,
which leads to a scaled measure of dispersion of expected stock price changes of
5.03, close to that for both the U.S. and Japan.
    As HF = HH and are hard to calibrate, we vary them over a wide range. Un-
der the benchmark we set = 100 and HF = HH = 1:5. Holding ( HH + HF )=2 =
0:22 remains broadly consistent with the evidence on information dispersion even
when we vary and HF = HH over a wide range.27
    The results are reported in 6 panels in Figure 3. The top 3 panels relate to
Implication 1. They report the fraction of the variance of gross and net capital
‡ows explained by unobserved state variables, as a function of respectively ( HH +
  HF )=2, HF = HH and . The bottom three panels relate to Implication 2, and
report the R2 of a regression of "D                                       A
                                   t+1 on net capital ‡ows at time t and "t+1 on gross
capital ‡ows at time t.
    For the benchmark parameterization the fraction of the variance of both gross
and net capital ‡ows explained by unobserved state variables is 49%.28 As ex-
pected, panel A shows that the disconnect gradually disappears when the standard
deviation of the errors in the signals becomes large. In that case the private signals
have little information content and the dispersion of information goes away. The
scaled measure of cross-sectional dispersion of expectations of asset price changes
(not reported) goes to zero as well.
    Panel B shows the disconnect as a function of the extent of information asym-
metry across countries. This is not relevant for net capital ‡ows, but the disconnect
for gross capital ‡ows relies entirely on the information asymmetry. We see that
  26
     Moreover, we eliminate days were there were fewer than 5 responses.
  27
     The scaled measure of dispersion of expected stock price changes varies from 4.3 to 5.6 when
varying HF = HH from 1.01 to 2. The range is 3.8 to 6.4 when we vary from 1 to 1000.
  28
     The disconnect would be even larger if we had introduced private information about fun-
damentals further into the future and persistence of the noise in the model. Both features are
present in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) in the context of a NRE model for exchange rate
determination.


                                               26
introducing only a very small degree of information asymmetry is su¢ cient to get
close to the full impact on disconnect. It makes little di¤erence for the disconnect
whether HF is 5% or 100% higher than HH .29
    Panel C shows that the disconnect is virtually independent of the variance of
the noise, which is proportional to . We report results for ranging from 1 to
1000. A higher reduces the contribution of "D      t+1 to the variance of net capital
‡ows while raising the contribution of the noise D t , leaving the overall contribution
of these unobserved state variables almost unchanged. The reduced contribution
of "D
    t+1 is a result of the reduced information content of the relative asset price due
to the increased noise. Therefore less is known about "D   t+1 .
    Turning to Implication 2 of the model, panel D shows that the information
content of both net and gross capital ‡ows is negatively related to the standard
deviaton of the errors of the private signals. It goes to zero when the private
signals become very weak (panel D). More interesting though is the di¤erence in
the information content when comparing gross and net capital ‡ows. The last
two panels show that the explanatory power of gross capital ‡ows at t for "A       t+1 is
quite robust. Panel E shows that only a small degree of information asymmetry is
required, while panel F shows that it is not sensitive to .
    By contrast, the explanatory power of net capital ‡ows at t for "D      t+1 is much
more limited and less robust. This is due to the noise, which only a¤ects net
capital ‡ows and reduces its information content. Panel F shows that introducing
more noise through a higher quickly evaporates the information content of net
capital ‡ows. The R2 of a regression of D    t+1 on net capital ‡ows declines rapidly
with . This is a result both of the increased importance of the noise and the
reduced weight of D    t+1 due to the lower information content of the relative asset
price.
  29
     Even under the benchmark parameterization, where HF = HH = 1:5, the average absolute
forecast error of Home productivity innovations is only 0.14% higher for Foreign investors than
for Home investors (based on the estimated a = 0:0127). To provide some perspective, Bae,
Stulz and Tan (2007) report that the absolute forecast error of annual earnings per share is 7.8%
higher for foreign analysts than local analysts. This is not fully comparable to our model though
as it refers to earnings forecasts of individual …rms rather than the entire economy. Nonetheless
it shows that the extent of information asymmetry in the model is not excessive by any means.




                                               27
5.2     Evidence from Six Industrialized Countries
5.2.1   Disconnect from Publicly Observed Fundamentals

We now turn to a model free approach to evaluating Implications 1 and 2. For
the …rst implication of the model, we estimate a VAR to evaluate the explanatory
power of innovations in macro variables for capital ‡ow ‡uctuations over various
horizons. We use quarterly data from 1977(1) to 2007(2), and report results for
both gross and net capital ‡ows. Gross capital ‡ows are again de…ned as out‡ows
plus in‡ows and net capital ‡ows as out‡ows minus in‡ows. We measure the latter
as the current account in most of the results reported, but …ndings are similar when
measured using …nancial ‡ows. Capital ‡ows are expressed as a share of GDP.
    For gross capital ‡ows we estimate a VAR that includes the following variables:
world GDP growth, world in‡ation, world interest rate (T-bill rate), world budget
de…cit (share of GDP) and gross capital ‡ows. All world variables are computed as
a GDP-weighted average of the variables across all countries. For net capital ‡ows
we estimate a VAR that includes: relative GDP growth, relative in‡ation, relative
T-bill rate, relative budget de…cit (share of GDP) and net capital ‡ows. Relative
refers to the di¤erence between the variable in the country minus a GDP-weighted
average of that in the other countries. Identi…cation of the innovations is achieved
using the Choleski decomposition with the ordering of the variables as listed above.
Three lags of all variables are included in the VAR.
    The results are reported in Table 1. The macro variables have very limited
explanatory power for gross capital ‡ows. At a one-quarter horizon only 6% of the
variance of gross capital ‡ows can be accounted for by innovations in the macro
variables. Even at a 12-quarter horizon only 16% of the variance of gross capital
‡ows is explained by innovations in the macro variables. Results are only slightly
better for the current account, where respectively 7% and 32% of the variance of
the current account at 1 and 12-quarter horizons can be explained by innovations
in publicly observed macro variables.
    These results are consistent with the …rst implication of the model. It is possi-
ble though that the limited explanatory power of publicly observed macro variables
is due to measurement error in both gross and net capital ‡ow data. Such mea-
surement error is likely to be much more severe for quarterly data than for annual
data. In the remainder of this section we therefore focus the analysis on annual
data. In Table 2 we repeat the previous exercise using 30 annual observations

                                         28
from 1977 to 2006, including only one lag in the VAR. Consistent with the view
that capital ‡ows are better measured for annual than for quarterly data, we now
…nd that a larger fraction of capital ‡ow ‡uctuations can be accounted for by the
macro variables. For gross capital ‡ows we …nd that respectively 21% and 30%
of the variance is explained by innovations in the macro variables at 1 and 3-year
horizons. For the current account these numbers are 34% and 53%.
    But this still leaves most gross and net capital ‡ow ‡uctuations unexplained.
Moreover, this signi…cantly overstates the true explanatory power of publicly ob-
served macroeconomic variables because of the relatively small sample of 30 annual
observations. It needs to be compared to what we would get when the macro vari-
ables are generated by pure noise. In order to make this comparison, for each
country we generate an arti…cial series of macro variables from an AR(1) process
with the same persistence as the actual macro variables for that country and ran-
domly generated N (0; 1) innovations. We then compute the average variance de-
composition based on 1000 estimations of the VARs with the randomly generated
macro variables.
    We …nd that the fraction of the variance of gross ‡ows explained at 1 and
3-year horizons by the random innovations in the macro variables is on average
respectively 17% and 27%. For the current account these numbers are 18% and
29%. This implies that for gross capital ‡ows the actual macro variables have
virtually no explanatory power at all as the results in Table 2 are very close to
what we would get if the macro variables were generated by pure noise. For net
capital ‡ows we …nd very limited true explanatory power as the fraction of the
variance of net capital ‡ows that can be explained by the actual macro variables
is only 16 to 24 percentage points higher than that generated by random noise.

5.2.2   Information Content of Capital Flows

We next turn to the second implication of the model. The calibration results indi-
cate that the information content of gross capital ‡ows is stronger and more robust
than for net capital ‡ows. It should therefore be easier to detect the information
content of gross capital ‡ows than net capital ‡ows. Noise in the model does not
a¤ect gross capital ‡ows. It only a¤ects net capital ‡ows and the relative asset
price, which reduces their information content. This in turn reduces the knowledge
that agents have about "D t+1 , which reduces its weight in the equilibrium relative




                                        29
asset price and net capital ‡ows, which further reduces their information content.
    This point is also illustrated in Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2006) in the
context of a NRE model of exchange rate determination. In their benchmark
calibration the presence of dispersed information leads to a signi…cant disconnect
between exchange rates and publicly observed fundamentals. It reduces the ex-
planatory power of observed fundamentals for one-period exchange rate changes
from close to 100% to 14%. But they …nd that the equilibrium exchange rate
contains only very limited information about future fundamentals. It is therefore
not surprising that evidence on the information content of exchange rates is not
overwhelming. Based on 36 bivariate Granger causality tests (6 countries and
6 di¤erent macro variables), Engel and West (2005) …nd statistically signi…cant
causality from exchange rate changes to future macro variables in only one third,
or 12, of the cases.
    We conduct separate Granger causality tests for gross and net capital ‡ows.
The theory implies that gross capital ‡ows negatively predict future world pro-
ductivity "At+1 and net capital out‡ows (or the current account) negatively predict
relative future productivity "Dt+1 . The model makes no distinction between future
productivity innovations, future GDP innovations and future innovations in asset
payo¤s. They are all driven by the same productivity shocks. However, it is pri-
vate information about future asset payo¤s that is ultimately responsible for the
information content of asset prices and capital ‡ows in the model. We therefore
ask to what extent capital ‡ows Granger cause the aggregate pro…t rate. The latter
is de…ned as GDP minus employee compensation, divided by the capital stock.

Information Content Gross Capital Flows

    The implication of the model that gross capital ‡ows contain information about
"A
 t+1 is then be tested by evaluating to what extent gross capital ‡ows Granger cause
the “world pro…t rate”. The latter is de…ned as a GDP-weighted average of pro…t
rates of all countries. We report results only for annual data as they su¤er less
from measurement error than quarterly data.
    The results are reported in Table 3. The second column reports results from
a bivariate Granger causality test. We regress the world pro…t rate on one lag of
itself and one lag of gross capital ‡ows. We test the null hypothesis that lagged
gross capital ‡ows fail to cause the world pro…t rate. Rejection of the null hypoth-
esis implies Granger causality. The table reports p-values for countries where we

                                        30
reject the null-hypothesis at a signi…cance level of 10% or better. In four of the
six countries we …nd strong evidence of Granger causality. Moreover, while not
reported in the table, in each of these four cases the direction of the causality is as
predicted by the theory. The coe¢ cient on the lagged gross capital ‡ows is always
negative.
    The third and fourth columns of Table 3 con…rm that these …ndings are ro-
bust to the inclusion of lagged values of other macro variables. We regress the
world pro…t rate on its own lag and lagged values of gross capital ‡ows and GDP-
weighted averages of a set of additional macro variables. We again test whether
the coe¢ cient on lagged gross capital ‡ows is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero. This
is the case for …ve of the six countries when including GDP-weighted averages of
lags of real GDP growth, in‡ation and the T-bill rate and for four out of the six
countries when additionally including a GDP-weighted average of budget de…cits
as a share of GDP. Moreover, in all of these cases we …nd that the coe¢ cient on
lagged gross capital ‡ows is negative as predicted by the theory.30

Information Content Net Capital Flows

    There is less evidence in favor of the hypothesis that net capital ‡ows Granger
cause the relative pro…t rate, de…ned as the pro…t rate minus the GDP-weighted
average pro…t rate of the other countries. The results are reported in Table 4.
We …rst again conduct a bivariate Granger causality test. We regress the relative
pro…t rate on its own lag and the lagged value of net capital out‡ows. We …nd that
the coe¢ cient on the lagged pro…t rate is signi…cantly di¤erent from zero in two
of the six countries. This is the case both when measuring net capital out‡ows as
out‡ows minus in‡ows and as the current account. We …nd even less signi…cance
when introducing lags of other macro variables. In addition, in cases where we
do …nd signi…cance the sign is positive. This is in contrast to the model, which
implies that net out‡ows negatively predict the relative pro…t rate.
    These …ndings are not necessarily inconsistent with the model though. To the
contrary, they can be viewed as further con…rmation of the theory. The calibration
exercise anticipated these results by showing that the information content of gross
capital ‡ows is stronger and more robust than that for net capital ‡ows. The noise
  30
    While not reported, these results continue to hold up when we include a linear time trend in
the regressions. The justi…cation for doing so is that gross capital ‡ows have increased over our
sample for reasons that are unrelated to our model.


                                               31
in the model, and its interaction with private information, is responsible for the
weak information content of net capital ‡ows.


6    Conclusion
We have developed a new theory of international capital ‡ows based on dispersed
information. The theory is innovative in that it integrates dispersed information
into a DSGE open economy macro model with portfolio choice to develop impli-
cations for gross and net capital ‡ows. It leads to a fundamentally di¤erent view
of what drives both gross and net capital ‡ows than standard models based on
common information. We have emphasized two important implications, which are
speci…c to models with dispersed information. First, capital ‡ows become partially
disconnected from current publicly observed fundamentals. Second, capital ‡ows
help forecast future fundamentals, even after controlling for current fundamentals.
    A calibration exercise has shown that the disconnect between capital ‡ows
and macro variables is not very sensitive to the extent of noise in the model and
information asymmetry across countries. By contrast, the information content
of net capital ‡ows can be signi…cantly reduced by noise while the information
content of gross capital ‡ows is quite robust. These implications of the theory are
con…rmed for six industrialized countries. Publicly observed macro variables have
very limited explanatory power for both gross and net capital ‡ows. Gross capital
‡ows contain information about future fundamentals in the way predicted by the
theory, while net capital ‡ows do not exhibit strong information content.




                                        32
                                          Appendix

A      Equations of the model
The various equations of the model are written in terms of the logs of the variables,
denoted by lower-case letters. We denote the worldwide average of log equity prices
by qtA = 0:5 (qH;t + qF;t ), and the cross-country di¤erence in log equity prices by
qtD = qH;t qF;t . We de…ne similar variables for the capital stock (kt+1  A     D
                                                                             , kt+1 ),
productivity (aA     D                        A         D
                t , at ) and asset returns (rt+1 , rt+1 = ert+1 ).
    Using the capital dynamics (2), the Tobin’s Q equation (5) in Home and Foreign
becomes:
                                                            !
                                             qtA + 12 qtD
                       A     1  D           e             1     A 1 D
                     ekt+1 + 2 kt+1 =  1+                     ekt + 2 kt        (42)

                                                                A   1 D
                                                                                   !
                        A     1 D                          eqt       q
                                                                    2 t        1          A   1 D
                      ekt+1    k
                              2 t+1       =        1+                                  ekt     k
                                                                                              2 t              (43)

Using the wage (3), the consumption Euler equations (14) and (17) are:
                  A    1 D
                                 !)(ktA + 12 ktD ) cHj                                                 p;Hj
              !eat + 2 at  +(1                      yt              1       =          EtHj e(1      )rt+1
                                                                                                               (44)
                  A    1 D
                                 !)(ktA        1 D
                                                     )   cF j                                          p;F j
               !eat     a +(1
                       2 t
                                                k
                                               2 t        yt        1       =          EtF j e(1     )rt+1
                                                                                                               (45)

The portfolio Euler equations for individual investors (15) and (18) are:
                                  p;Hj   A + 1 er                          p;Hj               A     1
           0 = EtHj e            rt+1  +rt+1 2 t+1                  e     rt+1         Hj;t +rt+1     er
                                                                                                    2 t+1      (46)
                                  p;F j               A     1                       p;F j   A       1
           0 = EtF j e           rt+1         F j;t +rt+1 + 2 ert+1
                                                                           e       rt+1   +rt+1       er
                                                                                                    2 t+1      (47)

The asset market clearing conditions (19)-(20) are:
                              Z
                                     A 1 D            A 1 D        Hj
                                  !eat + 2 at +(1 !)(kt + 2 kt ) ecyt zHj;t dj
     A + 1 k D +q A + 1 q D
    kt+1
   e     2   t+1    t 2  t  =                                                      (48)
                                Z
                                        A 1 D            A 1 D        Fj
                              +     !eat 2 at +(1 !)(kt 2 kt ) ecyt zF j;t dj
                              Z
                                     A 1 D            A 1 D        Hj
                                  !eat + 2 at +(1 !)(kt + 2 kt ) ecyt (1 zHj;t )dj (49)
     A   1 D        A 1 qD
    kt+1   k     +q
   e     2   t+1    t 2  t  =
                                Z
                                        A 1 D            A 1 D        Fj
                              +     !eat 2 at +(1 !)(kt 2 kt ) ecyt (1 zF j;t )dj

                                                         33
The rates of return on Home and Foreign equity (6)-(7) are given by:
                                                                 1 D              A + 1 kD                        1 D
                  A       1                              A                    ! (kt+1 2 t+1 )
                                                                                              qtA
             ert+1 + 2 ert+1 = (1                 !) eat+1 + 2 at+1                                                q
                                                                                                                  2 t      (50)
                                                              A + 1 qD
                                                             qt+1              qtA   1 D
                                                                                      q
                                           + (1        )e         2 t+1              2 t

                                                                 1 D                        1 D
               A          1                              A                    ! (kt+1
                                                                                  A
                                                                                                    )       qtA + 12 qtD
             ert+1          er
                          2 t+1       = (1        !) eat+1        a
                                                                 2 t+1
                                                                                             k
                                                                                            2 t+1                          (51)
                                                                      1 D
                                                              A
                                                             qt+1      q       qtA + 21 qtD
                                           + (1        )e             2 t+1



The portfolio returns of individual investors (13) and (16) are:
                  p;Hj                      A     1                                     A         1
             ert+1            = zHj;t ert+1 + 2 ert+1 + (1               zHj;t )ert+1               er
                                                                                                  2 t+1           Hj;t
                                                                                                                           (52)
                  p;F j                     A + 1 er                                               A         1
                 rt+1                      rt+1                                                   rt+1         er
              e               = zF j;t e        2 t+1         F j;t
                                                                      + (1        zF j;t )e                  2 t+1         (53)

   In terms of the zero order allocation, we normalize productivity to unity in both
countries, so a (0) = 0. The relative price of capital is unity, implying q (0) = 0.
The zero order components of the rate of return, capital and consumption of young
agents are:

                                  er(0) = (1             !) e         !k(0)
                                                                              + (1            )
                                 ecy (0) = !e(1          !)k(0)
                                                                         ek(0)

where the capital k (0) solves:
                              !k(0)                                       !k(0)                              1
                      !e               1        =       (1      !) e                 + (1               )

The ratio of young consumption to the wage is:

                                           1 cy (0)   (1 !)k(0)                  e!k(0)
                                  c=         e                         =1
                                           !                                       !
    The average portfolio share is computed from the asset market clearing (48):
                                                      zH (0) + zF (0)   1
                                      z A (0) =                       =
                                                             2          2


B      Signal extraction

General approach

   We focus on the signal extraction of Home investors. The inference for Foreign
investors is computed along similar lines.

                                                         34
     A Home investor infers the Home and Foreign future productivity shocks, "H    t+1
      F                                                                      D
and "t+1 from three types of signals. The …rst is the relative asset price, qt , which
together with the publicly observed state variables (22) reveals xDt from (21). The
second is the set of private signals on Home and Foreign future productivity shocks,
 H;H        H;F
vj;t  and vj;t  from (8)-(11). The third is the unconditional distribution of "H   t+1
and "Ft+1 .
     The signal extraction problem therefore consists of inferring a vector t+1 =
                                                                                                    0
j"H;t+1 ; "F;t+1 j0 conditional on a vector of signals YtHj = xD    H;H    H;F
                                                               t ; vj;t ; vj;t ; 0; 0 which
are linked as follows:
                                    YtHj = X H t+1 + vtHj
where X H is a 5 by 2 matrix and vtHj is a vector of independent innovations with
a diagonal variance matrix RH :
                                                                                     2     2
                                 1         1                                     4         a
                                                                                     2
                                 1        0                                          HH
                        XH =     0        1             ;        diag RH =           2
                                                                                     HF
                                                                                       2
                                 1        0                                            a
                                                                                       2
                                 0        1                                            a

The projection theorem implies that t+1 is then normally distributed with mean
^t+1 and variance V ^t+1 corresponding to GLS estimation:

           h                          i   1                                                    h                          i   1
                    0        1                      0             1                                     0        1
^      =       XH       RH       XH            XH           RH        YtHj   ;   V ^t+1 =          XH       RH       XH
 t+1



Expected productivity shocks

   Writing out the matrices above, the expected values of future Home and Foreign
productivities become:

                    EtHj ("H;t+1 ) =           Hj     D
                                               "H;xD xt +
                                                                  Hj      H;H   Hj      H;F
                                                                  "H;vH vj;t + "H;vF vj;t

                    EtHj ("F;t+1 ) =           Hj     D
                                               "F;xD xt +
                                                                  Hj     H;H   Hj     H;F
                                                                  "F;vH vj;t + "F;vF vj;t




                                                            35
where:
                                                                          !
                                                            2
                           Hj            1                  a                         1
                           "H;xD       =                2
                                                                    +1                2
                                         V              H;F                   2
                                                "                                                     ! #
                                                                                  2                                     2
                           Hj            1              1                         a                                     a
                           "H;vH       =                2       +             2
                                                                                          +1 2                      2
                                         V          2                         H;F                                   H;H
                                                                 2
                           Hj              1 1                   a
                           "H;vF       =
                                           V 2 2                2
                                                                H;F
                                                                              !
                                                                2
                           Hj                  1                a                             1
                           "F;xD       =                    2
                                                                         +1                   2
                                               V            H;H                       2
                                                 2
                           Hj            1 1     a
                           "F;vH       =
                                         V 2 2 2H;H
                                           "                                                          ! #
                                                                                  2                                     2
                           Hj            1    1                                   a                                     a
                           "F;vF       =        +                                             +1 2
                                         V 2 2                                2
                                                                              H;H
                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                       H;F


and:                                   !                        !                                                                  !
                           2                    2                                                          2                 2
                           a                    a                                 1                        a                 a
           V =            2
                                +1             2
                                                     +1 2+                            2                   2
                                                                                                                   +        2
                                                                                                                                  +2
                          H;H                  H;F                            2                           H;F               H;H

    While these coe¢ cients are complex functions, we can distinguish between their
various orders. We consider components up to order two. The coe¢ cients on xD    t
( Hj
  "H;xD and   Hj
              "F;xD ) only have components  of order zero and  two:
                      h            i                    h                 i                           1
                           Hj                                   Hj
                           "H;xD       (0) =                    "F;xD         (0) =                                     2
                                                                                                  2 1+2
                      h            i                                2                 2
                                                                                                  +4           2       2
                           Hj                               2       H;F               H;H                              H;F
                           "H;xD       (2) =                a                             2       2       2        2
                                                                4 1+2                                     H;H      H;F
                      h            i                                2
                                                                          +           2                     2       2
                           Hj                           2           H;F               H;H + 4                       H;H
                           "F;xD       (2) =            a                             2 2 2                        2
                                                                4 1+2                      H;H                     H;F

The coe¢ cients on the private signals only have components of order two:
   h           i                1+4 2                   2                     h                       i                     1               2
       Hj                                               a                             Hj                                                    a
       "H;vH       (2) =                                             ,                "H;vF               (2) =
                               2 1+2 2               2
                                                     H;H                                                                2 1+2          2   2
                                                                                                                                           H;F
   h           i                   1                   2                      h                       i                 1+4 2                2
       Hj                                              a                              Hj                                                     a
       "F;vH       (2) =                   2                         ,                "F;vF               (2) =
                               2 1+2                 2
                                                     H;H                                                               2 1+2 2             2
                                                                                                                                           H;F




                                                                36
    The various orders of the Home agent’s expectations of future Home produc-
tivity are then:
         h               i        h               i               1
           EtHj ("H;t+1 ) (1) =     EtHj ("F;t+1 ) (1) =                  xD
                                                                           t
                                                            2 1+2 2
                                               "                               #
         h               i             2
                                                 1  +  4  2
                                                                       1
           EtHj ("H;t+1 ) (2) =        a
                                          2           2
                                                             H;H
                                                             j;t + 2
                                                                           H;F
                                                                           j;t
                                2 1+2                 H;H             H;F
                                               "                               #
         h               i             2
                                                    1           1 +  4  2
           EtHj ("F;t+1 ) (2) =        a
                                          2        2
                                                         H;H
                                                         j;t +      2
                                                                           H;F
                                                                           j;t
                                2 1+2              H;H              H;F


A useful result is the third-order component of the expected productivity di¤erence:
                h                       i
                    Hj
                  Et ("H;t+1 "F;t+1 ) (3)
                                                                           !
                       2  2    2        2           2  2
                          a    H;H  +   H;F       2    a  " H;t+1  " F;t+1
           =             2 2     2    2
                                            xD
                                             t +       2     2        2
                                                                                (54)
                  1+2            H;H H;F         1 + 2       H;H      H;F



Variance of productivity shocks

   The Home agent also infers the variances and covariances of the productivities
shocks:
                                          "                   ! #
                                        2               2
                     Hj                 a    1          a
                 V art ("H;t+1 ) =              +         +1 2
                                       V 2 2          2
                                                      H;F
                                          "                   ! #
                                        2               2
                      Hj                a    1          a
                 V art ("F;t+1 ) =              +         +1 2
                                       V 2 2          2
                                                      H;H
                                                2
                                                    1
             CovtHj ("H;t+1 ; "F;t+1 ) =        a
                                                    2
                                            V 2
These terms only have second-order components (zero, …rst and third-order com-
ponents zero):

                                                                        1+4 2       2
                                                                                    a
                V   artHj   ("H;t+1 ) (2) = V   artHj   ("F;t+1 ) (2) =         2
                                                                        2 1+2
                                                        2
        CovtHj (""H;t+1 ; "F;t+1 ) (2) =                a
                                                            2
                                           2 1+2




                                            37
    The expected values of squared and cubic shocks are computed as:
                                            2
         EtHj ("H;t+1 )2 =   EtHj "H;t+1        + V artHj ("H;t+1 )
                                            3
         EtHj ("H;t+1 )3 =   EtHj "H;t+1        + 3 EtHj "H;t+1        V artHj ("H;t+1 )
                                           2
         EtHj ("F;t+1 )2 =   EtHj "F;t+1        + V artHj ("F;t+1 )
                                           3
         EtHj ("F;t+1 )3 =   EtHj "F;t+1        + 3 EtHj "F;t+1       V artHj ("F;t+1 )


C        First order solution
We now describe the …rst-order solution of all variables other than the di¤erence
ztD in portfolio shares. We leave the second-order solution to a Technical Appendix
available on request. To a …rst order, the variables are linear functions of the state
space:

                      qtD (1) =     qD   (0) St (1) +     5;qD   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)

                      qtA (1) =     qA   (0) St (1) +     5;qA   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)

                      cA
                       yt (1) =     cA   (0) St (1) +     5;cA   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)

                      cD
                       yt (1) =     cD   (0) St (1) +     5;cD   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)
                     A
                    kt+1 (1) =      kA   (0) St (1) +     5;kA   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)
                     D
                    kt+1 (1) =      kD   (0) St (1) +     5;kD   (0) xD
                                                                      t (1)


where:
                                                                          0
                      St (1) =    aD        A        D        A
                                   t (1) ; at (1) ; kt (1) ; kt (1)

                     xD        D
                      t (1) = "t+1 +
                                                  D
                                                  t =                                      (55)


Worldwide averages

   The solution in terms for the worldwide averages of consumption, equity prices
and capital dynamics is computed by taking linear expansions of the equations
(42)-(53). We then taking worldwide averages of the relations for the Home and
Foreign country, before computing expectations using the results from signal ex-




                                                38
traction. We …nally take the …rst-order component. The solution is given by:
                                1
                      cA
                       yt (1) =   [1 (1 c) (1 + ) 2;kA (0)] aA  t (1) +
                                c
                                1 c 1 !
                                                +    (1 + ) 4;kA (0) ktA (1)                                           (56)
                                  c      1 c
                      qtA (1) =              A
                                   2;kA (0) at (1) + ( 4;kA (0) 1) ktA (1)                                             (57)
                   A
                  kt+1 (1) =            2;kA   (0) aA
                                                    t (1) +        4;kA      (0) ktA (1)                               (58)

where:
                                                      + c (1   ) (1 rq )
 2;kA   (0) =                                                                                                               >0
                   (1 + ) + c (1                 ) [(1 rq ) ! + rq (1                      4;kA   (0)) + (1         rq )]
                          1
        rq     =
                 (1 !) e !k(0) + (1                     )

and     4;kA   (0) 2 (0; 1) in (58) is the root of the polynomial:

                                                   1                     1
         0 =             1     !+            1+c                     c           rq (      4;kA   (0))2

                                 1                                        1
                   + 1+c                 (1      rq ) ! + 1 + c                      (1 + rq )            4;kA   (0)


Cross-country di¤erences

   For cross-country di¤erences in equations the approach is the same as for world-
wide averages of equations: …rst take linear expansions of the equations (42)-(53).
We then take the cross-country di¤erences, and compute expectations using the
results from signal extraction. We …nally compute the …rst-order component. The
results are:

 qtD (1) =            1;qD   (0) aD
                                  t (1) +       3;qD   (0) ktD (1) +          5;qD   (0) xD
                                                                                          t (1)                         (59)
 cD
  yt (1)     =    aD
                   t (1)     + (1      !)ktD (1)                                                                        (60)
 D                1                                      1                                   1
kt+1 (1) =             1;qD   (0) aD
                                   t (1) + 1 +                3;qD   (0) ktD (1) +                5;qD   (0) xD
                                                                                                              t (1)     (61)

                      1+
4ztA (1) =                      1;qD   (0)      z D (0) aD
                                                         t (1)                                                          (62)

                               1+                                                                 1+
                  + 1+                   3;qD   (0)     (1        !)z D (0) ktD (1) +                       5;qD   (0) xD
                                                                                                                        t (1)




                                                             39
where:
                                   (1       rq )
 1;qD   (0) =                                   1
            1 rq + [(1                  rq ) ! rq
                                      3;qD (0)]
             1 h                                                                              0:5
                                                                                                    i
 3;qD (0) =      (1 rq ) ( + !)     (1 rq )2 ( + !)2 + 4rq (1                        rq ) !             <0
            2rq
                  1 rq + rq 1;qD (0)           1
 5;qD (0) =
            1 + [(1 rq ) ! rq 3;qD (0)] 1 + 2 2
                                         1


The coe¢ cient 5;qD (0) in (59)-(62) is de…ned conditional on , which we still have
to solve for.
    To solve for , we …rst take the third-order component of the optimal portfolio
condition for a Home investor (46) which can be written as:

         zHj;t (1) Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
         h          i                           h            i
           Hj                Hj                   Hj A
    = Et ert+1 (3) + t (3) + (1               ) Et rt+1 ert+1 (3)
                      h        i          2zHj (0) 1 h Hj            i
                        Hj A                                       2
        + (1     ) Et rt+1 (1)                          Et (ert+1 ) (3)
                                               2
                         zHj (0) (1 zHj (0)) 1 1            1+      h               i
        +       (1 + )                          +                     EtHj [ert+1 ]3 (3)
                                    2             6      2     4
                  2 h                    i
          (1     )                2
        +             EtHj rt+1
                             A
                                    ert+1 (3)
              2
                     2zHj (0) 1 h Hj A                i
            (1     )                 Et rt+1 (ert+1 )2 (3)
                           2
We can undertake similar steps for the optimal portfolio condition for a Foreign
investor (47). Averaging across investors and taking the average of these relations
for the Home and the Foreign country, we get

        2 ztA (1) Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
  =      EtH ert+1 (3) + EtF ert+1 (3) +            D
                                                    t   (3)
        + (1         ) EtH rt+1
                              A                  A
                                ert+1 (3) + EtF rt+1 ert+1 (3)
                      2 hh                i      h             i i
            (1       )      H   A   2                F   A   2
        +                  Et rt+1 ert+1 (3) + Et rt+1 ert+1 (3)                                         (63)
                 2
        + (1         )E H rA (1)         EtF rt+1
                                               A
                                                    (1)
                    2 Rt t+1         h                      i           3
                          2zHj (0) 1    Hj A              2
                              2
                                       Et rt+1 (ert+1 ) (3) dj
             (1   ) 4 R 2zF j (0) 1 h F j                   2
                                                              i         5
                                              A
                      +          2
                                        Et  r t+1 (er t+1 )     (3) dj
              Z                h                i             Z
                2zHj (0) 1                    2                   2zF j (0)   1h                  i
                                   Hj
                                 Et (ert+1 ) (3) dj +                              EtF j (ert+1 )2 (3) dj
                     2                                                   2

                                                    40
where EtH denoteshthe averagei expectation across Home investors, for instance:
   H
                 R    Hj
 Et ert+1 (3) =     Et ert+1 (3) dj. Similarly EtF denotes the average expectation
across Foreign investors.
   We can infer by using (62) to substitute for ztA (1) in (63). Both ztA (1) in (62)
and the terms on the right hand side of (63) (which are computed in the Technical
Appendix available on request) depend on xD           D
                                             t (1). t (3) only enters in the second
row of (63). Therefore (63) can only hold when "D  t+1 also enters (63) and in a way
that is proportional to xt (1) when combined with the term in D
                          D
                                                                    t (3).
     D
   "t+1 only enters (63) through the term

                                  EtH ert+1 (3) + EtF ert+1 (3)

and only through the linear component of ert+1 , which is

                   ert+1 =         qtD + rq qt+1
                                             D
                                                 + (1     r q ) aD
                                                                 t+1
                                                                                D
                                                                              !kt+1

The only component of this that matters is the one that is proportional in "D
                                                                            t+1 .
Abstracting from all the other terms we have
       h           i                             h                     i
         EtHj ert+1 (3) = [rq 1;qD (0) + (1 rq )] EtHj ("H;t+1 "F;t+1 ) (3)
       h                    i
where EtHj ("H;t+1 "F;t+1 ) (3) is given by (54). We can undertake similar steps
for a Foreign investors. Aggregating across individual investors, and again ab-
stracting from terms other than "D
                                 t+1 , we obtain:

                       EtH ert+1 (3) + EtF ert+1 (3)
                                                                                        !
                                                    2 2   2
                                                          a           1             1
             = [rq        1;qD   (0) + (1     rq )]       2       2
                                                                           +    2
                                                                                            "D
                                                                                             t+1
                                                    1+2           H;H           H;F

   Focusing on the terms of interest on the right hand side of (63), we have

             EtH ert+1 (3) + EtF ert+1 (3) +              D
                                                          t (3)   =
                                                                                !
                                            2 2     2
                                                    a         1           1
            [rq   1;qD   (0) + (1     rq )]         2      2
                                                                  +       2
                                                                                    "D
                                                                                     t+1 +
                                                                                                D
                                                                                                t (3)
                                            1+2            H;H            H;F

The ratio between the coe¢ cient on "D
                                     t+1 and the coe¢ cient on
                                                                                        D
                                                                                        t (3)   must be the
            D
same as in xt (1), implying:
                                                  2       2                     2
                                                  H;H + H;F           1+2
                  [1     rq + rq    1;qD   (0)]                   =                                     (64)
                                                    2   2
                                                    H;H H;F            2 2              2
                                                                                        a


                                                   41
The left-hand side of (64) is an increasing linear function of which is ‡atter the
higher the variance of the errors of the private signals. The right-hand side of
(64) is decreasing function of that is in…nite when ! 0 and converges to = 2a
when      ! 1. (64) therefore gives an implicit solution for . Combining it with
(59)-(62) gives the …rst-order solution for the model.
   After computing the terms on the right hand side of (63), done in the Technical
Appendix, it simpli…es to

                              EtA ert+1 (3)                  D
                                                           (3)
                                                             t
              ztA (1) =                           +
                              Et (ert+1 ) (2) 2 Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                                         2

                             1     [vart (rHt+1 )] (3) [vart (rF t+1 )] (3)
                           +
                                             2 Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

D     Portfolio di¤erence

Zero order solution

   We solve for z D (0) = zH (0) zF (0) by taking the second-order component of
the optimal portfolio condition for a Home investor (46) which can be written as:
                         h             i             h                i
                             Hj                          Hj         A
                     1     Et   er t+1   (2) +   1     Et   er t+1 t+1 (2)
                                                                  r
         zHj (0) = + h                       i +     h                i
                     2      E Hj (er )2 (2)            E Hj (er )2 (2)
                               t      t+1                        t    t+1


We can undertake similar steps for the optimal portfolio condition for a Foreign
investor (47). After summing across investors and taking the di¤erence between
these relations in the Home and the Foreign country, we get

          D                    2             EtH ert+1 (2)     EtF ert+1 (2)
         z (0) =                           +
                          Et (ert+1 )2 (2)            Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                                   EtH ert+1 rt+1
                                              A
                                                  (2)      EtF ert+1 rt+1
                                                                      A
                                                                          (2)
                     +(1       )
                                                  Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

We can show that EtH ert+1 rt+1 A
                                    (2) = EtF ert+1 rt+1
                                                     A
                                                         (2) = 0 and EtH ert+1 (2) =
EtF ert+1 (2). In addition:
                 h               i
                   EtHj (ert+1 )2 (2) = 2 2a (1 rq + rq 1;qD (0))2



                                             42
where 2 [0; 1] is an increasing function of that converges to one when private
signals are in…nitely noisy ( ! 1):
                    2                                     !2 3
                                          r q                    1
              = 1 41                                    1
                                                             5
                            1 + [(1 rq ) ! rq 3;qD (0)]        1+2 2

The zero-order portfolio di¤erence is then:
                                 2                                    1                 1
              z D (0) =                      =                                                 (65)
                            Et (ert+1 )2 (2)           2
                                                       a   (1   rq + rq   1;qD
                                                                                    2
                                                                                 (0))

First-order solution

   The …rst-order component of the di¤erence in portfolio shares is solved by
taking the average over Home investors of the third-order component of the optimal
portfolio condition (46) and substracting the average across Foreign investors of
the third-order component of the optimal portfolio condition (47). This gives

                  ztD (1) Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
          =      EtH ert+1 (3)         EtF ert+1 (3)
                + (1      ) EtH rt+1
                                 A
                                     ert+1 (3)             EtF rt+1
                                                                A
                                                                    ert+1 (3)
                + (1    )      EtH rt+1
                                      A
                                            (1) + EtF rt+1    A
                                                                   (1)
                    2 R              h                    i            3
                         2zHj (0) 1      Hj             2
                                       E     (er  t+1 )      (3) dj
                    4 R 2              ht                   i          5
                           2zF j (0) 1     Fj             2
                                 2
                                        Et (ert+1 ) (3) dj
                  (1    )2 hh H A 2                  i            h
                                                                                 2
                                                                                        i i
                +             Et rt+1 ert+1 (3)                     EtF rt+1A
                                                                                   ert+1 (3)
                      2     2 R                 h                          i          3
                                    2zHj (0) 1      Hj A                 2
                                        2
                                                  Et rt+1 (ert+1 ) (3) dj
                    (1    ) 4 R 2zF j (0) 1 h F j                          2
                                                                             i        5
                                                             A
                                           2
                                                   E  t   r t+1  (er t+1 )     (3) dj

Using the results for both the …rst and second-order solution of all variables other
than ztD , we compute the various terms on the right hand side of this expression
(the details are in the Technical Appendix available on request). This gives

                       EtH ert+1 (3)       EtF ert+1 (3)                  Et (ert+1 )2 (3)
        ztD   (1) =                                              D
                                                                z (0)
                                Et (ert+1 )2 (2)                          Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

where EtH ert+1 (3)         EtF ert+1 (3) and Et (ert+1 )2 = [vart (ert+1 )] (3) are given
by (33) and (34).

                                                 43
E     Balance of Payments Accounting

Saving and investment

   Saving is equal to income minus consumption. National savings in the Home
and Foreign countries are, net of depreciation of capital, are
             Z
     H                      Hj
    St =         WH;t Cy;t       dj
               Z
                             QH;t                    QF;t            Hj
                   zHj;t 1          + (1 zHj;t 1 )          WH;t 1 Cy;t  1 dj
                            QH;t 1                  QF;t 1
             Z
      F                     Fj
    St =         WF;t Cy;t      dj
               Z
                             QH;t                    QF;t           Fj
                   zF j;t 1         + (1 zF j;t 1 )        WF;t 1 Cy;t  1 dj
                            QH;t 1                  QF;t 1
    The …rst-order components of savings are
                                     1
               sH
                t (1) =                      [ aH;t (1) + (1      !) kH;t (1)]
                                 1       c
                                         c                                 z D (0) D
                                                 cH
                                                  y;t (1)      qtA (1)             qt (1)
                                     1       c                                2
                                     1
               sFt (1) =                     [ aF;t (1) + (1      !) kF;t (1)]
                                 1       c
                                         c                                 z D (0) D
                                                 cFy;t (1)     qtA (1) +           qt (1)
                                     1       c                                2
where sit (1) is scaled by the steady state wealth: sit (1) = Sti (1) = (W (0) (1 c)).
In addition for a variable g: gt (1)=gt (1) gt 1 (1). Using (56) and (60), the
…rst-order component of consumption is
                                 1 D
  cH
   y;t (1) =        cA
                     y;t (1) +     c (1)
                                 2 y;t
                                                1
           =     2;cA   (0) aA
                             t (1) +             4;cAaD (0) ktA (1) +
                                                      t (1) + (1 !) ktD (1)
                                                2
Savings in a speci…c country are then a¤ected by information dispersion only
through relative equity prices:
                                                    z D (0) D
               sH
                t   (1) =            sH St (1)               qt (1)
                                                       2
                                                    z D (0) D
               sFt (1) =             sF   S t (1) +         qt (1)
                                                       2
               sD
                t (1) =               aD
                                       t (1) + (1     !) ktD (1) z D (0) qtD (1)

                                                         44
where sD        H
       t (1) = st (1)   sFt (1).
   Investment is also de…ned net of depreciation:

               net
              Ii;t = Ii;t      Ki;t   1   = Ki;t        Ki;t   1            i = H; F

The …rst-order component of investment, scaled by steady-state wealth, is then:

                             ItH;net (1) ItF;net (1)                         1
             iD;net
              t     (1) =                            =              D
                                                                   kt+1 (1) = qtD (1)
                                  ew(0) (1 c)

where we used (5).

Capital ‡ows

   The passive portfolio share combines the steady-state holdings of quantities of
assets with the actual asset prices. For Home investors, we write:

                         p                  zH (0) eqH;t
                        zH;t =
                                  zH (0) eqH;t + (1 zH (0)) eqF;t

The …rst-order component of the passive portfolio share is the same for all investors
and re‡ects the relative asset price between Home and Foreign equity:

                             ztp (1) = zH (0) (1          zH (0)) qtD (1)

Using the di¤erence between the …rst-order components of (48) and (49) we get:
                                              1 h D;net                              i
                   ztA (1)        ztp (1) =      i      (1)         z D (0) sD
                                                                             t (1)
                                              4 t
   Gross capital out‡ows and in‡ows re‡ect the changes in the value of cross-
border asset holdings, evaluated at current prices:
                             Z
                                                       Hj
        OU T F LOW St =        (1 zHj;t ) WH;t Cy;t       dj
                                      Z
                                QF;t                              Hj
                                         (1 zHj;t 1 ) WH;t 1 Cy;t    1 dj
                               QF;t 1
                             Z
                                                 Fj
          IN F LOW St =        zF j;t WF;t Cy;t     dj
                                      Z
                                QH;t                         Fj
                                         zF j;t 1 WF;t 1 Cy;t   1 dj
                               QH;t 1




                                                   45
The …rst-order component of out‡ows, scaled by steady-state wealth W (0) (1                            c),
is:

 outf lowst (1) =      (1 zH (0)) qF;t (1)     zH;t (1)
                       1 zH (0)
                     +            aH;t (1) + (1 !) kH;t (1)                           c cH
                                                                                         y;t (1)
                         1 c
                                                                                  1 D
                 = (1         zH (0)) sH
                                       t (1)             ztA (1)        ztp (1)      z (1)
                                                                                  2 t
                                                  z D (0)           Et (ert+1 )2 (3)
                 = (1         zH (0)) sH
                                       t (1) +
                                                     2             Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                             Et ert+1 (3)IS          1       EtH ert+1 (3)             EtF ert+1 (3)
                             Et (ert+1 )2 (2)        2                   Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

where:
                             IS       Et (ert+1 )2 (2) D
              Et ert+1 (3)        =                    it (1)             z D (0)sD
                                                                                  t (1)
                                            4
Similarly, in‡ows are:
                                                                          1 D
  inf lowst (1) = zF (0) sFt (1) +           ztA (1)         ztp (1)           z (1)
                                                                          2 t
                                                 z D (0)           Et (ert+1 )2 (3)
                = (1         zH (0)) sFt   (1) +
                                                    2          Et (ert+1 )2 (2)
                             Et ert+1 (3)IS          1      EtH ert+1 (3)              EtF ert+1 (3)
                    +
                             Et (ert+1 )2 (2)        2                  Et (ert+1 )2 (2)

F     Data Appendix
Here follows a description of the data used in section 5.

Capital Flows: Quarterly data on capital ‡ows are obtained from the IMF Inter-
national Financial Statistics (IFS). Capital out‡ows are computed as the sum of
direct investment abroad, portfolio investment assets and other investment assets.
Capital in‡ows are the sum of direct investment liabilities, portfolio investment
liabilities and other investment liabilities. Net capital ‡ows is alternatively com-
puted as capital out‡ows minus in‡ows or the current account (also from the IFS).
All capital ‡ow data are converted from dollars to the local currency by multiply-
ing with the quarterly exchange rate (IFS), and are scaled by the gross domestic
product (IFS, seasonally adjusted). When computing annual net and gross capital


                                                46
‡ows we …rst aggregate over the quarterly data before dividing by annual GDP.
These data are used in the VAR analysis and Granger causality tests.

interest rates: We use the Treasury bill rate from the IFS, with the exception
of France, where the short-term rate from the OECD Economic Outlook is used.
The latter is very close to the Treasury bill rate from the IFS, but that series is not
available after Q3, 2004. Annual interest rates are computed by averaging over the
quarterly data. These data are used in the VAR analysis and Granger causality
tests.

real GDP growth: Quarterly real GDP growth is computed as the change in
the log seasonally adjusted GDP volume from the IFS. Annual GDP growth is
based on annual GDP volume data from the IFS. These data are used in the VAR
analysis and Granger causality tests.

real investment growth: Annual investment growth is computed as the growth
rate of annual total gross …xed capital formation (volume) from the OECD Eco-
nomic Outlook. These data are used in the calibration of the model, which matches
the standard deviation of average real investment growth relative to annual real
GDP growth, with the latter also computed with OECD Economic Outlook data.

in‡ation: Quarterly in‡ation is computed as the quarterly change in the log CPI
from the IFS. Annual in‡ation is computed after …rst averaging the price indices
for each quarter. These data are used in the VAR analysis and Granger causality
tests.

budget de…cit: We use quarterly data on government net lending as a percentage
of GDP, from the OECD Economic Outlook, as a measure of the budget de…cit.
These data are not available for Germany and France, for which we therefore omit
the budget de…cit from the quarterly VAR analysis. Annual data are available
from the OECD Economic Outlook for all countries and are used in the annual
VAR analysis and Granger causality test.

pro…t rate: The annual pro…t rate is computed as nominal GDP minus employee
compensation, divided by the value of the capital stock. The latter is computed as
the product of the volume of the capital stock for the total economy and the de‡ator
of total gross …xed capital formation. All data are from the OECD Economic
Outlook. These data are used in the Granger causality tests.


                                          47
labor share: The labor share is computed as the ratio of total employee compen-
sation to nominal GDP, both from the OECD Economic Outlook. These data are
used for the calibration of the model, which matches the average labor share in
the data.

Solow Residual: Annual Solow residuals are computed using data on GDP vol-
ume, total employment and the volume of the capital stock for the total economy,
all from the OECD Economic Outlook. The log Solow residual is then computed
as ait = yit !nit (1 !)kit , where yit , nit and kit are respectively log GDP, log
employment and log capital stock and ! is the estimated labor share. These data
are used to compute the persistence of ait in the calibration of the model.




                                       48
References
 [1] Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory H. Bauer and Martin Schneider (2008), “Global
     Private Information in International Equity Markets,”Journal of Financial
     Economics, forthcoming.

 [2] Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory H. Bauer and Martin Schneider (2007), “In-
     ternational Equity Flows and Returns: A Quantitative Equilibrium Ap-
     proach,”Review of Economic Studies 74(1), 1-30.

 [3] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2004), “A Scapegoat Model of
     Exchange Rate Fluctuations,”American Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
     ceedings, May 2004, 114-118.

 [4] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2006), “Can Information Het-
     erogeneity Explain the Exchange Rate Determination Puzzle? ,” American
     Economic Review 96(3), 552-576.

 [5] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop (2008), “Higher Order Expecta-
     tions in Asset Pricing,”Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 40(5), 837-866.

 [6] Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland (1992), “Interna-
     tional Real Business Cycles,”Journal of Political Economy 100(4), 745-775.

 [7] Bae, Kee-Hong, Hongping Tan and Rene M. Stulz (2007), “Do Local Analysts
     Know More? A Cross-Country Study of Performance of Local Analysts and
     Foreign Analysts,”Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

 [8] Beaudry, Paul and Franck Portier (2003), Stock Prices, News and Economic
     Fluctuations, NBER working paper 10548.

 [9] Brennan, Michael J. and H. Henry Cao (1997), “International Portfolio In-
     vestment Flows,”The Journal of Finance 52, 1851-1880.

[10] Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel (2006), Expectations and Exchange
     Rate Policy, NBER working paper 12213.

[11] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland (2007), “Country Portfolio Dy-
     namics,”working paper, University of British Columbia.


                                       49
[12] Dow, James and Gary Gorton (1995), “Pro…table Informed Trading in a Sim-
     ple General Equilibrium Model of Asset Pricing,”Journal of Economic Theory
     67, 327-369.

[13] Evans, Martin D. D., and Richard K. Lyons (2002), “Order Flow and Ex-
     change Rate Dynamics,”Journal of Political Economy 110, 170-180.

[14] Evans, Martin D.D. and Viktoria Hnatkovska (2008), “Solving General Equi-
     librium Models with Incomplete Markets and Many Financial Assets,”work-
     ing paper, Georgetown University.

[15] Fidora, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher and Christian Thimann (2007), “Home
     Bias in Global Bond and Equity Markets: The Role of Real Exchange Rate
     Volatility,”Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 631-655.

[16] Gehrig, Thomas (1993), “An Information Based Explanation of the Domestic
     Bias in International Equity Investment, ”Scandinavian Journal of Economics
     95(1), 97-109.

[17] Gennotte, Gerard and Hayne Leland (1990), “Market Liquidity, Hedging and
     Crashes,”The American Economic Review 80(5), 999-1021.

[18] Jaimovich, Nir and Sergio Rebelo (2008), Can news About the Future Drive
     the Business Cycle?, working paper, Northwestern University.

[19] Jorion, Philippe, and Will Goetzmann (1999), “Global Stock Markets in the
     Twentieth Century,”Journal of Finance 54, 953-980.

[20] Leuz, Christian, Karl V. Lins, and Francis E. Warnock (2008), “Do Foreigners
     Invest Less in Poorly Governed Firms?, ”Review of Financial Studies, forth-
     coming.

[21] Lorenzoni, Guido (2007), News Shocks and Optimal Monetary Policy, NBER
     Working paper 12898.

[22] Shiller, Robert J., Fumiko Kon-Ya and Yoshiro Tstsui (1996), “Why did the
     Nikkei Crash? Expanding the Scope of Expectations Data Collection,”Review
     of Economics and Statistics 78(1), 156-164.



                                       50
[23] Spiegel, M. and A. Subrahmanyam (1992), “Informed Speculation and Hedg-
     ing in a Noncompetitive Securities Market,”The Review of Financial Studies
     5, 307-329.

[24] Tille, Cedric and Eric van Wincoop (2008), “International Capital Flows,”
     CEPR Discussion paper 6705.

[25] Veldkamp, Laura and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh (2008), “Information Immobil-
     ity and the Home Bias Puzzle, ”Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

[26] Wang, Jiang (1994), “A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume,”Jour-
     nal of Political Economy 102, 127-168.




                                      51
           Figure 1 Modeling Contribution



Info dispersion    Portfolio choice     GE           Non linearity


                                             standard DSGE

            NRE                DSGE with portfolio

                   Our model




                                                                 1
       Figure 2 Role of Information Dispersion

       τ tD             ε tD+1                             ε tA+1


              q   t
                   D
                                              [EtHert+1](3) −[EtFert+1](3)

      saving, investment

portfolio growth       [ Et Aert +1 ]IS (3)




     Net Capital Flows                         Gross Capital Flows
                                                                             2
                                       Figure 3 Results From Model Simulation*
 0.8                                                                0.8                                                      0.8
                  Panel A Share of Variance Explained                      Panel B Share of Variance Explained                         Panel C Share of Variance Explained
                  by Unobserved Fundamentals                               by Unobserved Fundamentals                                  by Unobserved Fundamentals
 0.6                                                                0.6                                                      0.6
                                                                                                                                                             gross capital flows
                                                                                                  net capital flows
 0.4                                                                0.4                                                      0.4                     net capital flows
                                       gross capital flows

 0.2                                                                0.2        gross capital flows                           0.2


                  net capital flows
      0                                                               0                                                        0
              0        0.4       0.8     1.2     1.6           2           1       1.2      1.4      1.6     1.8         2         0        200    400       600    800    1000
                               (σHH+σHF)/2                                                   σHF/σHH                                                         θ
                  Panel D R2 of regression of ε t +1 , ε t +1                                                      ε tD+1 , ε tA+10.8 Panel F R2 of regression of ε tD+1 , ε tA+1
0.8                                                    D           A 0.8
                                                                           Panel E R2 of regression of
                  on respectively net and gross capital                    on respectively net and gross capital                       on respectively net and gross capital
                  flows                                                    flows                                                       flows
0.6                                                                 0.6                                                      0.6


                                gross capital flows                                        gross capital flows                                    gross capital flows
0.4                               gross capital flows               0.4                                                      0.4



0.2                                                                 0.2                                                      0.2
                                                                                         net capital flows                                         net capital flows
                            net capital flows
 0                                                                    0                                                        0
          0           0.4       0.8     1.2     1.6        2               1       1.2      1.4      1.6     1.8         2         0        200    400       600    800    1000
                                 (σHH+σHF)/2                                                σHF/σHH                                                      θ

  *Gross Capital flows=capital outflows+capital infows; Net capital flows=capital outflows-capital inflows. Results are based
  on a simulation of the model over 100,000 periods.
         Table 1. Percentage Variance of Gross and Net Capital Flows Accounted for by
                  Macro Fundamentals: Quarterly Data, 1977(1)-2007(2)

Capital flow measure                    Outflows+Inflows (% GDP)                        Current Account (% GDP)

Horizon                         1 quarter      4 quarters     12 quarters       1 quarter      4 quarters      12 quarters

United States                       4              11              16               17              36              48

Japan                               1               9              14               5               37              55

Canada                              4              18              22               4               18              35

United Kingdom                     11              14              18               9               10              13

Germany                            13              10              16               5               22              33

France                              2               7              11               2               6               10

Average                             6              12              16               7               22              32

Notes. The table reports the contribution of macro variables to gross and net capital flows. It is based on a VAR of real
GDP growth, the inflation rate, the T-bill rate, the budget deficit as a fraction of GDP and the measure of gross or net
capital flows in the first row of the table (as fraction of GDP). Identification is achieved using the Cholesky decomposition
with the ordering of the variables as in the previous sentence. For VARs including gross capital flows (sum of capital
inflows and outflows), the macro-variables are computed as a GDP-weighted average of the six countries in the sample.
For the VARs including net capital flows (the current account), the macro-variables equal to that variable in the country
minus a GDP-weighted average of that in the other countries. The results are based on 122 quarterly observations from
1977(1) to 2007(2), with three lags of each variable. The table reports the total contribution of innovations of all four
macro fundamentals to the variance of gross and net capital flows over 1, 4 and 12-quarter horizons.
         Table 2. Percentage Variance of Gross and Net Capital Flows Accounted for by
                  Macro Fundamentals: Annual Data, 1977-2006

Capital flow measure                    Outflows+Inflows (%GDP)                          Current Account (%GDP)

Horizon                          1 year         2 years          3 years          1 year         2 years         3 years

United States                      33              38              47               53              63              69

Japan                              10              20              32               51              55              56

Canada                             35              39              40               44              61              68

United Kingdom                     10              10              17               10              25              33

Germany                            25              29              34               28              56              65

France                             10               7               7               16              22              26

Average                            21              24              30               34              47              53

Notes. The table reports the contribution of macro variables to gross and net capital flows. It is based on a VAR of real
GDP growth, the inflation rate, the T-bill rate, the budget deficit as a fraction of GDP and the measure of gross or net
capital flows in the first row of the table (as fraction of GDP). Identification is achieved using the Cholesky decomposition
with the ordering of the variables as in the previous sentence. For VARs including gross capital flows (sum of capital
inflows and outflows), the macro-variables are computed as a GDP-weighted average of the six countries in the sample.
For the VARs including net capital flows (the current account), the macro-variables equal to that variable in the country
minus a GDP-weighted average of that in the other countries. The results are based on 30 annual observations from 1977 to
2006, with one lag of each variable. The table reports the total contribution of innovations of all four macro fundamentals
to the variance of gross and net capital flows over 1, 2 and 3-year horizons.
Table 3. Granger Causality Test of “World Profit Rate” by
         Capital Inflows+Outflows (% GDP): Annual Data, 1977-2006

                                        Bivariate                    Multivariate
                                                          World GDP            World GDP
                                                            Growth,          Growth, interest
                                                         interest rate,       rate, inflation,
            Control variables                               inflation         budget deficit
                                             -                2.9                     -
            United States
                                             -                  -                     -
            Japan
                                           0.1                0.2                   4.5
            Canada
                                           2.3                1.3                   6.9
            United Kingdom
                                           2.9                0.0                   4.7
            Germany
                                           1.7                0.4                   9.4
            France

            # significant at 10%            4                  5                     4

Notes. The table reports p-values (in %) from the F-test that the sum of inflows and outflows (as a fraction
of GDP) does not Granger cause the world profit rate. A value of 2.5 for example indicates that the null of
no Granger causality is rejected at the 2.5% level. The wor1d profit rate is defined as a GDP-weighted
average of profit rates of all 6 countries. The profit rate is equal to GDP minus employee compensation,
divided by the capital stock. The table only reports p-values for countries where there is significance at the
10% level or better. The multivariate Granger Causality test results in columns 3 and 4 introduce GDP
weighted averages of respectively 3 and 4 control variables. In column 3 they are real GDP growth, the T-
bill rate and the CPI inflation rate. In column 4 the budget deficit as a share of GDP is an additional control
variable. The results are based on annual data from 1977 to 2006 with one lag for all variables.
         Table 4. Granger Causality Test of “Relative Profit Rate” by Net Capital Flows:
                  Annual Data, 1977-2006.

                                       Bivariate                                          Multivariate
                                                                  Relative GDP growth,          Relative GDP growth, interest
Control variables                                                 interest rate, inflation       rate, inflation, budget deficit
                                                outflows-                         outflows-                          outflows-
                                 CA                                 CA                               CA
Capital flow measure                             inflows                           inflows                            inflows
                                   -                -                 -               -                -                 -
United States
                                   -                -                 -               -                -                 -
Japan
                                   -                -                 -               -                -                 -
Canada
                                 1.3               1.6              1.0               -              2.8                 -
United Kingdom
                                   -                -                 -               -                -                 -
Germany
                                 3.5               5.0                -               -                -                 -
France

# significant at 10%              2                 2                1               0                 1                 0

Notes. The table reports p-values (in %) from the F-test that net capital flows do not Granger cause the relative profit rate.
A value of 2.5 for example indicates that the null of no Granger causality is rejected at the 2.5% level. The relative profit
rate is defined as the profit rate in a country relative to a GDP-weighted average of that in the other countries. The profit
rate is equal to GDP minus employee compensation, divided by the capital stock. The table only reports p-values for
countries where there is significance at the 10% level or better. The multivariate Granger Causality test results in columns
3 and 4 introduce respectively 3 and 4 control variables. In column 3 they are real GDP growth, the T-bill rate and the CPI
inflation rate. In column 4 the budget deficit as a share of GDP is an additional control variable. All control variables are
relative to a GDP weighted average of that in the other countries. The results are based on annual data from 1977 to 2006
with one lag for all variables.
