                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       TEMPORARY PRICE CHANGES AND THE REAL EFFECTS OF MONETARY
                                POLICY

                                         Patrick J. Kehoe
                                         Virgiliu Midrigan

                                       Working Paper 14392
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14392


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2008




We thank Kathy Rolfe and Joan Gieseke for excellent editorial assistance. Kehoe thanks the National
Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Patrick J. Kehoe and Virgiliu Midrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Temporary Price Changes and the Real Effects of Monetary Policy
Patrick J. Kehoe and Virgiliu Midrigan
NBER Working Paper No. 14392
October 2008
JEL No. E12,E5,E58

                                               ABSTRACT

In the data, prices change both temporarily and permanently. Standard Calvo models focus on permanent
price changes and take one of two shortcuts when confronted with the data: drop temporary changes
from the data or leave them in and treat them as permanent. We provide a menu cost model that includes
motives for both types of price changes. Since this model accounts for the main regularities of price
changes, its predictions for the real effects of monetary policy shocks are useful benchmarks against
which to judge existing shortcuts. We find that neither shortcut comes close to these benchmarks. For
monetary policy analysis, researchers should use a menu cost model like ours or at least a third, theory-based
shortcut: set the Calvo model's parameters so that it generates the same real effects from monetary
shocks as does the benchmark menu cost model. Following either suggestion will improve monetary
policy analysis.


Patrick J. Kehoe
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Avenue
Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER
pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us

Virgiliu Midrigan
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th St.
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
virgiliu.midrigan@nyu.edu
       At the heart of monetary policy analysis is the question, How large are the real eﬀects
of monetary shocks? The most popular class of models used to attempt to answer this
question assumes that goods prices are sticky, or that they change relatively infrequently.
This assumption is a key determinant of the answers these models get. If prices change
infrequently, then the models predict that the real eﬀects of monetary shocks will be large.
If prices actually change frequently, however, then the models predict the policy eﬀects will
be small. The measured stickiness of prices is thus critical for anyone using these models for
monetary policy analysis.
       Measuring the frequency of price changes in the data is not as straightforward as it
may seem. How sticky prices actually are depends on whether the data being measured
include temporary price changes. For in the data, only a small fraction of price changes are
long-lasting, or permanent. A much larger fraction of price changes are quickly reversed; not
long after a change, the price returns to its original level. When temporary price changes
are included in a data set, therefore, prices naturally look fairly flexible, and without them,
prices look quite sticky. This can be seen clearly in Figure 1, which displays a fairly typical
price series for goods in our data set. When we include both types of price changes in the
data (as in the dashed line), the good’s price changes frequently; but when we include only
permanent changes (as in the solid line), the price changes rarely.
       Despite the critical nature of this distinction in the data, researchers generally make
no attempt to model it, by explicitly building into their models motives for firms to make
temporary price changes. Instead, when confronted with data in which a large fraction of
price changes are temporary, researchers generally take one of two shortcuts. The most
popular shortcut is to exclude temporary price changes from the data, construct a model
without a motive for temporary price changes, and then choose parameters to match the
frequency of price changes in the data with the temporary price changes excluded. We refer
to this approach as the temporary-changes-out approach. An alternative shortcut, used less
often, is to construct a model without a motive for temporary price changes and then choose
parameters to match the frequency of price changes in the data with temporary price changes
included. We refer to this approach as the temporary-changes-in approach.
       Here we use theory to evaluate the adequacy of these two approaches for analyzing
the real eﬀects of monetary shocks. We find both approaches inadequate and oﬀer two
alternatives. Our theory is a simple menu cost model that explicitly includes a motive for
temporary price changes and, hence, itself is an alternative to the common shortcuts. We
document the regularities in the U.S. data concerning temporary price changes and then
demonstrate that our model can account for them well. Because of that performance, we
then use the model as a benchmark against which to judge the existing shortcuts used with
standard Calvo (1983) sticky price models. We have the menu cost model predict the real
eﬀects of monetary shocks and compare its predictions to those of a standard model using
each of the two common approaches. Neither approach performs well. We find that if we take
the temporary changes out of the data, prices change infrequently, only every 50 weeks, and
the Calvo model overestimates the real eﬀects of monetary shocks by almost 70%. If we leave
the temporary changes in the data, prices change much more often, every 3 weeks, and the
Calvo model predicts only 11% of the real eﬀects of monetary shocks as does our benchmark
model.
         Some researchers may find our first suggested alternative to their shortcuts–using a
version of our benchmark menu cost model–computationally diﬃcult. For them, we oﬀer an-
other alternative: use a simpler model that approximates the benchmark model’s real eﬀects.
One way to do that is to set the frequency of price adjustment in the standard Calvo model
so that it reproduces the real eﬀects in the benchmark menu cost model. We demonstrate
here that to do so, the Calvo model’s parameters must be set so that, on average, prices
change every 17 weeks. This second alternative is a theory-based shortcut that is preferable
to the existing shortcuts.
         Before we describe our benchmark menu cost model in detail, we attempt to describe
its simple analytics, to help provide intuition for our results. We build the simplest possible
model of temporary price changes that can be solved using pen and paper. The model is a
Calvo sticky price model of price-setting modified to have temporary as well as permanent
price changes. Since in this model the only aggregate shocks are shocks to the money supply,
we measure the real eﬀects of these shocks by the variance of output. We treat the model
as the data-generating process and solve it in closed form for the law of motion for output
and its variance. We then solve for similar closed-form expressions for output under the


                                               2
temporary-changes-out and -in approaches. A comparison of the expressions proves that the
temporary-changes-out approach overstates the real eﬀects and the temporary-changes-in
approach understates them.
       We then turn to our quantitative analysis. We start by documenting six regularities
(or facts) about temporary and permanent price changes that we use to quantify the patterns
of these changes. Among these regularities are that overall prices change frequently (every 3
weeks), 94% of price changes are temporary, about 90% of temporary price changes are cuts
and about 10% are increases, temporary price changes revert to their preexisting level 80%
of the time, and permanent price changes last for about a year. Unlike much of the previous
research, we also document the comovements of quantities and prices. In particular, we find
that periods in which a temporary price is charged account for a disproportionate amount of
goods sold.
       We then turn to our benchmark model, which is purposely chosen to be a parsimonious
extension of the standard menu cost model of, say, Golosov and Lucas (2007) and Midrigan
(2007). Indeed, we add to that model only one parameter on the technology of price ad-
justment. Nonetheless, our simple extension allows the model to produce patterns of both
temporary and permanent price changes that are similar to those in the data.
       In our model, firms are subject to two types of idiosyncratic disturbances: persistent
productivity shocks and transitory shocks to the elasticity of demand for the firm’s product.
The latter shocks are meant to capture in a simple way an idea popular in the industrial
organization literature, that firms face demand for their products with time-varying elasticity.
       To understand the technology for changing prices in our model, consider the problem
of an individual firm. Such a firm enters each period with a preexisting regular price. This
is the price the firm can charge in the current period at no extra cost. If the firm wants
to charge a diﬀerent price in the current period, then it has two options: change its current
regular price to a new regular price, or change its price temporarily. To change its regular
price, the firm must pay a fixed cost, or menu cost, which gives it the right to charge this
price both today and in all future periods with no extra costs. We think of this option as akin
to buying a permanent regular price change. To instead make a temporary price change, the
firm must pay a smaller fixed cost, which gives it the right to charge a price that diﬀers from


                                               3
its existing regular price for the current period only and keep its regular price unchanged.
We think of this option as akin to renting rather than buying a price change. (Of course,
the firm can rent a price change for several consecutive periods if it pays the rental cost each
period.) We show that, essentially, the optimal choice in this environment is for firms to use a
temporary price change to respond to a transitory demand shock. In contrast, their optimal
choice when faced with much more persistent monetary and productivity shocks is to use a
regular price change.
       We show that our model can generate the salient features of the micro price data,
including the frequency of temporary and permanent price changes, which we document
here. We then use the model as a laboratory in which to study how well the two existing
shortcuts approximate the real eﬀects of monetary shocks. With our extended menu cost
predictions as the benchmark, we demonstrate that the existing shortcuts that are meant
to deal with temporary price changes are likely to be inadequate in applied settings. That
should not be true of our alternative, theory-based approaches.
       Our work is related to a recent debate in the literature between Golosov and Lucas
(2007) and Midrigan (2007), focusing on how good an approximation a simple Calvo model of
price changes is to a menu cost model. This literature assumes that the true data-generating
process is a menu cost model and that researchers, for convenience, fit a Calvo model instead.
Golosov and Lucas have found that the approximation is not good because the Calvo model
greatly overstates the real eﬀects of monetary shocks; Midrigan, however, argues that if
a researcher matches more details of the micro data on prices, including the fat tails of
the distribution of prices, such a researcher would overstate the real eﬀects of monetary
shocks only slightly. Our work extends this debate to environments with both temporary
and permanent price changes. To match the details of the micro data on prices, we follow
Midrigan (2007) and Gertler and Leahy (2008) in assuming fat-tailed shocks.
       Our work is also related to a growing literature that documents features of micro price
data in panel data sets. Two influential works in this literature are those of Bils and Klenow
(2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (forthcoming). When these researchers approach the
data, they focus on temporary price declines, referred to as sales, rather than all temporary
price changes, which are the sum of temporary price declines and temporary price increases.


                                               4
These researchers have found, as we do, that the frequency of price changes measured in the
data depends sensitively on the treatment of temporary price declines.
       Our use of time-varying demand elasticities attempts to capture, in a very simple
way, the spirit of an industrial organization literature that explains sales as arising from
intertemporal price discrimination. (See, for example, the work of Varian (1980) and Sobel
(1984), among others.) A critical distinction between our model and those in the earlier
literature is that we have nominal frictions, menu costs for either temporarily or permanently
deviating from an existing regular price. These frictions make it optimal for firms to return
their price to the preexisting level after temporary price cuts. Without such menu costs,
money would be neutral and the presence or absence of sales would be irrelevant for the real
eﬀects of monetary policy shocks.
       The focus of our work is, however, quite diﬀerent from that in the industrial orga-
nization literature. We want to understand how the presence of temporary price changes
(including sales) alters a model’s predictions about the size of the real eﬀects of monetary
policy shocks. The industrial organization literature aims to explain why temporary price
changes (especially sales) ever arise at all. Because of our focus, we adopt a simple model of
temporary price changes that is purposefully chosen to be similar to the existing sticky price
models. We do not build an elaborate model of intertemporal price discrimination that has
layered onto it nominal frictions that make money non-neutral. Building such an elaborate
model is an interesting area for future research beyond the scope of this work.
       Finally, Rotemberg (2004) oﬀers an alternative explanation for why temporary prices
return to their previous level. One view of Rotemberg’s work is that it shows how costs to
the firm of changing prices that act similarly to menu costs can arise from the preferences of
consumers.

1. An Analytic Exercise
       Before getting into the details of our quantitative model, we attempt to provide some
of the intuition behind our argument that the common shortcuts to modeling temporary
price changes are inadequate. We describe a simple Calvo model of price-setting and extend
it to include both temporary and permanent price changes. We solve the extended Calvo


                                              5
model for a closed-form expression for the real eﬀects of monetary shocks and then use it to
analytically evaluate the two shortcuts. We find that both approaches are poor predictors
of the real eﬀects of monetary shocks. The temporary-changes-out approach overestimates
them, and the temporary-changes-in approach underestimates them.

A. Extending the Simple Calvo Model
       In our extended Calvo model, the only aggregate shock is to the money supply. Hence,
aggregate real variables in this economy fluctuate only because money is not neutral. We
measure the magnitude of the real eﬀects of monetary shocks by the variance of aggregate
consumption. We begin by briefly describing the economy and then solve for this variance as
a function of the primitive parameters in the economy.
       We borrow the formulation of the consumer problem from the menu cost model we
will describe in detail later. That is a standard cash-in-advance model with a consumer who
has the choice of a continuum of diﬀerentiated consumption goods. Here we describe just the
key elements of the consumer problem that we need to illustrate our points.
       In particular, the consumer’s preferences in this Calvo model are defined over leisure
and a continuum of consumption goods such that, given that the price of good i is Pit in any
time period t, the consumer demand for each good i is

              µ            ¶−θ
                  Pit
(1)   cit =                      Ct ,
                  Pt

              ³R            θ−1   ´ θ−1
                                     θ
                 1
where Ct =         0
                           citθ di      is the composite consumption good and θ the elasticity of substi-
tution between goods. The corresponding aggregate price index is

              µZ       1            ¶ 1−θ
                                       1


(2)   Pt =                 Pit1−θ di        .
                   0


Moreover, the consumer utility function is such that the first-order condition for labor is

      Wt
(3)      = ψCt ,
      Pt

where Wt is the nominal wage and ψ is a parameter governing the disutility of working.

                                                         6
Finally, the cash-in-advance constraint binds:


(4)   Pt Ct = Mt ,


where the supply of money Mt is given by an exogenous stochastic process that follows
Mt = μt Mt−1 . Here log μt is independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with mean 0
and variance σ 2μ .
       The firm side of the model is more interesting. Each firm is the monopolistic supplier
of a single good. Each firm enters a period with a preexisting regular price for its good,
PR,t−1 . The firm must charge its existing regular price PR,t−1 in the current period unless
one of two events occurs. One event, referred to as a permanent price change, occurs with
probability αR and allows the firm to change this existing regular price to some new regular
price PRt . The other event, referred to as a temporary price change, occurs with probability
αT and allows the firm to charge a price PT t that diﬀers from its existing regular price PR,t−1 ,
but only for one period. That is, a firm that experiences a temporary price change will charge
PT t in the current period and PR,t−1 in the subsequent period unless in the subsequent period
that firm again experiences one of the two price-changing events. (Note that this feature of
the model is consistent with the observation that most temporary price changes revert to the
preexisting regular price.)
       Consider the problem facing a firm that is allowed a temporary price change PT t in
period t. Clearly, the choice of this price has no influence on the firm’s profits in any future
period or state. Thus, the firm simply solves the static problem of maximizing current profits,

                      µ          ¶−θ
                          PT,t
      (PT,t − Wt )                     Ct .
                           Pt

Here the optimal price is PT,t = θWt /(θ − 1). Note from (3) and (4) that in equilibrium
Wt = ψMt . For convenience, normalize all nominal variables by the money supply. Doing so
and then log-linearizing gives that


(5)   pT,t = 0,



                                                 7
where pT,t is the log deviation of PT,t /Mt from its steady state.
        Consider next the problem facing a firm that is allowed a permanent price change.
That is, in period t the firm can reset its regular price PR,t . Clearly, in choosing its new price,
that firm need consider only the states for which that price will be in eﬀect. (This price has
no eﬀect on either future periods in which the firm can choose a temporary price or future
periods in which a new regular price will be in eﬀect.)
        The firm will want to maximize the value of profits during those periods and states in
which the price chosen today will be in eﬀect. Letting λ = 1 − αR be the probability that
the firm doesn’t make a permanent change, the objective is to maximize this expression:

                      µ          ¶−θ                                           "             µ       ¶−θ #
                          PR,t
                                                 ∞
                                                 X          1 − α T − α R                      P R,t
       (PR,t − Wt )                    Ct + Et         λs−t               Q̃t,s (PR,t − Ws )            Cs ,
                           Pt                    s=t
                                                                  λ                             Ps

where Qt,s is the price of a dollar in period s in units of dollars in t, normalized by the
conditional probability of the state in s given the state in t. To understand this objective,
note that in t the prevailing price is PR,t , in t + 1 the prevailing price is PR,t with probability
1 − αT − αR , in t + 2 the prevailing price is PR,t with probability λ(1 − αT − αR ), and so on.
Letting pR,t denote the log deviation of PR,t /Mt from its steady state, we can easily see that
the log-linearized first-order condition for this problem is


              "                           #
                   ∞
                   X      j 1 − αT  − α R
                                                       X∞
                                                                 1 − αT − αR
       pR,t   1+     (λβ)                   = wt + E t     (λβ)j             wt+j .
                 j=1
                                  λ                    j=1
                                                                      λ


        As we have already noted, (3) and (4) imply that in equilibrium Wt = ψMt . Letting
wt denote the log deviation of Wt /Mt from its steady state, we have that ws = 0 for all s, so
that


(6)    pR,t = 0.


The intuition for (6) is simple. The firm chooses its new regular price as a markup over the
discounted value of its expected future marginal costs–here, future nominal wages. Since



                                                             8
wages are proportional to the nominal money supply and the money supply is a random walk,
the mean of future wages is equal to current wages and, hence, proportional to the current
money supply. Hence, the firm sets its new price proportional to the current money supply,
which in normalized log-deviation terms means the firm sets it equal to zero.
       Now we describe how aggregate consumption in this Calvo economy evolves.

       Proposition 1. Aggregate consumption in log-linearized form for this economy evolves
according to


(7)   ct = (1 − αR )ct−1 + (1 − αR − αT )μt .


       Proof. We establish Proposition 1 using the cash-in-advance constraint (4). Log-
linearizing this constraint gives that


(8)   ct = −pt .


Thus, to get an expression for the evolution of aggregate consumption, we need only solve
for the law of motion of the price index. From (2) we know that this index is given by
             Z   1
(9)   pt =           pit di.
             0


To compute the right side of (9), we note that the fraction αR of firms in t charge pRt = 0,
the fraction αT of firms in t charge pT t = 0, and the rest charge whatever is their existing
regular price. Let p̄R,t−1 denote the average of existing regular prices in t − 1 normalized by
the money supply in t − 1 and expressed in log-deviation form. Then we can write the price
index as


(10) pt = αR pR,t + αT pT,t + (1 − αR − αT )(p̄R,t−1 − μt ).


       To prove the proposition, we must also describe the law of motion for the average
existing regular price p̄R,t . Given that αR firms reset prices in t to pR,t and that 1 − αR do
not, but instead use whatever their regular price was in t − 1, we can write the law of motion

                                                9
for p̄R,t recursively as


(11) p̄Rt = αpR,t + (1 − αR )(p̄R,t−1 − μt ),


where, from (6), we know that pRt = 0. Combining (10) and (11) gives that


         pt = (1 − αR )pt−1 − (1 − αR − αT )μt .


Substituting from (8) gives our result (7). Q.E.D.

B. Evaluating the Two Common Shortcuts
          Now we use this extended Calvo model to evaluate the two common shortcuts to
dealing with temporary price changes. Consider a researcher who studies the data generated
by our extended Calvo model, with both temporary and permanent price changes, through
the lens of a simple standard Calvo model, with only permanent price changes and with a
frequency of price change α. The researcher using such a simple model follows one of the
two common approaches we have described to calibrate the frequency of price changes in this
model. In the temporary-changes-out approach, we imagine that the researcher is able to
isolate the permanent price changes and thus concludes that the frequency of price changes is
α = αR . In the temporary-changes-in approach, we imagine that the researcher uses the raw
data that include the temporary price changes, concluding that the frequency of price changes
is approximately α = αR + 2αT . To see where this last expression comes from, recall that
every temporary price change involves two price changes, one to and one from the temporary
price.
          To set up evaluation of the two approaches, note that our derivation above implies that
the standard Calvo pricing, in which a fraction α of firms reset prices in any given period,
has a law of motion for consumption of


         ct = (1 − α)ct−1 + (1 − α)μt ,




                                                   10
and the unconditional variance of ct is, therefore,

                    (1 − α)2
(12) var(ct ) =               σ2 .
                  1 − (1 − α)2 μ

Now set α = αR and α = αR + 2αT in (12). Let cOut
                                              t   and cIn
                                                       t denote the stochastic processes

for consumption generated under the two approaches, and let ct denote the stochastic process
for the data-generating process. Then we can say this:

        Proposition 2. The temporary-changes-out approach overstates the real eﬀects of mon-
etary shocks, whereas the temporary-changes-in approach understates those eﬀects. In par-
ticular, the temporary-changes-out approach predicts that


       var(cOut                   In
            t ) > var(ct ) > var(ct ).



        Proof. Evaluating (12) at α = αR and α = αR + 2αT gives that

         (1 − αR )2    2   (1 − αR − αT )2 2   (1 − αR − 2αT )2
(13)                 σ   >                σ  >                   σ2 .
       1 − (1 − αR )2 μ     1 − (1 − αR )2 μ 1 − (1 − αR − 2αT )2 μ

Clearly, the left-most term in (13) is (12) evaluated at α = αR , the middle term follows from
(7), and the right-most term is (12) evaluated at α = αR + 2αT . Q.E.D.

        The intuition for this result is as follows. The temporary-changes-out approach cor-
rectly predicts the persistence of consumption, but it overstates the volatility of shocks to the
consumption process because it ignores the fact that a fraction αT of firms change prices in
any given period and thus oﬀset the monetary shock. In contrast, the temporary-changes-in
approach understates the persistence of consumption because it fails to recognize that some
of the prices change only temporarily and revert to their previous value. Moreover, that ap-
proach counts the returns from the temporary price to the permanent price as a price change
that is useful in responding to the monetary shock, but in fact it is not, since the price returns
to a preexisting level.
        This simple setup can also be used to answer a question that can help researchers
improve their models’ predictions: To what frequency of price changes should a researcher


                                               11
calibrate a simple Calvo model with no temporary price changes in order to predict the real
eﬀects of monetary shocks in the model with a fraction αR of permanent price changes and a
fraction αT of temporary price changes? Using the results above, we know that the frequency
of price changes, α, equates to

        (1 − α)2     (1 − αR − αT )2
                   =                 .
      1 − (1 − α)2    1 − (1 − αR )2

We thus have the following corollary to Proposition 2:

       Corollary: If the data are generated by our extended Calvo model, which includes
both permanent and temporary price change parameters, αR and αT , then a simple Calvo
model with parameter

                          1 − αR − αT
(14) 1 − α =                                         1
               [1 − (1 − αR )2 + (1 − αR − αT )2 ] 2

will predict the same real eﬀects of monetary shocks.

2. Price Changes in the Data: Six Facts
       We turn now to documenting how prices have changed in the U.S. data. We here
describe six regularities, or facts, that we see in these data. We will later use the data to
both calibrate and evaluate our model.
       Our data base is a by-product of a randomized pricing experiment conducted by the
Dominick’s Finer Foods retail chain in cooperation with the University of Chicago Graduate
School of Business (the James M. Kilts Center for Marketing). The data base includes nine
years (1989—97) of weekly store-level reports from 86 stores in the Chicago area on the prices
of more than 4,500 individual products, organized into 29 product categories.1 The products
available in this data base range from nonperishable foodstuﬀs (for example, frozen and
canned food, cookies, crackers, juices, sodas, and beer) to various household supplies (for
example, detergents, fabric softeners, and bathroom tissue) as well as pharmaceutical and
hygienic products. (For a detailed description of the data and Dominick’s pricing practices,
see the work of Hoch, Drèze, and Purk (1994), Peltzman (2000), and Chevalier, Kashyap,


                                                12
and Rossi (2003).)
       We use a simple algorithm (described in Appendix A) to categorize all price changes
in this data base as either temporary or permanent. To do so, we define for each product
an artificial series called a regular price series, denoted {PtR }, which we construct and use
mainly to define which periods are periods of temporary price changes. An intuitive way to
think about our analysis is to imagine that at any point in time every product has an existing
regular price and may experience two types of price changes: temporary changes in which the
price briefly moves away from the regular price and permanent changes which are changes in
the regular price itself.
       In Figure 2, we illustrate the results of our algorithm for several particular price series.
On each of the four graphs, for each of the four products, the dashed lines are the raw data
(the original prices), and the solid lines are the regular price series constructed with our
algorithm. On each graph, every price change that is a deviation from the regular price line
is defined as a temporary price change, whereas every price change that coincides with a
change in the regular price is defined as a permanent price change. Perusal of these graphs
makes some facts about price changes clear: across the board, price changes are frequent
and large, most of them are temporary, and most temporary prices return to the preexisting
regular price.
       We turn now to a more formal description of the data that we will use in our theoretical
model. In Table 1 and Figure 3, we report a variety of general facts about price changes that
our data reveal. (All statistics are computed by weighting each good by its sales share.)

Fact 1: Prices change frequently, but most price changes are temporary, and after temporary
changes, prices tend to return to the regular price. Notice from line 1 in Table 1 that the
frequency of weekly price changes in these data is 33%, so prices change on average once every
three weeks. However, most of these price changes–indeed, 94% of them–are temporary
(line 2). Regular prices, therefore, change infrequently, with a weekly frequency rate of 2%,
or about once a year. The temporary price changes are short-lived; on average they last two
weeks, so the probability that a temporary price change reverts to the preexisting regular
price is 46% (line 4). Moreover, 80% of the time (line 3), temporary price changes return to


                                                13
the preexisting regular price.

Fact 2: Most temporary price changes are cuts, not increases. Of all the periods in the data
when the store charges a temporary price (24.3%, line 5), most of the time the price moves
temporarily down (20.3%, line 6) rather than up (2.1%, line 7).

Fact 3: During a year, prices stay at their annual modal value most of the time. When
prices are not at their annual mode, they are much more likely to be below it than above it.
Table 1 shows that, on average during a 50-week period, prices tend to be at their annual
modal value 58% of the time (line 8). When prices are not at their annual mode, they are
most likely below it (30%, line 9). That leaves prices above their mode only 12% of the time.
Thus, prices are about 2.5 times as likely to be below the annual mode than above it.

Fact 4: Price changes are large and dispersed. The mean size of all price changes in these
data is 17% (line 10), and their interquartile range is 15% (line 13). The mean of regular
price changes is 11%. Also large and dispersed are temporary price changes. The mean
deviation of the temporary price from the regular price is −22% (line 11) when the price is
temporarily down and 13% (line 12) when it is temporarily up. The interquartile ranges of
these temporarily down and up deviations are 21% (line 14) and 12% (line 15), respectively.

Fact 5: Periods of temporary price cuts account for a disproportionately large share of goods
sold. Quantities sold are more sensitive to prices when prices decline temporarily than when
they decline permanently. In the data, 38% of output is sold in periods with temporary prices
(line 16), 35.4% when the price is temporarily down (line 17), and 1.2% when the price is
temporarily up (line 18), even though the fraction of weeks with temporary prices is relatively
small: 24.3%, 20.3%, and 2.1%, respectively. (See Fact 2.) Put another way, in periods of
temporary price declines, more than twice as many goods are sold as in periods of regular
prices. A regression of changes in quantities on changes in prices during regular price change
periods yields a slope coeﬃcient of −2.08 (line 19). A similar regression during periods when
the price change is a temporary decline from a regular price yields a slope coeﬃcient of −2.93
(line 20). (Of course, the slope coeﬃcient in our simple regression is not a true structural
measure of demand elasticity. Nonetheless, note that in static monopolistic competition,

                                              14
setting an increase in demand elasticity from 2.08 to 2.93 would lower the monopolist’s
markup from 92% to 52%. In this metric, the change in the slope coeﬃcient is large.)

Fact 6: Price changes are clustered in time. In Figure 3 we display the hazard of price
changes, defined as the probability that prices change in period t + k when the last price
change occurred in period t. We computed this hazard by assuming a log-log functional
form for the hazard of price adjustment and estimating the resulting model by allowing
for good-specific random eﬀects and holiday and seasonal dummies, as well as by modeling
age dependence nonparametrically. In constructing the likelihood function, we weight each
product according to its share in Dominick’s total revenue.
       Figure 3 shows the eﬀect of varying the age of the price spell, or how long the new price
lasts, while holding all other covariates constant at their mean.2 Note that this procedure
implicitly accounts for ex ante heterogeneity in the frequency of price changes across products
by use of good-specific random eﬀects.
       The left panel of the figure displays the hazard for all price changes, both temporary
and permanent. The panel shows that the hazard for a price change at one week after a
change is 38%. That is, if a store has changed the price of a given product last week, then
the store changes that price again this week 38% of the time. More generally, we see that
the hazard sharply declines in the first two weeks after a price change and follows a declining
trend thereafter. This implies that price changes tend to come in clusters: overall, the data
include periods with many price changes followed by prolonged periods with none.
       The right panel of the figure displays the hazard for just regular price changes. Without
temporary price changes included, the hazard is low and flat, though slightly increasing in
the first few weeks.

3. A Model of Temporary and Permanent Price Changes
       Now we attempt to build a model that can reasonably well approximate the facts
about price changes that we have just documented.
       Our model explicitly allows temporary as well as permanent price changes, yet is a
parsimonious extension of a standard menu cost model. Indeed, our model includes only one
parameter on the firm side that is not part of that standard model. Here, as there, firms

                                              15
can pay a fixed cost and change their regular price. Our simple innovation is to allow firms
the option in any period of paying a diﬀerent and smaller fixed cost in order to change their
price temporarily, for only one period, leaving their regular price unchanged. Our one new
parameter is the size of the fixed cost for a temporary price change. At an intuitive level,
we think of the standard model as requiring that the only way a price can change is that the
firm buys a potentially permanent price change. In this way, we think of our model as adding
an option of renting a price change for one period.
       The standard menu cost model of Golosov and Lucas (2007) has only technology
shocks, but we allow both technology shocks and demand shocks. Our motivation is from
both theory and data.
       Our theoretical motivation is that a common explanation in the industrial organization
literature for temporary price changes is intertemporal price discrimination in response to
time-varying price elasticities of demand. In particular, the idea is that firms willingly lower
markups in periods during which a large number of buyers of the product happen to have
high elasticities.
       Our empirical motivation comes from two observations. First, as we have shown,
quantities sold seem to be more sensitive to price changes during periods of temporary price
declines than during other periods (Fact 5). Second, as several researchers have shown,
temporary price cuts are associated with reductions in price-cost margins. (See, for example,
the work of Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi (2003).) Taken together, these features suggest
that in the data the demand elasticity that firms face is time-varying, and this feature leads
firms to have time-varying markups.
       Motivated by both theory and data, then, we introduce time-varying elasticities by
having consumers with diﬀering demand elasticities and by including good-specific shocks to
preferences.
       We argue that our extended menu cost model is a useful laboratory for evaluating the
common approaches to treating temporary price changes in the data. We do this by showing
that the model can fit what we think are the key aspects of the micro data.




                                              16
A. Setup
        Formally, we study a monetary economy populated by a large number of infinitely
lived consumers and firms and a government. In each period t, this economy experiences one
of finitely many events st. We denote by st = (s0 , . . . , st ) the history (or state) of events up
through and including period t. The probability, as of period 0, of any particular history st
is π(st ). The initial realization s0 is given.
        In the model, we have aggregate shocks to money supply and idiosyncratic shocks to
a firm’s productivity and the demand for each good. In terms of the money supply shocks,
we assume that the (log of) money growth follows an autoregressive process of the form


(15) μ(st ) = ρμ μ(st−1 ) + εμ (st ),


where μ is money growth, ρμ is the persistence of μ, and εμ (st ) is the monetary shock, a
normally distributed i.i.d. random variable with mean 0 and standard deviation σ μ . We
describe the idiosyncratic shocks below.

Technology and Consumers
        In each period t, the commodities in this economy are labor, money, and a continuum
of consumption goods indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Good i is produced using the technology


       yi (st ) = ai (st )li (st ),


where yi (st ) is the output of good i, li (st ) the labor input to the production process, and
ai (st ) the good-specific productivity shock that evolves according to


(16) log ai (st ) = ρa log ai (st−1 ) + εi (st ),


where ρa is the persistence of the productivity process and εi (st ) the persistent shock to
productivity.
        The economy has two types of consumers, diﬀerentiated by how much their demand
responds to price changes: measure 1 − ω of low elasticity consumers and measure ω of high



                                                    17
elasticity consumers. The stand-in consumer for the low elasticity consumers, a consumer of
type A, has preferences of the form

       X
(17)        β t π(st )[log cA (st ) − ψlA (st )],


where β is the discount factor, cA (st ) is a composite of goods consumed given by
³R               ´ θ−1
                    θ
    1     t θ−1
      c (s ) θ di
   0 Ai
                       , lA (st ) is labor supplied by this consumer, and ψ is a parameter gov-
erning the disutility of work. The stand-in consumer for the high elasticity consumers, a
consumer of type B, has preferences of the form

       X
(18)        β t π(st )[log cB (st ) − ψlB (st )],

                                                         ³R             1              γ−1
                                                                                               ´ γ−1
                                                                                                  γ
                                                            1
where cB (st ) is a composite of goods given by            0
                                                                zi (st ) γ cBi (st )    γ    di      , lB (st ) is labor
                                                t
supplied by this consumer, and zi (s ) is a type of preference shock for individual goods
or, more simply, demand shocks. Note that all high elasticity consumers receive the same
realization of the demand shock for a specific good. In this way, variations in this shock
represent demand variation at the level of each good but induce no aggregate uncertainty
because there is a continuum of goods. Note also that on the labor side we follow Hansen
(1985) by assuming that indivisible labor decisions are implemented with lotteries.
       In this economy, the markets for state-contingent money claims are complete. We
represent the asset structure by having complete, contingent, one-period nominal bonds. We
let B(st+1 ) denote the consumers’ holdings of such a bond purchased in period t and state st
with payoﬀs contingent on some particular state st+1 in t + 1. One unit of this bond pays one
unit of money in period t+1 if the particular state st+1 occurs and 0 otherwise. Let Q(st+1 |st )
denote the price of this bond in period t and state st . Clearly, Q(st+1 |st ) = Q(st+1 )/Q(st ).
       Consider the constraints facing the consumer of type A (with low elasticity). The
purchases of goods by this consumer must satisfy the following cash-in-advance constraint:
       Z
           Pi (st )cAi (st ) di ≤ M (st ),


where pi (st ) is the price of good i and M(st ) is nominal money balances. The budget con-

                                                    18
straint of this consumer is

                     X        ¡        ¢
(19) M (st ) +               Q st+1 |st B(st+1 )
                      st+1

                                                           ∙                   Z                     ¸
                t−1           t−1          t−1         t            t−1
      = R(s           )W (s         )lA (s       ) + B(s ) + M(s          )−       Pi (s )cAi (s ) di + T (st ) + Π(st ),
                                                                                       t       t


                             P
where 1/R(st ) =                 st+1   Q (st+1 |st ) is the uncontingent nominal interest rates, W (st ) is the
nominal wage rate, l(st ) is labor supplied, T (st ) is transfers of money, and Π(st ) are profits.
The left side of (19) is the nominal value of assets held at the end of bond market trading.
The terms on the right side are the returns to last period’s labor market activity, the value of
nominal debt bought in the preceding period, the consumer’s unspent money, the transfers
of money, and the profits from the firms. The cash-in-advance constraint and the budget
constraint for a consumer of type B (with high elasticity) are analogous.
       Notice that in (19) we are assuming that firms pay consumers W (st−1 )lA (st−1 ) at the
end of period t−1 and that the government transfers to consumers [R(st−1 )−1]W (st−1 )lA (st−1 )
and pays for those transfers with lump-sum taxes implicit in T (st ). Having the government
make such transfers is a simple device that eliminates the standard distortion in the labor-
leisure decision that arises in cash-in-advance models because consumers get paid in cash at
the end of one period and must save that cash at zero interest until the next period. These
distortions are not present in the recent literature on sticky prices, so we abstract from them
here in order to retain comparability.
       Solving the consumers’ problem in two stages is convenient. In the first stage, we solve
for the optimal choice of expenditure on each variety of good, given the composite demands.
Consider, again, a consumer of type A. For composite demand cA (st ), we solve
            Z   1
      min           Pi (st )cA (st ) di
            0

                      ³R                  ´ θ−1
                                              θ
                         1         θ−1
subject to cA (st ) = 0 cAi (st ) θ di            , and we define the resulting price index as PA (st ) =
³R              ´ 1−θ
                    1
    1 1−θ t
     p (s ) di
   0 i
                      . We solve an analogous problem for the composite demand of a consumer
                         ³R           1           γ−1
                                                         ´ γ−1
                                                            γ
                            1
of type B, cB (st ) =      0 i
                              z (s t γ
                                    )   cBi (st γ
                                                )     di       , and define the resulting price index as

                                                               19
            ³R                              ´ 1−γ
                                               1
                 1
     t
PB (s ) =       0 i
                   z (st )p1−γ
                           i   (st )   di           . The resulting total demand for good i is thus given by

                            µ               ¶−θ                   µ              ¶−γ
            t          Pi (st )                         t             Pi (st )
(20) qi (s ) = (1 − ω)                              cA (s ) + ω                        zi (st )cB (st ).
                       PA (st )                                       PB (st )

         Notice that (20) makes clear the precise sense in which the shocks zi (st ) represent a
type of demand shock: if zi (st ) is relatively high, then at a given set of prices and composite
demands cA (st ) and cB (st ), the total demand for good i is relatively high. The expression
in (20) also makes clear that our model generates time-varying elasticities of demand in a
simple way. In periods when zi is relatively high, a large fraction of goods are demanded by
consumers with a high demand elasticity (γ), and when zi is relatively low, a large fraction
of goods are demanded by consumers with a low demand elasticity (θ).
         In the second stage of the consumer’s problem, we solve, in the standard way, the
intertemporal problem for the composite demands cA (st ) and cB (st ) as well as the rest of the
allocations.

Firms
         Consider now the problem of a firm in this economy. The firm has menu costs, mea-
sured in units of labor, of changing its prices. Let PR (st−1 ) denote the firm’s regular price
from the previous period that is a state variable for the firm at the subsequent st . The firm
has three options for the price it sets after the history st : pay nothing and charge the regular
price PR (st−1 ); pay a fixed cost κ and change the regular price to PR (st ); or pay a fixed cost φ
and have a temporary price change in the current period. Having a temporary price change
at st entitles a firm to charge a price diﬀerent from its inherited regular price PR (st−1 )M for
that one period t only. If the firm wants to continue that temporary price change into the
next period, it must again pay φ. In the period after the period of a temporary price change,
the firm inherits the existing regular price PR (st−1 ).
         In this simple model, the only role of temporary price changes is to economize on the
costs of changing prices. Firms face a mixture of shocks–some more permanent and some
more temporary. Given this mixture of shocks, firms sometimes choose to change their prices
temporarily and sometimes choose to change them permanently.


                                                                  20
        To write the firm’s problem formally, first note that the firm’s period nominal profits,
excluding fixed costs at price Pi (st ), are


       R(Pi (st ); st ) = (Pi (st ) − W (st ))qi (st ),


where we have used the demand function (20). The present discounted value of profits of the
firm, expressed in units of period 0 money, is given by

       XX
(21)                 Q(st )[Ri (Pi (st ); st ) − W (st )(κδ R,i (st ) + φδT,i (st ))],
        t       st


where δ R,i (st ) is an indicator variable that equals one when the firm changes its regular price
and zero otherwise, and δ T,i (st ) is an indicator variable that equals one when the firm has a
temporary price change and is zero otherwise. In expression (21), the term


       W (st )(κδ R,i (st ) + φδ T,i (st ))


is the labor cost of changing prices, or the menu cost. The constraints are that Pi (st ) =
PR (st−1 ) if δ R,i (st ) = δ T,i (st ) = 0, that there is neither a regular nor a temporary price
change, and that Pi (st ) = PR (st ) if δ R,i (st ) = 1, so that there is a regular price change.

Equilibrium
        Consider now this economy’s market-clearing conditions and the definition of equilib-
rium. The market-clearing condition on labor,
                     Z
            t
                          £ t                                   ¤
       l(s ) =             li (s ) + κδ R,i (st ) + φδ T,i (st ) di,
                      i


requires that the sum of the labor used in production and the menu costs (measured in
units of labor) of making both regular and temporary price changes equals total labor. The
market-clearing condition on bonds is B(st ) = 0.
        An equilibrium for this economy is a collection of allocations for consumers {ci (st )}i ,
M (st ), B(st+1 ), and l(st ); prices and allocations for firms {Pi (st ), yi (st )}i, ; and aggregate



                                                                21
prices W (st ), PA (st ), PB (st ), and Q(st+1 |st ), all of which satisfy the following conditions: (i)
the consumer allocations solve the consumers’ problem; (ii) the prices and allocations of
firms solve their maximization problem; (iii) the market-clearing conditions hold; and (iv)
the money supply processes and transfers satisfy the specifications above.
         Writing the equilibrium problem recursively will be convenient. At the beginning of
st , after the realization of the current monetary, productivity, and demand shocks, the state
of an individual firm i is characterized by its regular price in the preceding period, PRi (st−1 );
its idiosyncratic productivity level, ai (st ); and the idiosyncratic demand for its good, zi (st ).
Normalizing all of the nominal prices and wages by the current money supply is convenient.
For real values, we let pR−1,i (st ) = PRi (st−1 )/M (st ) and w(st ) = W (st )/M (st ) and use similar
notation for other prices. With this normalization, we can write the state of an individual
firm i in st as [pR−1,i (st ), ai (st ), zi (st )].
         Let λ(st ) denote the measure over all firms of these state variables. The only aggregate
uncertainty is money growth, and the process for money growth is autoregressive; therefore,
the aggregate state variables are [μ(st ), λ(st )]. Dropping explicit dependence of st and i, we
write the state variables of a firm as x = (pR,−1 , a, z) and the aggregate state variables as
S = (μ, λ). Let
                      µ           ¶
                            w (S)
(22) R(pi , a, z, S) = pi −         q(pi , z, S),
                              a

where real wage w(S) and quantity demanded of good i q(pi , z, S) are known functions of the
aggregate state. The function R is the static gross profit function, normalized by the current
money supply M. Let λ0 = Λ(λ, S) denote the transition law on the measure over the firms’
state variables.
         In any period, the value of a firm that does nothing (N )–does not change its price
and instead uses its existing regular price–is
                                                           "                                           #
                                                            X
       V N (pR,−1 , a, z; μ, λ) = R(pR,−1 , a, z, S) + E        Q(S 0 , S)V (pR,−1 , a0 ; μ0 , λ0 )|a, z) .
                                                           S0


(Here the expectations are taken only with respect to the idiosyncratic shocks a and z. Since


                                                      22
these shocks are idiosyncratic, the risk about their realization is priced in an actuarially fair
way. Of course, our formalization is equivalent to having an intertemporal price defined over
idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks and then simply summing over both of those.)
       The value of a firm that charges a temporary (T ) price pT 6= pR,−1 is
                                                           "                                                #
                                                            X
 V T (pR,−1 , a, z; μ, λ) = max [R(pT , a, S) − φw(S)]+E            Q(S 0 , S)V (pR,−1 , a0 ; μ0 , λ0 )|a, z) ,
                           pT
                                                               S0


and that of a firm that changes its regular (R) price is
                                                               "                                            #
                                                                X
                                                                                                    0
   V R (pR,−1 , a, z; μ, λ) = max [R(pR , a, S) − κw(S)] + E             Q(S 0 , S)V (pR , a0 ; μ0 , λ )|a, z) .
                                pR
                                                                    S0


       Recall the intuitive way to think about the diﬀerence between a temporary and a
regular price change. A temporary price change corresponds to renting a new price today, for
just one period, whereas a regular price change corresponds to buying a new price that can
be used for more than one period in the future; hence, the new regular price has a capital-like
feature. As the state variables drift away from the current state, the investment in a new
regular price depreciates in value.
       Inspection of the value function V T makes clear that, conditional on having a price
change, the optimal pricing decision for pT is static, and the optimal temporary price sets
the marginal gross profit Rp (p, a, z, S) = 0. Note that the optimal temporary price is
                           µ ¶
            ε(p, z, S)      1
(23) pT =                      w(S),
          ε(p, z, S) − 1    a

where ε(p, z, S) is the demand elasticity of q(p, z, S) derived from (20). Note that this price
is a simple markup over the nominal unit cost of production and is exactly what a flexible
price firm would charge when faced with such a unit cost. In contrast, if the regular price
is changed, then the optimal pricing decision for the new regular price, pR , is dynamic. (In
particular, pR will not typically equal pT . This feature of our quantitative model diﬀers from
the corresponding one in our analytic exercise.)
       As (23) makes clear, if a price is changed temporarily, then the inherited regular price


                                               23
pR,−1 is irrelevant, so we can write pT (a, S). Similarly, as inspection of the value function V R
makes clear, conditional on having a regular price change, the inherited regular price pR,−1 is
also irrelevant, so we can write pR (a, S).

B. Quantification and Prediction
       We want to use the facts described above as the basis for our model and its evaluation.
Now we describe how we choose the model’s functional forms and parameter values. We then
investigate whether our parsimonious model can be made to account for the facts about
prices that we have documented. We find that it can. We also go on to determine the
model’s implications for the real eﬀects of a monetary shock, which we will later use to judge
other models.


Functional Forms and Parameters
       We set the length of the period as one week and therefore choose a discount factor
of β = .961/52 . We choose the value of ψ, the disutility of labor parameters, to ensure that
without aggregate shocks, consumers supply one-third of their time to the labor market. We
set γ, the elasticity of substitution for the high elasticity types, to be 6. This is at the high
end of the substitution elasticities estimated for grocery stores.
       Since our model is weekly, so is the process for money growth (15) in our numerical
experiments. However, the highest frequency at which the U.S. Federal Reserve’s monetary
aggregate data are available is monthly. Thus, we pin down the model’s autocorrelation
ρμ and variance σ 2μ of weekly money growth by requiring the model to generate a monthly
growth rate of money that has the same autocorrelation and variance as the Fed’s measure
of currency and checking accounts (M1) during 1989—97, the years for which the Dominick’s
price data are available.
       The rest of the parameters are calibrated so that the model can closely reproduce the
facts we have described which are based on those price data: κ, the (menu) cost the firm
incurs when changing its regular price; φ, the cost of having a temporary price change; as
well as the specifications of the productivity and demand shocks. We will discuss the values
of these critical parameters after we display the model’s predictions.


                                               24
       Now consider our specification of the two idiosyncratic shocks in our model. We
begin with the productivity process. As (16) indicates, this process has persistence ρa . The
distribution of the shocks εi (st ) requires special attention. Midrigan (2007) shows that when
εi (st ) is normally distributed, a model like ours generates counterfactually low dispersion
in the size of price changes. Midrigan argues that a fat-tailed distribution is necessary in
order for the model to account for the distribution of the size of price changes in the data.
A parsimonious and flexible approach to increasing the distribution’s degree of kurtosis is
to assume, as Gertler and Leahy (2008) do, that productivity shocks arrive with Poisson
probability λ and are, conditional on arrival, uniformly distributed on the interval [−ν̄, ν̄].
This is the approach we take in our numerical experiments:
                 ⎧
                 ⎨ ν (st ) with probability λ
                    i
      εi (st ) =
                 ⎩ 0       with probability 1 − λ,

where ν i (st ) is distributed uniformly on the interval [ν, ν̄]. The productivity process thus has
three parameters: the persistence ρa , the arrival rate of shocks λa , and the support of these
shocks ν̄.
       Paying special attention to the distribution of the productivity shocks is useful because
this distribution plays an important role in determining the real eﬀects of changes in the
money supply. Golosov and Lucas (2007) show, for example, that the eﬀects of monetary
shocks are approximately neutral when productivity shocks are normally distributed. But as
Midrigan (2007) shows, with a fat-tailed distribution of productivity shocks, shocks to the
money supply have much larger real eﬀects because changes in the identity of adjusting firms
are muted as the kurtosis of the distribution of productivity shocks increases.
       Consider next the process for demand shocks. To keep the model simple, we assume
that the demand shock, zt , follows a Markov chain, with zt ∈ {zl , zm , zh } and transition
probabilities
      ⎡                           ⎤
          λs 1 − λs        0
      ⎢                           ⎥
      ⎢                           ⎥
      ⎢ λl  ρv   1 − λl − ρv      ⎥.
      ⎣                           ⎦
        0 1 − λs     λs


                                                25
Here the subscripts l, m, and h indicate the low, medium, and high values. Hence, ρv is
the probability of staying in the medium demand state zm , λs is the probability of staying
in either the low demand state zl or the high demand state zh , and λl is the probability of
transiting from the medium demand state to the low demand state. We normalize zl = 0.
Our parameterization of these shocks thus has five parameters {zm , zh , λs , λl , ρv }.

Predictions
       We now show that the parameters of our parsimonious extension of a standard menu
cost model can be chosen so that the model can account for the six facts about price changes
we have documented. We detail those parameters as well as the predictions. We then give
some intuition for how the model works.

The Facts
       The particular parameters that matter for the facts about price changes are the para-
meters governing the costs of changing prices and the productivity and demand shocks. In
setting these parameters, we target the 12 moments in the data checked in the last column
of Table 1. These moments include the frequency of weekly price changes (including and
excluding temporary price changes), the fraction of temporary price changes, the proportion
of returns to the old regular price, the probability of a temporary price spell ending, the
fraction of periods and goods sold in periods when prices are temporarily up and down, the
fraction of prices at the annual mode, the fraction of prices below that mode, as well as the
size and dispersion of price changes (including and excluding temporary price changes).
       In Table 1 we see that with a particular set of parameters, our parsimonious model
does a remarkably good job of reproducing the first five facts about prices that we have
documented. The frequency of weekly price changes is high: 33% in the data and 31% in the
model, with all prices included (but much lower both in the data, 2.0%, and in the model,
1.9%, when temporary price changes are excluded). The mean size of all price changes is high
in both the data (17% for all price changes and 11% for regular price changes) and the model
(16% and 11%), and the dispersion is high in both as well. The portion of price changes that
are at the annual mode is also high: 58% in both the data and the model. When prices are
not at their annual mode, they tend to be below the annual mode more often than above it

                                                26
in both the data and the model. Specifically, prices spend 30% of the time below the annual
mode in the data and about 28% in the model. Most price changes are temporary: 94% in
both the data and the model. Most temporary prices tend to return to the regular price
that existed before the temporary change: 80% in the data and 90% in the model. We also
see that temporary price changes are transitory: the fraction of weeks with temporary price
changes that are followed immediately by weeks without temporary price changes is 46% in
the data and 59% in the model. Finally, our model predicts, as in the data, that the fraction
of goods sold in periods when firms charge temporary prices is disproportionately high. Even
though these periods account for 24.3% in the data and 18.4% in the model, the fraction of
output sold in these periods is close: 38% in the data and 34.5% in the model.
       We also investigate our model’s implications for some other moments that we have not
directly used to parameterize the model. Recall the sixth fact from the data, displayed in
Figure 3, that price changes are clustered in time, in the sense that for all prices the hazard of
price changes drops sharply in the first two weeks after a price change and declines thereafter.
Figure 4 reproduces the curves from Figure 3 and adds to them the hazard predicted by our
model. Clearly, our model generates a pattern similar to that in the data.
       In Table 1 we also consider statistics about the mean and interquartile range of de-
viations of the temporary prices from the regular prices, as well as the relative fraction of
goods sold in periods with prices temporarily up and down. We see that for most of these,
the model produces values similar to those in the data. Finally, as in the data, the model’s
slope coeﬃcient of a regression of changes in quantities on changes in prices for regular price
changes is smaller in absolute value for periods with regular price changes (−2.1 in the data
vs. −2.2 in the model) than in periods with temporary price cuts (−2.9 in the data vs. 4.4
in the model).
       Table 2 lists the parameter values that have allowed the menu cost model to best
match the moments in the data. The menu cost of changing regular prices κ is .90% of a
firm’s steady-state labor expense. In contrast, the cost of a temporary price change φ is
.44% of a firm’s steady-state labor expense, or about 50% of the cost of changing the regular
price. Productivity shocks arrive with probability λ = .061 and have an upper bound of
ν̄ = .095. Moreover, the productivity process is highly transitory; its persistence is ρa = .991.


                                               27
The fraction of high elasticity consumers, ω, is .08. The distribution of demand shocks is
{zl , zm , zh } = {0, .047, .197}, and the parameters governing the Markov transition matrix are
λs = .369, ρv = .803, and λl = .072. Thus, the medium demand state is most persistent,
whereas firms that are in the low or high demand states expect to return to the medium with
high probability 1 − λs = .631. Finally, the low elasticity of type A consumers is equal to
θ = 1.984.
       Now consider our model’s prediction for the main point of all this analysis: the real
eﬀects of monetary shocks. Our summary measure of the real eﬀect is the standard deviation
(or volatility) of output, which is .72%. In this model, if a monetary shock has no real
eﬀect, then this standard deviation should be zero; and the larger is the real eﬀect, the larger
should be the standard deviation. We find this predicted value useful; it is a benchmark
against which to compare the sizes of the real eﬀects of monetary shocks predicted by other
models.

The Workings of the Menu Cost Model
       Our model works diﬀerently from existing menu cost models because of a firm’s ability
to use temporary price changes to respond to shocks. To understand our model’s predictions,
we describe the firm’s optimal decision rules, in particular, when the firm chooses to make a
temporary price change and when it chooses to make a permanent price change. Briefly, we
find that firms use temporary price changes primarily to respond to temporary shocks and
use permanent price changes to respond to (more) permanent shocks.
       Consider the firm’s optimal decision rules in the quantitative menu cost model. These
rules are a function of the individual states, namely, the normalized regular price pR−1 =
PR,−1 /M , the current productivity level a, and the current demand shock z, as well as the
aggregate state variable–the money supply growth rate–and the distribution of firms λ.
       We illustrate the firm’s optimal decision rules in Figure 5. Since the demand shock
takes on three values, we report the firm’s decision rules for each of the three demand states:
low demand zl , medium demand zm , and high demand zh . Figure 5 shows two decision rules
for each of these three demand states: the regular price pR (a), conditional on the firm’s choice
to change the regular price, and the temporary price pT (a), conditional on the firm’s choice


                                               28
to set a temporary price.
       Figure 5 also shows the regions of the state space in which the firm optimally chooses
to make a regular price change (R), to make a temporary price change (T ), or to not change
its price (N ). All three panels share a standard feature: if the current price pR,−1 is close
enough to both pR (a) and pT (a) (that is, if the price lies in the regions labeled N ), then the
firm finds it optimal to forgo paying any costs and just charge the regular price.
       As we have noted above when discussing the value functions, the temporary price pT (a)
is a constant markup over marginal cost given by (23), and it does not equal the regular price
pR (a). The temporary price pT (a) in log space falls one-for-one with a for all values of a
because the log of marginal costs falls one-for-one with a. In contrast, the regular price pR (a)
diﬀers from pT (a) because its choice reflects the dynamic considerations.
       More interesting is the diﬀerence in behavior across diﬀerent states of demand. In the
medium demand state, if the firm does choose a price diﬀerent from its existing regular price,
then it always chooses a new regular price, never a temporary price. The productivity and
monetary shocks are highly persistent, so the firm expects its new regular price to be close
to what is statically optimal for a long period of time. Hence, the firm is willing to pay the
large fixed costs to change its regular price.
       In contrast, in the high demand state, if the firm chooses a price diﬀerent from its
existing regular price, then it always chooses a new temporary price. Here, the firm knows
that the state of high demand is temporary and significantly diﬀerent from the medium
demand state. Therefore, the firm is better oﬀ paying the relatively small fixed cost in order
to use a temporary price than paying a large fixed cost and have to change its regular price
twice, since the firm knows the current state will not last long. Of course, if the state of high
demand lasts for a second period, then the firm will again choose to have a temporary price
change. In this sense, two periods of high demand can generate two periods of temporary
price declines or increases.
       The firm’s optimal decision rules in the low demand state are somewhat subtler. The
key diﬀerence between the low and high demand states is that the low demand state is fairly
close to the medium demand state, whereas the high demand state is not. (That is, zl is only
about 5% lower than zm , but zh is about 20% higher than zm .) If the firm’s existing regular


                                                 29
price is very far from what is currently statically optimal, then the firm changes its regular
price. Its new regular price is essentially what it would charge if it were in the medium
demand state today. In this sense, the firm realizes that the temporary state of low demand
will pass quickly and makes a once-and-for-all adjustment to have a new price–a strategy
that works well when the medium demand state resumes. If the firm’s existing regular price
is such that tomorrow if the medium state resumes it would be essentially in the inaction
region, then the firm decides to have a temporary price increase today. The final subtle part
is that when demand is low, the costs of having a price that diﬀers from the statically optimal
one are lower than when the demand state is medium because the lost profits are low when
demand is low. Hence, the inaction region in the low demand state is wider.

4. Experiments
       We have shown that our menu cost model with permanent and temporary price changes
can reproduce the main features of Dominick’s micro price data. Thus, we view our model
as a reasonable laboratory in which to evaluate the two common approaches to dealing with
temporary price changes. In our experiments, we focus on the common approaches that use
the simple Calvo model of pricing with only permanent price changes because this model is
most popular in the applied literature and is viewed as a simple approximation to an un-
derlying menu cost model. When we compare the predictions of our benchmark menu cost
model to those of the Calvo model using the two existing shortcuts, we find the same quali-
tative results as in our previous comparison: the temporary-changes-in shortcut understates
the real eﬀects of monetary shocks, whereas the temporary-changes-out shortcut overstates
them. Then we oﬀer a third shortcut, based on our benchmark menu cost model, which
should provide better results than the current two. (In Appendix B, we evaluate existing
shortcuts that use a menu cost model without a motive for temporary price changes.)

A. The Standard Shortcuts
       The Calvo models we consider are similar to the menu cost model described above
except that the Calvo models have time-dependent sticky prices and no temporary price
changes. The consumers in this type of model are identical to those in our benchmark menu
cost model. Firms are allowed to adjust their prices in an exogenous, costless, and random

                                              30
fashion as in the analytic exercise discussed earlier. Specifically, in a given period, with
probability α a firm can change prices, and with probability 1 − α the firm cannot change
prices. We refer to α as the frequency of price changes.
        In such a model, the problem of a firm that is allowed to change prices in state st is

         X
         ∞ X
     max
       t
            (1 − α)r−t Q(sr |st )R(Pi (st ); sr ),
     pi (s )
               r=t       sr


where
                                                        µ              ¶−θ
                 t        r
                                  ¡     t       r
                                                    ¢       Pi (st )
     R(Pi (s ); s             ) = Pi (s ) − W (s )                           c(sr ).
                                                            P (sr )

Since changing prices is costless, the resource constraint is simply
                 Z
         t
     l(s ) =             li (st ) di.
                     i


        In the Calvo models, the parameters of technology, preferences, and stochastic processes
are set to be equal to those in our benchmark model. (See Table 2.) The additional para-
meter that needs to be set is α. We consider two parameterizations corresponding to the two
shortcuts discussed above.
        In the temporary-changes-out approach, we filter the data using the same algorithm
as before, in order to remove temporary price changes, and treat the resulting regular price
series as the relevant data. We then choose the frequency of price changes in the Calvo model,
1 − α, so as to reproduce the frequency of regular price changes. In the temporary-changes-in
approach, we choose the frequency of price changes so as to reproduce the frequency of all
price changes.
        In the Calvo temporary-changes-out model, we set α = .02 so that the average duration
of prices is 50 weeks. In the Calvo temporary-changes-in model, we set α = .33 so that the
average duration of prices is 16.7 weeks. We leave all other parameters unchanged.
        In Table 3 we report these Calvo models’ predictions for the size of the real eﬀects of
monetary shocks and compare them to our menu cost model’s. We see that neither Calvo
model predicts eﬀects close to those of the benchmark model. The standard deviation of real

                                                                 31
output from the temporary-changes-out approach is 68% higher than the benchmark model’s,
and the standard deviation of output from the temporary-changes-in approach is only about
11% of the benchmark model’s. Neither shortcut to modeling temporary price changes thus
appears adequate for modeling or evaluating monetary policy.

B. An Alternative Shortcut
       So far the only alternative we have oﬀered to the inadequate existing shortcuts in the
literature is to build an extended menu cost model that explicitly includes motives for tem-
porary as well as permanent price changes. However, we acknowledge that some researchers
may find implementing this alternative computationally diﬃcult. For such researchers, we
suggest an alternative, theory-based shortcut: use the simple Calvo model, but adjust the
model’s duration of price changes so that the Calvo model mimics the real eﬀects of our menu
cost model.
       Figure 6 gives a sense of what such an adjustment entails and how well it may work. In
that figure, we plot the standard deviation of output in a simple Calvo model with duration
of prices T = 1/α in weeks relative to the standard deviation of output in the menu cost
model. We see that when the duration of prices in the simple Calvo model is set equal to
16.7 weeks, the real eﬀects in the two models are equal. This, then, is the duration price we
recommend simple Calvo models use for monetary policy analysis.

5. Conclusion
       In the data, a sizable fraction of price changes are temporary. Existing sticky price
models abstract from explicitly modeling these changes. Should they? We have demonstrated
here that they should not. Neither of the existing approaches to handling temporary price
changes in the data provides predictions of the real eﬀects of monetary policy that are near
those of a menu cost model with an explicit motive for temporary price changes which is
consistent with the price data. The temporary-changes-out approach leads to much larger
eﬀects than those of menu cost model, and the temporary-changes-in approach leads to much
smaller eﬀects.
       A key insight to explain these results has to do with the nature of the monetary shocks:
they are permanent. Their eﬀects, therefore, cannot be expected to be oﬀset, or diminished

                                              32
to a great degree, by temporary price changes alone. Despite their high frequency temporary
price changes cannot oﬀset the eﬀects of monetary shocks as much as would equally frequent
permanent price changes. In this sense, temporary and permanent price changes act quite
diﬀerently in an economy. Models that don’t treat these two types of price changes diﬀerently
or that ignore one of them completely will thus naturally provide poor predictions of monetary
policy eﬀects.
         We have oﬀered two theory-based alternatives to the common approaches to handling
temporary price changes in the data. One alternative, of course, is to build and use a menu
cost model like ours, which explicitly includes a motive for temporary price changes. We have
shown that this parsimonious extension of the standard menu cost model can be made to
account for many of the patterns of price changes in the data. A cruder but simpler alternative
to using a new model is to stick with the simple Calvo model but instead use our analysis
to set the model’s frequency of price adjustment. Even this crude theory-based approach is
likely to produce better monetary policy analysis than do the approaches commonly used
today.




                                              33
6. Appendixes
A. The Algorithm to Construct the Regular Price
       Here we describe, intuitively and precisely, our algorithm for constructing a regular
price series for each product in the Dominick’s data base.
       The algorithm is based on the idea that a price is a regular price if the store charges it
frequently in a window of time adjacent to that observation. We start by computing for each
period the mode of prices pM
                           t that occur in a window which includes prices in the previous

five periods, the current period, and the next five periods.3 Then, based on the modal price in
this window, we construct the regular price recursively as follows: For the initial period, set
the regular price equal to the modal price.4 For each subsequent period, if the store charges
the modal price in that period, and at least one-third of prices in the window are equal to the
modal price, then set the regular price equal to the modal price. Otherwise, set the regular
price equal to the preceding period’s regular price.
       We want to eliminate regular price changes that occur when the store’s actual price
does not change, but only if the actual and regular prices coincide in the period before or
after the regular price change. To do that, if the initial algorithm generates a path for regular
prices in which a change in the regular price occurs without a corresponding change in the
actual price, then we replace the last period’s regular price with the current period’s actual
price for each period in which the regular and actual prices coincide. Similarly, we replace
the current period’s regular price with the last period’s actual price if the two have coincided
in the previous period.
       Examples of regular price series constructed using this algorithm are displayed in
Figures 1—4.
       Now we provide the precise algorithm we use to compute the regular price and describe
how we apply it.

  1. Choose parameters: l = 5 (= lag, or size of the window: the number of weeks before
      or after the current period used to compute the modal price), c = 1/3 (= cutoﬀ used
      to determine whether a price is temporary), a = .5 (= the number of periods in the
      window with the available price required in order to compute a modal price).
      We apply the algorithm below for each good separately:

                                               34
     Let pt be the price in period t; T, the length of the price series.

  2. For each time period t ∈ (1 + l, T − l),

        • If the number of periods with available data in (t − l, ..., t + l) is ≥ 2al, then

            — Let pM
                   t = mode(pt−l , ..., pt+l ).

            — Let ft = the fraction of periods (with available data) in this window subject
               to pt = pM
                        t .

        • Else, set ft , pM
                          t = 0 (missing data).


  3. Define the regular price in period t, pR
                                            t , using the following recursive algorithm:


        • If pM                   R      M
              1+l 6= 0, then set p1+l = p1+l (initial value).

        • Else, set pR
                     1+l = p1+l for t = 2 + l, ...T

            — If (pM                       M              R    M
                   t 6= 0 & ft > c & pt = pt ), then set pt = pt .

            — Else, set pR    R
                         t = pt−1 .


  4. Repeat the following algorithm five times:

        • Let R = {t : pR     R      R           R
                        t 6= pt−1 & pt−1 6= 0 & pt 6= 0} be the set of periods with regular

          price changes.

        • Let C = {t : pR         R
                        t = pt & pt 6= 0 & pt 6= 0} be the set of periods in which a store

          charges the regular price.

        • Let P = {t : pR             R
                        t−1 = pt−1 & pt−1 6= 0 & pt−1 6= 0} be the set of periods in which a

          store’s last period price was the regular price.

        • Set pR                       R
               {R∩C}−1 = p{R∩C} . Set p{R∩P} = p{R∩P}−1 .



B. An Alternative Menu Cost Model
       Since Calvo models are by far the most popular in applied work related to monetary
policy analysis, we have focused our attention on them. For completeness, however, we
also performed analogous experiments with simple menu cost models using two common
approaches. Our results are qualitatively similar.



                                                  35
      Table A1 reports our choice of parameter values for the simple menu cost model
without a motive for price changes. This type of model abstracts from demand shocks and
assumes that the measure of type B (high elasticity) consumers is constant at 0. We calibrate
the frequency and size of price changes by choosing the arrival rate of productivity shocks
and the upper bound of the support of their distribution.
      Table A2 displays the real eﬀects of monetary shocks predicted by these models. We
find again that the temporary-changes-out approach overstates the real eﬀects–now by about
40%. Similarly, the temporary-changes-in approach again understates the real eﬀects: it
predicts real eﬀects that are only about 20% of those predicted by our menu cost model with
a motive for temporary price changes.
      In Table A1 we can identify one discrepancy between the menu cost model without
a motive for temporary price changes and the data (and thus our benchmark model): the
simple menu cost model misses the fraction of prices at the annual mode. In the data, that
fraction is 58%. The temporary-changes-in approach underpredicts the fraction as 22%; the
temporary-changes-out approach overpredicts it as 77%.
      Finally, we show that an alternative superior approach to shortcuts that include or
exclude temporary price changes in the data is to choose parameters in models without a
motive for temporary price changes by matching the fraction of annual prices at the mode.
When we do that, the implied frequency of price changes, reported in the last column of
Table A1, is .051, or about once every 20 weeks. In Table A2 we see that this alternative
parameterization predicts real eﬀects of monetary shocks that are similar to those of the
benchmark model: it overstates those eﬀects by only 8%.




                                             36
                                                Notes

      1
          The data used by Bils and Klenow (2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (forthcoming)
have a much wider set of products than the grocery store data, but the data are only collected
as point-in-time prices at the monthly frequency. These monthly data thus provide no direct
evidence about the critical issue of how many temporary price changes happen within a
month. To see how much of a quantitative diﬀerence the use of weekly versus monthly data
makes, note that in the weekly Dominick’s data, prices change every three weeks, whereas in
the monthly data, prices change every nine weeks.
      2
          We obtain similar results if we compute a product-specific hazard and then a weighted
average of each of the hazards using each product’s share of total sales as the weight.
      3
          We only do this calculation if at least one-half of the prices in this window are available.
      4
          If in the window around this price more than half of the data are missing, then we set
the initial reference price equal to the actual price.




                                                   37
References
      Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. Some evidence on the importance of sticky
prices. Journal of Political Economy 112 (October): 947—85.
      Calvo, Guillermo A. 1983. Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework. Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics 12 (September): 383—98.
      Chevalier, Judith A., Anil K. Kashyap, and Peter E. Rossi. 2003. Why don’t prices
rise during periods of peak demand? Evidence from scanner data. American Economic
Review 93 (March): 15—37.
      Gertler, Mark, and John Leahy. 2008. A Phillips curve with an Ss foundation. Journal
of Political Economy 116 (June): 533—72.
      Golosov, Mikhail, and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 2007. Menu costs and Phillips curves.
Journal of Political Economy 115 (April): 171—99.
      Hansen, Gary D. 1985. Indivisible labor and the business cycle. Journal of Monetary
Economics 16 (November): 309—27.
      Hoch, Stephen J., Xavier Drèze, and Mary E. Purk. 1994. EDLP, hi-lo, and margin
arithmetic. Journal of Marketing 58 (October): 16—27.
      Midrigan, Virgiliu. 2007. Menu costs, multi-product firms, and aggregate fluctuations.
Working Paper 2007/13, Center for Financial Studies, University of Frankfort.
      Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. Forthcoming. Five facts about prices: A reeval-
uation of menu cost models. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
      Peltzman, Sam. 2000. Prices rise faster than they fall. Journal of Political Economy
108 (June): 466—502.
      Rotemberg, Julio J. 2004. Fair pricing. Working Paper 10915, National Bureau of
Economic Research.
      Sobel, Joel. 1984. The timing of sales. Review of Economic Studies 51 (July): 353—68.
      Varian, Hal R. 1980. A model of sales. American Economic Review 70 (September):
651—59.




                                            38
                                                                     Table 1: Five facts about prices *
                                                             In the data and the benchmark menu cost model

                                                                                  Data                            Benchmark model
                                                                      Including          Excluding    Including    Excluding
                                                                     temporary           temporary   temporary     temporary         Used for
       Line Moments                                                    changes            changes      changes      changes         calibration?


FACT 1 1     Frequency of weekly price changes                         0.33               0.020        0.31          0.019               √
       2     Fraction of temporary price changes                       0.94                 -          0.94            -                 √
       3     Proportion of returns to regular price                    0.80                 -          0.90            -                 √
       4     Probability temporary price spell ends                    0.46                 -          0.59            -                 √


FACT 2 5     Fraction of periods with temp prices, %                   24.3                  -         18.4            -                 √
       6     Fraction of periods when price temp. down, %              20.3                  -         16.0            -                 -
       7     Fraction of periods when price temp. up, %                2.1                   -         2.1             -                 -

FACT 3 8     Fraction of prices at annual mode                         0.58                  -         0.58            -                 √
       9     Fraction of prices below annual mode                      0.30                  -         0.28            -                 √

FACT 4 10    Mean size of price changes                                 0.17               0.11         0.16         0.11                √
       11    Mean log(p T /p R ) if price temporarily down             -0.22                 -         -0.23           -                 √
       12    Mean log(p T /p R ) if price temporarily up               0.13                  -         0.08            -                 √
       13    IQR of price changes                                      0.15                0.08        0.17          0.04                √
       14    IQR log(p T /p R ) if price temporarily down              0.21                  -         0.13            -                 -
       15    IQR log(p T /p R ) if price temporarily up                0.12                  -         0.01            -                 -

FACT 5 16    Fraction output sold when temp prices, %                   38.0                 -          34.5           -                 √
       17    Fraction output sold when price temp. down, %              35.4                 -          32.6           -                 -
       18    Fraction output sold when price temp. up, %                1.2                  -          1.7            -                 -
       19    Price elasticity for regular price changes                -2.08                 -         -2.19           -                 -
       20    Price elasticity for temporary price cuts                 -2.93                 -         -4.40           -                 -

Note: IQR=Interquartile range.
* For Fact 6, see Figures 3-4.
                         Table 2: Parameter values for menu cost and Calvo models

                                                                                    Calvo model without
                                                                                     temporary prices
                                                               Benchmark     Temporary-         Temporary-
Parameters                                                       model       changes-in         changes-out

Calibrated
Cost of changing regular price, % of SS labor bill                0.90
Cost of temporary markdown, relative to menu cost                 0.44

Arrival rate of productivity shock                               0.061
Upper bound on productivity                                      0.095
Persistence of productivity                                      0.991

Value of demand shock in medium demand state                     0.047
Value of demand shock in high demand state                       0.197
Substitution elasticity of low elasticity consumers              1.984
Measure of high elasticity consumers                              0.08

Probability of staying in non-medium demand state                0.369
Probability of staying in medium demand state                    0.803
Probability of jumping from medium to low demand state           0.072

Probability of Calvo price adjustment                               -           0.33                0.02

Assigned
Discount factor                                                  0.961/52      0.961/52            0.961/52
Substitution elasticity of high elasticity consumers                 6             -                   -
Autocorr. of growth rate of money supply                           0.90          0.90                0.90
Std. dev. of shocks to growth rate of money supply              8.31*10-4     8.31*10-4           8.31*10-4
Table 3: Real effects of monetary shocks predicted by model economies



                                                 Calvo model without
                                                   temporary prices

                              Benchmark       Temporary-    Temporary-
                                model         changes-in    changes-out

Std. dev. of chain-weighted     0.72             0.08          1.21
real output, %



Relative to benchmark model       -              0.11          1.68
     Table A1: Data moments and parameter values in menu cost models using shortcuts


                                                                    Data                 Menu cost model without temporary prices
                                                        Including          Excluding
                                                       temporary           temporary   Temporary-       Temporary-    Match fraction of
                                                         changes            changes    changes-in       changes-out   prices at annual
                                                                                                                           mode



Moments
Frequency of weekly price changes                        0.33               0.020         0.31             0.019           0.051
Mean size of price changes                               0.17                0.11         0.16             0.11             0.16
Fraction of prices at annual mode                        0.58                  -          0.22             0.77             0.58

Calibrated parameters
Arrival rate of productivity shock                                                       0.750             0.012           0.049
Upper bound on productivity                                                              0.152             0.100           0.132


Assigned parameters
Cost of changing regular price, % of SS labor bill                                        0.90             0.90             0.90
Persistence of productivity process                                                       0.84              0.84            0.84
Discount factor                                                                         0.961/52          0.961/52        0.961/52
Substitution elasticity of low elasticity consumers                                        3                 3               3
Substitution elasticity of high elasticity consumers                                        -                -                -
Autocorr. of growth rate of money supply                                                  0.90             0.90             0.90
Std. dev. of shocks to growth rate of money supply                                      8.31*10-4        8.31*10-4        8.31*10-4
Table A2: Real effects of monetary shocks in menu cost models




                                            Menu cost model without temporary prices
                                                                          Match fraction
                               Benchmark
                                           Temporary-       Temporary-     of prices at
                                 model     changes-in       changes-out   annual mode




 Std. dev. of chain-weighted     0.72         0.15             1.00           0.78
         real output

Relative to benchmark model        -          0.21             1.39           1.08
                   Figure 1: Illustration of temporary and permanent price changes
           1.4
                                                               Original price (with all changes), p
                                                               Price without temporary changes, pR

           1.3

                                Permanent price change

           1.2




           1.1
Price, $




            1




           0.9                Temporary price change



           0.8




           0.7




           0.6
             100                     150                        200                                   250
                                                       Weeks
  Figure 2: Examples of applying the algorithm to categorize price changes as temporary or permanent
                                                          Original price
                 Angel Soft Batt Tissue, 4 CT.                                              Green Apple Gly SP# Bath Soap
 0.6                                                      Price without temporary changes
                                                                                      3

                                                                                   2.8
0.55
                                                                                   2.6

 0.5                                                                               2.4

                                                                                   2.2
0.45
                                                                                     2

                                                                                   1.8
 0.4
                                                                                   1.6
0.35                                                                               1.4
       0        20         40           60     80    100                             100    120     140           160   180   200
                                weeks                                                                     weeks

            Omega II Laundry Detergent, 25 lb.                                                      Sprite, 24/12
 10                                                                                 1.3

  9                                                                                 1.2

                                                                                    1.1
  8
                                                                                     1
  7                                                                                 0.9

  6                                                                                 0.8

                                                                                    0.7
  5

           40         60           80        100    120                              200    220     240     260         280   300
                                weeks                                                                  weeks
                                              Figure 3: Fact 6 -- The hazard of price changes in Dominick's data




                                           All price changes                                                          Only permanent changes
                             0.4                                                                            0.4


                            0.35                                                                           0.35


                             0.3                                                                            0.3
Probability of adjustment




                                                                               probability of adjustment
                            0.25                                                                           0.25


                             0.2                                                                            0.2


                            0.15                                                                           0.15


                             0.1                                                                            0.1


                            0.05                                                                           0.05


                                                                                                             0
                                   0   5          10           15      20                                         0   5          10           15   20
                                       Age of price spell (weeks)                                                     Age of price spell (weeks)
                                      Figure 4: The hazard of price changes predicted by the benchmark model vs. Dominick's data

                                                                                   Data
                                                                                   Model
                                                  All price changes                                                        Only permanent changes
                            0.7




                            0.6                                                                                  0.6




                            0.5                                                                                  0.5
Probability of adjustment




                                                                                     probability of adjustment
                            0.4                                                                                  0.4




                            0.3                                                                                  0.3




                            0.2                                                                                  0.2




                            0.1                                                                                  0.1




                             0                                                                                    0
                                  0           5          10            15   20                                         0   5          10            15   20
                                                  Age of price spell                                                           Age of price spell
                                                  Figure 5: A firm's optimal decision rules in the benchmark model

                           Regions where firm's choice is R = Regular price change, T = Temporary price change, N = No price change


                              Low demand state                        Medium demand state                           High demand state
                0.2                                            0.2                                       0.2



               0.15                                           0.15
                       N                                                                                 0.1
                                           R

                0.1                                            0.1
                                                                                           R
                                                                      N                                    0                      T

               0.05                                           0.05
                                          pT(a)
log(pR,-1/M)




                                                                                                         -0.1

                  0
                                                          N      0
                                                                                            pR(a)
                                                                                                         -0.2
                                          pR(a)                                                                                   p (a)=p (a)
               -0.05                                          -0.05                                                                T     R


                                                                                           pT(a)         -0.3
                -0.1                                           -0.1
                                                   T

                               R                                              R                          -0.4             T
               -0.15                                          -0.15



                -0.2                                           -0.2                                      -0.5
                           -0.05     0      0.05                      -0.05         0          0.05               -0.05       0       0.05
                                                                                  log(a)
                  Figure 6: Real effects of monetary shocks in Calvo alternatives vs. the benchmark model
         2



        1.8
                                                                                      Calvo with
                                                                                     Temporary-
        1.6                                                                          changes-out

        1.4



        1.2


                                             Benchmark with temporary prices
Ratio




         1



        0.8



        0.6



        0.4

                      Calvo with
        0.2           Temporary-
                      changes-in
         0
              0           10     16.7   20            30              40             50            60       70
                                         Average interval between price changes, weeks
