                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               ESTATE ACTS, 1600 TO 1830:
                           A NEW SOURCE FOR BRITISH HISTORY

                                            Dan Bogart
                                          Gary Richardson

                                        Working Paper 14393
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14393


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Dan Bogart and Gary Richardson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Estate Acts, 1600 to 1830: A New Source for British History
Dan Bogart and Gary Richardson
NBER Working Paper No. 14393
October 2008
JEL No. K0,K11,N13,N43,P14,P16,P26

                                              ABSTRACT

A new database demonstrates that between 1600 and 1830, Parliament passed thousands of acts restructuring
rights to real and equitable estates. These estate acts enabled individuals and families to sell, mortgage,
lease, exchange, and improve land previously bound by landholding and inheritance laws. This essay
provides a factual foundation for research on this important topic: the law and economics of property
rights during the period preceding the Industrial Revolution. Tables present time-series, cross-sectional,
and panel data that should serve as a foundation for empirical analysis. Preliminary analysis indicates
ways in which this new evidence may shape our understanding of British economic and social history.


Dan Bogart
3151 Social Science Plaza
University of California
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
dbogart@uci.edu

Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
1. Introduction

       Between 1600 and 1830, Britain’s Parliament passed more than 3,500 acts altering

individuals’ and families’ rights to real and equitable estates. Real estates consisted of rights to

land and permanent fixtures, such as buildings and mines, upon the land. Equitable estates

consisted of bundles of rights to real estates and to streams of incomes derived from real estates

and other assets. The volume of estate acts exceeded the volume of all other legislation, with the

exception of acts establishing statutory authorities and enclosure commissions. Scholars expend

considerable energy analyzing the latter legislation, but few scholars have studied estate acts. As

a result, basic questions remain unanswered. When were the majority of acts affecting rights to

land and resources passed? In which geographic regions were they concentrated? Who procured

the acts? Why did they do so? What were the consequences? How did Parliament’s actions affect

the use of land and resources and the efficiency of the English economy?

       This paper introduces statistical series which address those questions. The series depict

the legal, economic, social, spatial, and temporal characteristics of estate legislation between

1600 and 1830. The new series should be of interest to a wide range of economic, legal, and

social historians. Our initial analysis of the data suggests answers to the questions that we posed

above. Further examination of the data may shed light on an array of important issues. We hope

that our essay inspires scholars to pursue this research and provides them with the data to do so.

       The data demonstrate that estate acts freed land from the shackles of Britain’s

landholding and inheritance system – known as the system of strict settlements. Strict

settlements imposed equitable estates in land (enforced by the court of Chancery) on top of real

estates in land (enforced by common law courts). These overlapping estates involved numerous

individuals, including the landholder, his extended family, additional beneficiaries designated by




                                                  1
past landholders, and potential heirs (including those unborn). All of these individuals possessed

rights to revenues derived from the land. These complicated bundles of overlapping rights

prevented property holders from using resources as they saw fit. Landholders could neither

mortgage, nor lease, nor sell much of the land under their control. Landholders had to dedicate

large tracts of land to traditional tasks. Landholders could neither utilize resources in new ways

nor improve infrastructure without reaching agreements with all other parties possessing interests

in a parcel, and such agreements could not, in most cases, be enforced by law, but could, in many

instances, be challenged through courts. This inflexible system posed problems for people trying

to exploit opportunities arising from technologies unanticipated in decades past.

       Estate acts freed property from this rigid system. Estate permitted previously prohibited

actions, reorganized complicated bundles of rights, and conveyed those new rights to new users.

Estate acts began as petitions from landholders seeking relief from restrictions that strict

settlements imposed on the employment of land and resources. Parliament reviewed these

petitions, ensured that they met certain standards for protecting the rights of all interested parties,

and then passed legislation establishing new rules regarding the employment and conveyance of

property. Most estate acts authorized the sale, lease, or improvement of land. In layman’s

language, estate acts exposed land to the invisible hand. In technical terms, estate acts reduced

transaction costs and enabled landholders to undertake activities that they could not take given

existing property-rights arrangements and legal institutions.

       A companion paper (Bogart and Richardson 2008a) outlines our transaction-cost

interpretation of estate legislation. By reducing transactions costs and increasing the ease and

security of conveyance, estate acts facilitated the reallocation of resources to new and more

productive uses. Case studies and quantitative evidence indicate that this was the case.




                                                   2
Concentrations of estate acts occurred in urbanizing areas, such as the periphery of London, and

in industrializing regions, such as the county of Lancaster. Correlations between estate

legislation, urbanization, and industrialization suggest a link between the reorganization of rights

and Britain’s march towards modernity.

         Another companion paper advances a broader argument (Bogart and Richardson 2008a).

At the end of the seventeenth century, Parliament established forums where rights to land and

resources could be reorganized. These forums issued estate, enclosure, and statutory authority

acts, which enabled individuals, families, and communities to alter property rights and reallocate

resources in response to changing economic conditions. The ensuing institutional adaptability,

we argue, fostered Britain’s expansion. We test a key implication of our argument by

demonstrating that between 1700 and 1830, when the public’s demand for acts reorganizing

property rights increased, Parliament responded by passing more acts. Tests with placebo groups

confirm the robustness of this result. Property rights, in sum, were adaptable.

         This essay establishes a factual foundation for our argument. It also disseminates data on

estate acts, including statistical series characterizing the acts’ economic, legal, social,

geographic, and temporal characteristics.1 The series illuminate the connection between property

rights and economic development at the microeconomic level. The academic literature is divided

on the degree to which property rights evolved during the seventeenth, eighteenth, and

nineteenth centuries and whether the evolution of property rights contributed to agricultural,




1
    Our quantitative compilation of estate acts builds on a large literature which counts and categorizes acts of
    Parliament. See Tate (1967, 1978), Turner (1980, 1984), Habakkuk (1980), Wordie (1983), Lanford (1991),
    Hoppit (1996, 2003), Hoppit and Innes (1997), and Innes (1997) for recent contributions to this centuries-old
    academic enterprise.


                                                          3
industrial, and financial developments in Britain.2 By publishing these series, we hope to

stimulate research into these issues.3

           The rest of this essay undertakes that task. Section 2 discusses information necessary to

understand estate acts’ context and content. Section 3 describes the sources of evidence and our

procedures for processing the data. Sections 4 and 5 describe estate acts’ legal and economic

dimensions respectively. Section 6 presents information on trends over time. Section 7 provides

information on geographic patterns. Section 8 discusses the social ranks and professions of

individuals mentioned in estate acts. Section 9 discusses the implications of this evidence. The

estate acts shed light on many issues in British economic, social, legal, and political history. The

acts also reveal much about the lives of the individuals and communities that expended great

efforts passing so much legislation reorganizing property rights at a tipping point in economic

history.


2. Historical Background

         Understanding the rationale for and the impact of estate acts requires historical

knowledge of three types. The first concerns the system of landholding and inheritance that

generated the need for estate acts. The second concerns the evolution of politics and

Parliamentary structure from the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries. The third

concerns general trends in legislation to which estate acts can be compared.

2.1      System of Landholding and Inheritance

         Estate acts arose from an English system of inheritance that solidified around the Civil

War of the 1640s and prevailed for several centuries thereafter.4 During this era, large

2
    See, for example, the classic works by North and Weingast (1989), Neal (1990), and Clark (1998a).
3
    Academic inspirations for our evidentiary endeavor include Tate’s (1978) Domesday of Enclosures and Greg
    Clark’s (1998b) compilation of the Charity Commission Records. These sources form the foundation for
    rigorous analysis of enclosure acts.


                                                       4
landowners held most of their land under settlement. Lesser gentry and yeoman families also

employed the legal device, even on single family farms. While estimates vary, at the peak, at

least one-quarter and as much as three-fourths of land in England was strictly settled.5

         A settlement was designed to care for extended family and to keep a family’s estate

together for future generations. The current holder of settled land was a life tenant and was not

the absolute owner. The land belonged to a trust, for which the current holder was named the

beneficiary. The holder, in turn, held the land in trust for other beneficiaries, typically including

his wife, children, unborn descendants, all potential future heirs, and members of his extended

family, such as his brothers, sisters, nieces, nephews, and other descendants of previous holders

of the estate. The life tenant controlled the use of the land possessed by the nested trusts as long

as they fulfilled the terms of their stewardship. Once the life tenant died the settlement dictated

that the estate descend intact from one generation to the next. It did this by assigning control of

the estate to a single heir, usually the eldest son of the current holder.

         Settlements had three features which created a need for parliamentary involvement. First,

settlements restricted the uses to which resources could be put. The holder of a settled estate

(who was just a life tenant) could not grant leases lasting beyond his life and could not grant

leases from which he benefited at the expense of his successors (such as leases in which tenants

paid lump sums up front in return for concessions). The holder of a settled estate could not sell,

exchange, or mortgage the property. If he completed such transactions, he could be held liable

for damages to the estate, and the transaction could be voided, because he had no power to

transfer title. Similarly, the holder of an estate could not alter the property, even if he considered

4
    For more information about strict settlements, see Bogart and Richardson 2008a, from which this section was
    abstracted.
5
    Some of the best known works describing the system of strict settlements are Thompson (1963, 1994), Eileen
    (1964, 1983, 1993), Baker (1971) English and Saville (1983), Beckett (1984), Habakkuk (1994), and Cannadine
    (1994).


                                                       5
the alterations to be an improvement. The removal of trees, hedges, and buildings, the opening of

new mines, quarries, and peat bogs, and the conversion of arable lands into pasture (or vice

versa) could be considered waste. All those who benefited from such actions could be liable for

damages, if upon inheriting an estate, the successor claimed to have been harmed by the acts.

Sales, exchanges, mortgages, improvements, and long-term leases could only be undertaken if

the powers section of a settlement contained specific clauses authorizing such actions.

         Second, a settlement legally bound the hands of all heirs alive when it was written. A

settlement could not be changed until a tenant in tail (i.e. the next in line to inherit) who was

born after the date of settlement came of age (i.e. reached age 21). Then, the current life tenant

(usually the father) and the future tenant in tail (usually the son) could remove the entail by the

legal process of common recovery. These facts meant that a settlement could be changed only

infrequently, at intervals of twenty-one years or longer, as a family waited for an heir to come of

age and for the father and son to reach an agreement about restructuring the estate.

         Third, conducting transactions and enforcing contracts on settled land could be costly,

uncertain, and insecure. Settlements were long, complex documents, traditionally unpunctuated,

and full of repetition.6 Interpreting settlements required experience, skill, detailed knowledge of

the document, and a large library of property laws, precedents, and legal texts estimated at 674

volumes in 1826 (English and Saville, 1983, p. 18). Settlements were not part of the public

record. Copies of the deeds were usually held by the settlers, trustees, and lawyers. Settlements

had to be consulted before taking out mortgages, drawing up leases, or completing sales, because

if the settlement did not specifically authorize a transaction, the transaction could be voided.




6
    The fact that until the Conveyancing Act of 1881, solicitors were paid for conveyances by the word (1s for every
    72 words in 1862), did not encourage conciseness (England and Seville, 1983, p. 18).


                                                         6
Ambiguities in settlements often deterred individuals from acting on estates; for fear that the

transactions would be disputed by successors.

       Settlements placed restrictions on the deployment and use of property but they also

prevented the holder of the estate from dissipating resources dedicated to the support of future

heirs and the extended family. Families did not know how the Chancery court would react to the

inclusion of additional powers or whether the wording of a novel clause might provide a life

tenant with a loophole enabling him to circumvent all other restrictions. They did not know the

personality of the person(s) who would inherit the estates and who would have power over the

widow, dependants, and descendants of the individual who established the settlement.

Uncertainty about the impact of providing powers to the life tenants and the threat that powers

might pose to the interests of the extended family meant that families often favored narrow rather

than extensive and/or novel powers in their settlements. Parliament provided a way of

overcoming these restrictions through the passage of estate acts. To understand how Parliament

emerged in this role we must first review some parliamentary history.


2.2    Political and Parliamentary History

        Estate legislation formed a key component of the surge in legislative activity that began

in the 1690s following some of the most dramatic events in British political history: the

Restoration of 1661 and the Glorious Revolution of 1688-89. In the early 1600s, the Stuart

monarchs, King James I and King Charles I, attempted to overturn English political tradition,

and impose an absolute monarchy ruling by divine right, rather than a kingship ruling with the

consent of the nobility and clergy, as enshrined in the Magna Carta. James I and his son argued

with Parliament over taxation, religion, foreign policy, the prerogatives of the monarch, and the




                                                 7
limits of royal power. To weaken their Parliamentary opponents, the Stuart monarchs seldom

called Parliament into session.

       The Stuarts’ attempt to impose personal rule ended when Parliamentary forces defeated

the royal army during the Civil War. After the conflict, King Charles I lost his head, and a

republican government temporarily reigned. Cromwell’s Protectorate lasted for two decades. In

1661, however, the Stuarts returned to power, and Charles II ascended the throne. During the

decades that followed, political instability reemerged. The Stuart dynasty ended with the

Glorious Revolution of 1688, when William of Orange and his wife Mary invaded England. The

last Stuart monarch, James II fled. Parliament accepted William and Mary as the new king and

queen. As part of his Parliamentary alliance, William accepted the Declaration of Rights, which

gave Parliament the power to convene each year and determine the length of its sessions, and

required the monarch to consult Parliament on legislative issues.

       William and Mary’s reign lasted from 1689 to 1701. Queen Anne’s reign followed from

1702 to 1714. This 25-year period experienced transcendent political developments. Parliament

solidified its role as the principal law making body. The House of Commons took control of the

authorization of taxes. Central government taxation expanded as Britain waged an expensive

war. The Bank of England was formed in 1694 and helped to propel the growth of government

debt. The Whig and Tory parties battled for control over the House of Commons and the spoils

associated with ministerial posts.

       In 1714 the monarchy was peacefully transferred to George I. Over the next 100 years

there were numerous shocks and challenges but the political system was not fundamentally

altered. Hanoverian monarchs reigned for over 100 years through a succession of kingships

(George I, George II, George II, George IV, and William IV). Following the Septennial Act in




                                                 8
1717 Parliament had an election every 7 years. The right to vote remained in the hands of elites.

The Whig and Tory parties maintained a presence in Parliament and came to exercise greater

control over the ministry. Excise taxes and government debt continued to expand fuelling

Britain’s involvement in foreign and colonial wars.

       The pattern of political fluctuation and stability mirrored the process of procedural

innovation and constancy. In the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, legislative

procedures evolved rapidly, as legislators strove to standardize and streamline the process for

passing legislation. Effective procedures emerged by 1715 and changed littler thereafter. Private

bills began with a petition from individuals desiring to alter rights. Petitioners hired lawyers to

prepare paperwork. Parliamentary committees investigated merits of petitions and issued reports.

Petitions were written into bills, read to the public three times, passed through both houses of

Parliament, and then sent to the king for royal assent. Public notice ensured those with interests

in bills knew about the proposal. Parties could oppose bills by submitting counter-proposals to

Parliament. Parliamentary committees considered the contending proposals, and then passed one

of the bills, modified the original bill to satisfy the opposition, or rejected both proposals. The

multiple layers for review and numerous opportunities for opposition ensured that Parliament

considered the interests of all concerned before coming to a decision.

       The acts themselves also became standardized in the late seventeenth and early

eighteenth century. Parliament used templates whenever individuals requested legislation

enabling them to divorce, naturalize, change their name, or alter their estate. Consistency of form

and function enabled Parliament to rapidly process petitions.


2.3    Trends in Legislation




                                                  9
       Estate acts emerged at a time when Parliament passed increasing quantities of legislation

of many types. Figure 1 illustrates the rising tide of legislation and indicates the dates of political

events mentioned in the previous section. Figure 2 decomposes the total number of acts passed

into three categories authorizing changes in rights to specific pieces of property – estate,

enclosure, and statutory authority acts – and all other acts. The figures illuminate important

patterns. During the eighteenth century, the quantity of legislation surged. In the early nineteenth

century, the number of acts passed per year peaked near 350. Between 1690 and 1720, estate acts

accounted for much of the growth. Between 1750 and 1830, the number of estate acts remained

relatively stable, while the number of statutory authority and enclosure acts soared.

       Estate, enclosure, and statutory-authority legislation shared key features. All altered

property rights. Statutory authority acts created new organizations with the authority to provide

infrastructure and public services. These organizations contributed to the improvement of roads,

rivers, harbors, canals, railways, water supply, waste disposal, and county buildings and the

provision of police, poor relief, and disputes resolution services. Enclosure acts eliminated the

open fields by ending the collective ownership and management of land and for the old system

substituting private ownership and management of resources.


3. Data Description and Coding Methods

       As acts passed through Parliament, clerks wrote their contents on long pieces of

parchment. Clerks stored the documents by rolling them tightly and writing a summary, called a

clerical title, on the exterior. These clerical titles summarized the act, usually in a concise

paragraph containing enough information for the clerks to identify the act and its principal

provisions amidst thousands of similar pieces of parchment, without opening the rolls to read the

full text. These clerical summaries form the foundation of our database.



                                                  10
         There is a large and venerable body of scholarship which uses the clerical titles to

categorize and count acts of Parliament. The most recent examples include Hoppit (1996, 1997,

2003), Innes (1997), Tate (1967, 1978), Turner (1980, 1984), and Wordie (1983). All of these

studies relied on printed sources, like the Statutes of the Realm, or the conversion of printed

sources into an electronic form. This paper uses an existing electronic database of clerical titles

instead of the printed sources. The Parliamentary Archives maintains a catalogue, Portcullis,

which indicates the clerical title, calendar year, regal year, and parliamentary session for all acts

passed since the early sixteenth century.7 For acts passed before 1798, Portcullis indicates

whether the act was public or private. The distinction referred to the type of documentation

required in legal cases. Parties at law had to present to the court authorized copies of private acts

in order to have the provisions of the act applied in the case. Public acts were considered to be

part of the public record and applied in all cases without the need to submit them as evidence.

For acts passed after 1798, Portcullis indicates whether the act was public or local/personal. This

distinction pertained to the scope of the legislation. A public act created a law of general

application throughout the jurisdiction in which it was proposed. A personal or local act affected

only a single person, group, or locale, which was named within the act.

         We use the clerical titles in Portcullis to identify all estate acts that were passed between

1600 and 1830. We define estate acts as private (and personal) acts which affected individuals

and families rights to equitable estates and to real property held within equitable estates. We

exclude marriage acts, naturalization acts, name acts, and office acts, which were private acts

that affected individuals’ and/or families’ rights but did not affect the structure of equitable


7
    http://www.portcullis.parliament.uk. The Parliamentary Archives provided us with the database underlying
    Portcullis to facilitate our research. The clerical titles contained within Portcullis were first published in two
    nineteenth century compilations of Parliamentary legislation, entitled the Statutes of the Realm (Great Britain,
    1963) and the Statutes at Large (Great Britain, 1807).


                                                           11
estates. We also exclude restitution and restoration acts, which restored individuals’ and

families’ rights to property that had been taken from them due to convictions for crimes,

typically treason following civil unrest.

         Identifying estate acts amongst all private acts is straightforward. Parliament standardized

procedures for writing acts. Clerks possessed templates from which they wrote the initial acts

and standard procedures for converting final versions into summaries written on the exteriors of

rolls. For example, the title for all acts that settled the property of an estate onto an individual

began, “An act for settling the estate …”.8 The title for all acts that authorized the sale of

property from an estate usually began “An act for the sale of …”, “An act for effecting the sale

of …”, or “An act for selling …”.9

         After identifying estate acts, we classify several categories of information contained

within the clerical titles. This information includes legal actions; economic transactions; the

property rights changed by the former to facilitate the latter; the geographic locations of land

involved in economic transactions; and the social rank, profession, and gender of individuals

whose estates were altered by estate acts. We created our categorizations by reading all of the

clerical titles and then devising algorithms to extract the relevant information. The authors

applied these algorithms independently and then compared their results. We also encapsulated

these algorithms in computer coding, which scanned the clerical titles for key words, and

compared our results to the computer output. Most of the key categories were also checked by

one of our research assistants.




8
    See for example, Parliamentary archive reference number HL/PO/PB/1/1707/6&7An26.
9
    See for example HL/PO/PB/1/1710/9&10An47, HL/PO/PB/1/1809/49G3n399, and
    HL/PO/PB/1/1809/49G3n208. Note that in acts of all types, minors variations in the use of articles exists.


                                                         12
        The consistency of estate acts’ form and function makes extracting the relevant

information straightforward. An example should clarify our procedures. Consider an estate act

from the mid-eighteenth century. We begin with two pieces of information.

        1) A reference number from the Parliamentary archives:
           “HL/PO/PB/1/1741/15G2n48.”

        2) A descriptive clerical title: “An Act to impower Henry Earl of Carlisle to
           make Leases of Coal Mines and Coal Works, lying within his settled Estates
           in the County of Northumberland, for any Term not exceeding ninety nine
           Years.”

The reference number reveals that the document was a private act (PB), originally written by the

clerks in the House of Lords (HL), passed by Parliament during the fifteenth year of the reign of

George II in 1741. The clerical title determines that someone (Henry Earl of Carlisle) was legally

empowered to make leases of a property held in an estate (Coal Mines and Coal Works) in the

county of Northumberland. We enter all of this information into a spreadsheet. Each of the

spreadsheet’s rows pertains to a single act of parliament. Each column contains the same type of

information for each act.

        Our detailed encoding enables us to construct statistical series that reveal trends of

interest to historians and social scientists. These statistical series usually report the annual

number of acts that did something – such as authorize the sale of land – over time. Such time

series could, of course, conceal as much as they reveal, particularly if the scope, scale, and nature

of the legislation changed over time. For this reason, we visited the Parliamentary Archives and

examined samples of original acts from the beginning (1610s), middle (1700s, 1740s, and

1780s), and end (1800s) of our sample period. Our examination reveals that estate acts possessed

salutary statistical properties. Estate acts were standardized in form and content. Estate acts

described the property that was affected, the individuals involved, and the rights that were




                                                  13
changed. There was variation in the geographic extent of properties affected. Later we show that

the proportion of acts which name properties in multiple counties as opposed to a single county

was stable over time. This property ensures that counting the number of acts passed annually

reveals broad trends in the amount of property being affected by the acts and the types of rights

being created, altered, or annulled because the distribution of the area affected was constant.

       For the vast majority of acts we are able to correctly determine the year in which it was

passed. For most of our sample period, a convention dated all acts passed by a session of

Parliament as if they were passed on the opening day of the session. This convention lingered

from an earlier period when Parliament met infrequently at royal request and handled a limited

volume of business in a short time period. In the eighteenth century, Parliament met annually.

Sessions began in the fall, usually in the months of October, November, or December; lasted

throughout the winter; and adjourned in the spring. Complications arose, however, in 1699,

1701, 1715, 1752, and 1761 when the monarch died, and/or Parliament opened late. In 1714, for

example, Queen Anne died. George I assumed the throne. His ascension delayed the opening of

Parliament until January of 1715. This parliament adjourned in the spring and another opened on

schedule during the next fall. So, in the year 1715, the conventional dating method assigned the

acts passed in two Parliamentary sessions – the winters 1714-15 and 1715-16 – to one calendar

year, 1714, yielding a count of zero acts in 1715. The years 1699, 1701, 1715, 1752, and 1761

are also recorded as having zero acts, while their adjacent years have an especially high count of

acts. We do not correct for these problems in the time-series presented here. Instead we leave it

to the researcher to choose their own method for addressing this issue.


4. Legal Functions of Estate Acts




                                                14
         Estate acts changed rights to equitable and real estates. Estate acts did this by triggering

legislative actions that changed little (if at all) during the centuries that we study.

         The typical vesting act contained five elements. It granted (i) some property, right, or

benefit, which had been a portion of (ii) someone’s settled estate, (iii) to someone else, (iv) for

some reason, and in some circumstances (v) in exchange for some property or asset. Some

examples illustrate the function of vesting acts. An act from 1702 vested “certain lands and

tenements of Montague Earl of Abingdon, in trustees, to be sold” and the proceeds employed in

the purchase “of other lands of equal value” to be employed “to the same uses, as the lands to be

sold are limited.”10 An act in 1759 vested “the inheritance of certain estates in the County of

Northampton, part of the entailed estate of John Freeman Esquire, in him, in fee simple” in

return for “settling other estates in the Counties of Wilts and Middlesex, in lieu thereof.”11

         Enabling and empowering acts were similar to vesting acts. They typically enabled or

empowered (i) someone, (ii) to do something, (iii) for some reason. For example an act in 1692

enabled “Abel Atwood to sell some Lands for payment of debts and to make provision for

younger children.”12 An act in 1725 enabled “Charles Lowndes Gentleman and the persons in

remainder after him to make contracts for getting brick earth in, and grant building leases of the

house and ground called Spring Garden.”13 An act from 1695 empowered “the Most Noble Anne

Duchess of Buckcleugh, and the Right Honourable James Earl of Dalkeith, her son, of the

Kingdom of Scotland, to grant leases for improving a piece of ground in the Parish of St. Martin

in the Fields.”14 An act from 1749 empowered “trustees to cut down and sell timber upon the



10
     HL/PO/PB/1/1702/13&14W3&1As1n33
11
     HL/PO/PB/1/1759/33G2n55
12
     HL/PO/PB/1/1692/4&5W&Mn43
13
     HL/PO/PB/1/1725/12G1n35
14
     HL/PO/PB/1/1695/7&8W3n50


                                                   15
estate late of John Trevor Esquire, in the Counties of Denbigh and Flint, for discharging his

debts, and also to make leases of mines in the said counties.”15

         Acts authorizing sales affected rights over a specific property. They typically authorized

the sale (i) of something, (ii) by someone, (iii) for some reason, and (iv) if certain conditions

were met. An example from 1692 authorized the “sale of lands by Sir Robert Smith” under the

condition that he “settle other lands of greater value to the same uses, in lieu thereof.”16 An act in

1773 authorized the sale of “certain charity estates” and apply the proceeds to “the building of a

town hall and shambles in the Town of Newark upon Trent and in the purchasing of lands and

hereditaments for enlarging the Church.”17 An act in 1702 authorized “Trustees to make Sale of

Part of the Estate of Humphrey Bury, for paying of a Mortgage, and a Portion charged

thereupon.”18

         Acts authorizing exchanges were similar but they authorized the transfer of two or more

properties. The typical act authorized the exchange (i) of some property, (ii) possessed by

someone, (iii) for some other property, (iv) possessed by someone else, (v) for some reason, and

(vi) if certain conditions were met. An example from 1692 permitted the exchange “of several

small Parcels of Land in the Parish and Manor of Fulham, belonging to the Bishoprick of

London…for other Lands of the like Value, to Charles Earl of Monmouth, and his Heirs.” An act

in 1739 permitted the exchange of land “belonging to Thomas Inaven Esquire, in the Parish of

Wootton in the County of Bedford, for other lands of equal value in the same Parish, belonging

to the master, fellows and scholars of Sidney Sussex College.”19 An act in 1785 authorized the



15
     HL/PO/PB/1/1749/23G2n57
16
     HL/PO/PB/1/1692/4&5W&Mn41
17
     HL/PO/PB/1/1773/13G3n179
18
     HL/PO/PB/1/1702/13&14W3&1As1n53
19
     HL/PO/PB/1/1739/13G2n44


                                                 16
exchange of “part of the settled estate of Heneage, Earl of Aylesford, in the County of Kent, for

another Estate, of greater Value, in the same county, to be settled in lieu thereof.”20

         Acts for discharging were also specific to a property. They typically discharged (i)

something, (ii) from some restriction, (iii) for some reason, and (iv) substituted something else in

its place. An example from 1677 discharged the Manor of Winstead in the County of York from

a Settlement in Tail, and charging other Manors and Lands in the County of Lincoln of a greater

Value with the same Uses.21 An act in 1733 discharged a “certain Piece of Ground called The

Pesthouse Field from certain charitable Trusts, and for settling another Piece of Ground of equal

Extent, and in a more convenient Place, upon the same Trusts.”22

         Acts for settling had a structure similar to acts for discharging because they placed

property into the confines of a settlement. An example from 1697 settled “certain lands in Essex

on Thomas Burgh Esquire, and his heirs, in lieu of other lands of greater value, conveyed by

him, according to the decree and the will of Sir Samuel Jones deceased.”23 An act from 1735

settled “the estate of William late Earl Cowper deceased, to the uses and for the purposes

mentioned in certain articles of agreement, made between William now Earl Cowper, and his

brother, and the issue of Spencer Cowper Esquire deceased.”24

         Some estate acts confirmed a transaction that had already taken place. For example, an

act from 1692 confirmed “the sale of certain wood lands in the County of Southampton, and

certain articles of agreement made between Isaac Woollaston and Richard Woollaston

Esquires.”25 An act from 1738 confirmed “an exchange, agreed to be made between Thomas



20
     HL/PO/PB/1/1785/25G3n104
21
     HL/PO/PB/1/1677/29&30C2n12
22
     HL/PO/PB/1/1733/7G2n40
23
     HL/PO/PB/1/1697/9&10W3n53
24
     HL/PO/PB/1/1735/9G2n33
25
     HL/PO/PB/1/1692/4&5W&Mn26


                                                  17
Holles Duke of Newcastle, and Sir Miles Stapleton Baronet, of their settled estates in the County

of York; and for settling the lands given in exchange to each party” to the uses of their estates.26

An act from 1790 confirmed a lease “lately made by Henry Nevill, Earl of Abergavenny, of

certain entailed mines, and other hereditaments, in the County of Monmouth, and to enable

granting future leases of the said entailed mines and other Hereditaments.”27

         A last type of estate act remedied mistakes in acts previously passed by parliament or

inadvertently included in families settlements. For example, an act in 1719 was for “supplying

the Defects in, and better Performance of the Will of Edmund Dunch Esquire, deceased.”28


5. The Economic Function of Estate Acts

         The examples above make it clear that landholders used the legal forms described in the

preceding section to achieve economic ends, which we describe in this section. The legal forms

and economic ends do not map into each other in a one-to-one relationship. Some legal forms

could be used for multiple purposes. Some economic ends could be achieved through multiple

means. The sale of property, for example, could be accomplished via an act that directly

authorized the sale of a particular piece of property or that empowered a landowner to sell

property or that vested in someone the authority to decide what property should be sold.

         Table 1 summarizes the economic transactions most often authorized by estate acts.

Column (1) indicates the total number of estate acts that authorized sales of land, long-term

leasing of land, exchanges of property, discharges of property from the restrictions of strict

settlements, mortgaging of property, partitioning of property, harvesting of timber, and mining of

ores, metal, and coal. Acts authorizing sales and leases allowed particular pieces of property (and


26
     HL/PO/PB/1/1738/12G2n53
27
     HL/PO/PB/1/1790/30G3n142
28
     HL/PO/PB/1/1719/6G1n25


                                                 18
at times entire estates) to be put on the market. Exchanges of land involved removing one (or

more) specific pieces of property from a settled estate and replacing it with specific pieces of

property from another estate. Discharges involved removing restrictions from land without

necessarily specifying what would happen to the land and if/whether/what would replace it.

Mortgage acts allowed property within an equitable estate to serve as collateral for a loan.

Partitions separated what had been considered a single tract of land into two (or more) units that

could be put to different uses or sold separately. All of these transactions enabled landholders to

undertake actions or engage in transactions that they could not given the existing allocation of

rights and laws concerning equitable and real estates. Column (2) indicates the percentage of

estate acts that authorized these transactions. The percentages sum to more than 100% because

estate acts could authorize more than one type of transaction.

          The most frequently authorized transaction was the sale of property. Acts authorizing

sales usually contained conditions. In many cases, the life tenant had to use a portion of the

proceeds to purchase property with a value equivalent to the land just sold and incorporate that

property into the estate. This provision protected the income of beneficiaries, such as current

dependants and future heirs. In some cases, trustees used the proceeds of the sale to pay debts,

often accumulated by the recently-deceased life tenant, or to provide pensions, portions, or

jointures for the beneficiaries.

          Lease acts enabled landowners to lease land for terms extending beyond the life of the

current landholder and for a fixed number of years, often up to ninety-nine. Such long-term

leases ensured tenants that they would not have to renegotiate the lease (or be kicked off the

property) when an heir inherited the estate.29 Without such assurances, tenants would be

reluctant to invest, improve, or maintain property, because the sums that they sunk into the
29
     See Bogart and Richardson (2008b) for a discussion of the effects of lease acts.


                                                          19
project could be expropriated when their landlord died or when the life tenant and heir apparent

renegotiated the settlement and transferred possession of the property to the next generation. This

disincentive is known as the hold-up problem in transaction-cost economics.

         Acts often authorized a particular type of contract known as a building lease. An act in

1788, for example, enabled Charles Earl Camden to grant “building leases of the prebendal lands

at Kentish Town, in the County of Middlesex.”30 Building leases authorized the letting of land on

long-term contracts, typically 99 years, on which the leaseholders could construct buildings for

residential or industrial use and in turn, lease the premises to subtenants who would occupy the

buildings. These leases facilitated construction on the edges of rapidly growing towns and cities,

where property owners wanted to switch land from rural to urban uses, but lacked contractual

forms needed to do so.

         Table 2 shows that 38.8% of all lease acts and 5.9% of all estate acts specifically

authorized building leases. A small number of acts authorized leases on land where metal ores

and coal lay underneath. In 1736, for example, an act enabled “the Guardians of Anthoney

Langley Swymmer, an Infant, to join in making Leases of certain Mines, in the County of Flint,

with the other Owners thereof, during the Minority of the said Infant”31 In 1783, an act

empowered “Nigel Bowyer Gresley…to lease Part of his settled Estates in Staffordshire,

pursuant to an Agreement entered into with George Parker, and others, Iron Masters; and also to

grant Leases of Lands and Mines within the same Estates.”32 This lease authorized the opening

of a mine in the heart of the midlands metal-mining area during the early stages of the Industrial

Revolution. Mining leases typically lasted from 40 to 60 years. This long time-horizon provided

lease holders with substantial incentives for making location-specific investments.

30
     HL/PO/PB/1/1788/28G3n132
31
     HL/PO/PB/1/1736/10G2n59
32
     HL/PO/PB/1/1783/23G3n88.


                                                  20
         Acts authorizing the exchange of land had many of the same effects as sale acts with

conditions to purchase and settle property of equivalent value. The difference between these acts

stemmed from the details of the transaction. Exchanges specified that the land that would be

placed in the settlement to replace the land withdrawn from the equitable estate. Many sales

indicated that land (or another asset) should replace the property withdrawn from the equitable

estate, but specified only the value and use of what the remuneration should be. Acts discharging

one property from a settlement and settling another property of equal value were also similar in

their effects. If a family wanted to free a property from the confines of a settlement they might

want to exchange it with some of their other properties that were not restricted. In this case they

were exchanging two or more properties within their own estate rather than exchanging with a

different party.

         Acts authorizing the portioning of land were particularly useful when shifting agricultural

land to urban uses. Residences required less space than farms. Property-owners partitioned farms

so they could divide the property into multiple building sites. An example from 1809 was an act

to “Partition certain Settled Estates of John Wharton Esquire, situated in the Counties of York,

Westmorland, and Durham.”33 An act from 1827 confirmed a “Partition made by Mary

Bainbrigge Spinster, with the Reverend Richard Fawcett Clerk and Anna Maria his Wife, and

others, of an Estate situate in the Township of Headingley-cum-Burley in the Parish of Leeds in

the County of York.”34 The latter act occurred at a time when the rapidly expanding population

of Leeds was engulfing neighboring townships like Headingley-cum-Burley.

         Another transaction facilitated by estate acts was the mortgaging of land. Equitable

estates often restricted life tenants from borrowing against their estate. In most cases, standard


33
     HL/PO/PB/1/1809/49G3n363
34
     HL/PO/PB/1/1827/7&8G4n214


                                                 21
mortgages could not be taken out because in the event of a default the creditor could not seize

settled land. Some settlements authorized borrowing or the ‘raising of money,’ but usually only

for specific purposes, such as raising funds for daughters’ dowries or sons’ educations, to

refinance existing debts, or to pay for improvements. Landholders might need to borrow for

other reasons, and in those instances too, they turned to estate acts.

         An estate act could authorize a mortgage in several ways. One was to vest authority in

trustees who raised the funds. For example, an act in 1741 vested “Part of the Marriage Portion

of Mary, late Wife of John Walcot Esquire, and also part of his settled Estate in Trustees for

raising Money to pay Debts.”35 Another was to give the life tenant authority to borrow. For

example, an act in 1726 enabled “Daniel Dunn Esquire, by Sale or Mortgage of Part of his

Estate, to raise Money to pay off and discharge the Portions of his Brothers and Sister.”36 An act

in 1807 enabled “Rear Admiral Bentinck, Tenant for Life under the Will of his late Father John

Albert Bentinck Esquire deceased, to charge his Estates in the County of Norfolk with the

Sums…for the embanking, improving, and increasing the same Estates by the Means therein

mentioned.”37

         Estate acts authorized an array of additional transactions intended to improve the

efficiency of estates. Some specifically authorized the opening of mines and extraction of coal.

Many of these authorized the extraction of coal in midlands and northern counties on the eve of

the Industrial Revolution. A handful authorized the exploitation of tin deposits in southwestern

England. Property owners requested these acts when the rules under which they inherited their

estate did not explicitly authorize the mining of minerals. The default rule prohibited mining,

which was considered to be a legal act of ‘waste,’ since it consumed a non-renewable resource,

35
     HL/PO/PB/1/1741/15G2n55
36
     HL/PO/PB/1/1726/13G1n70
37
     HL/PO/PB/1/1807/47G3s2n199


                                                 22
which law and custom preserved for the tenants in tail (i.e. future heirs). Property owners seeking

to raise capital to open mines (or to rent the rights to work the mines to third parties) needed acts

of Parliament to ensure partners that capital invested in the mine could not be expropriated by

individuals with beneficial interests in the estate, and thus, the right to sue in Chancery court and

shut down the mine during the (usually very long) period of time while Chancery pondered the

case.

         Over sixty estate acts authorized the harvesting (i.e. cutting and sale) of timber. For

example, an act in 1798 called for “Timber to be cut upon the settled Estates of Le Gendre Pierce

Starkie Esquire, and applying the Money to arise there from in the Purchase of other Estates, to

be settled to the same Uses.”38 Property owners requested these acts when the rules under which

they inherited their estate did not clearly authorize harvesting trees from particular plots of land.

The default rule prohibited the cutting of timber, which was considered to be a legal act of

‘waste,’ since it consumed a non-renewable resource, which law and custom preserved for the

future heirs and other beneficiaries. But, restrictions on harvesting timber could harm long-term

financial prospects when the price of wood changed or when old-growth trees stunted new

growth. In such circumstances, property owners could approach Parliament for authority to

harvest the timber. Authority often came in the form of an act requiring the life tenant to set

aside part of the proceeds of the sale of timber for the dependents of the estate and to make sure

that no one lost income from the arrangement.

         To summarize, estate acts’ primary task was to break the fetters imposed by settlements.

The acts authorized a variety of transactions prohibited by strict settlements, including sales,

leases, exchanges, partitions, and mortgages on property. Estate acts also authorized the mining

of iron, coal, and other ores as well as the cutting and sale of timber. Provisions authorizing these
38
     HL/PO/PB/1/1798/38G3n212


                                                  23
transactions were rarely including in eighteenth-century settlements and gradually became

common in nineteenth-century settlements. At the end of the seventeenth century, Parliament

streamlined procedures for reviewing estate bills, providing a quick and inexpensive forum for

modifying rights to equitable estates. Our data demonstrate the effectiveness of those reforms, by

revealing the rapid rise in the number of estate acts in the immediate aftermath.


6. Trends Over Time

          The number and composition of estate acts changed over time. Table 3 lists the number

of estate acts and the types of transactions they facilitated in each year from 1600 to 1830.

These statistical series should be especially useful to scholars doing time-series analysis on the

British economy.39 Figure 3 plots the annual number of sale acts by year from 1600 to 1830.

Like all acts of Parliament, sale acts were rare in the early 1600s. No acts appear to have been

passed during the Interregnum of the 1640s and 1650s, because after the Restoration the

monarchy annulled all acts passed in its absence and destroyed all records of those acts.40 After

the Restoration, the number of sale acts increased for a brief period, but then declined during the

political instability of the 1670s and 1680s. During the 1690s, the number of sale acts surged and

remained at a high level for several decades. During the eighteenth century, the number of sale

acts averaged 11 per year, with much variance around that mean.

          Figure 4 shows the number of acts authorizing leases in each year from 1600 to 1830.

The pattern resembles sale acts. The correlation coefficient between these series is 0.61. Like

sale acts, lease acts were rare during the early 1600s but increased after 1660. From 1715 to

1790, the number of lease acts averaged 3 per year. After 1790, as the pace of urbanization and


39
     See Bogart and Richardson (2008a) for a time-series analysis of estate, statutory authority, and enclosure acts.
40
     The standard reference on the Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum (Firth and Rait 1911) does not contain
     information about private acts.


                                                           24
industrialization increased, the number of lease acts rose. For the next four decades, the number

of lease acts averaged 6 per year. The peak occurred in 1825, when 25 lease acts were passed.

         These patterns should interest scholars for several reasons. It is believed that the system

of strict settlements arose during the early seventeenth century, crystallized around 1640, and

diffused among landed families during the generations preceding (or encompassing) the Civil

War. Precisely dating the development and dissemination of the doctrine is difficult, if not

impossible, however, because written records from the Chancery court do not exist for the period

(English and Saville 1983). The number of sale and lease acts help to document the timing of the

transition. Strict settlements certainly existed before 1640, because Parliament passed legislation

concerning them before that time. But, prior to 1640, estate acts were scarce. Scarcity suggests

that only limited numbers of settlements existed prior to that point in time. The rising number of

acts during the late seventeenth century and the surge of acts in the early eighteenth century

reveal the apogee of the settlement system and the plague of problems caused by the spread of

equitable estates, which bound tightly in their earliest incarnations, before lawyers learned how

to write settlement contacts that adequately protected beneficial interests and contingent

remainders, while allowing life tenants enough flexibility to profitably manage their estates.

         The pattern of sales also reflects political events during this period, such as the

Restoration of 1661 and the Glorious Revolution of 1689. After the Restoration, the number of

estate acts surged. During the political turmoil of the 1670s and 1680s, the number declined.

After the Glorious Revolution of 1689, sales surged again. There are many explanations in the

literature as to why the number of estate acts surged following the Glorious Revolution. One

class of arguments focuses on the behavior of Parliament.41 Another class of arguments focuses

on changes in the demand for estate acts, perhaps driven by economic developments. The
41
     See Langford (1991) and Hoppit (1996).


                                                   25
composition of estate acts in the period before and after the Glorious Revolution sheds light on

this issue. Table 4 shows that the composition of acts from 1660 to 1688 resembled the

composition from 1689 to 1719. A little over 50 percent of all estate acts authorized sales in both

periods. A little less than 10 percent authorized leases in both periods. These similar distributions

suggest that the Glorious Revolution did not change the types of estate acts that were passed, or

the composition of demand for acts, but it did change the volume of estate acts that were passed,

probably by relaxing constraints on the supply of acts.

       Table 4 also shows that the composition of estate acts changed after 1719. After that date,

the proportion of acts authorizing leases, exchanges, and discharges increased. The rate of

increase accelerated during the Industrial Revolution. The most rapid increase occurred in the

number of lease acts. Lease acts frequently facilitated construction in urbanizing and

industrializing areas and played an important role in reallocating resources towards

infrastructure, industry, and mining.

       Figure 5 shows that the character of sale acts changed during the eighteenth century. Sale

acts often described the reason that Parliament passed the act and the conditions that Parliament

imposed upon the transaction. Before 1690, for example, more than three-fourths of all acts

listed “to pay debts” as the rationale for the sale. The proportion listing “debts” as the rationale

fell continuously after the Glorious Revolution. By the time of the Industrial Revolution, less

than one act in four listed “debts” as a rationale for the transaction, and then, often one among

many rationales. A different trend existed for acts requiring the proceeds of the sale to be used to

purchase land of value equivalent to the old land and settled in the old land’s usage. The

proportion of acts imposing this requirement rose throughout the eighteenth century. This pattern




                                                  26
has implications for understanding English social history which we discuss in the concluding

section.



7. Geographic Distribution

          Estate acts affected particular pieces of property in particular places. Our database

indicates the region, county, city, and/or street of affected properties for approximately two-

thirds of all estate acts. Table 5 reveals the regional distribution of these acts. Column (3)

examines acts for which our database contains geographic information. Of these acts, 85%

pertained to property in England, approximately 5% referred to property in Ireland, 5% to

property in Scotland, 4% to property in Wales, and 1% to property in colonies overseas.42 The

concentration of acts in England was due, in part, to the concentration of population and land

area in that part of the United Kingdoms. The concentration may also reflect the difficulty of

requesting an estate act if one lived on the periphery of the empire and far from the center of

power in London. In addition, Ireland and Scotland had indigenous Parliaments. Acts passed by

these local legislatures do not appear in our database, which contains information only from the

Parliament at Westminster.43

          For estate acts affecting land within England, our database often identifies the county (or

counties) in which the property (or properties) was (or were) located. An estate act could pertain

to property located in multiple counties. Such an act would not be unusual, because the estates of

landed families often spanned several counties. A landed family might possess a house in

London, a country estate near their ancestral lands, agricultural manors scattered in several

42
     We expect that this distribution will hold for all of England, since we believe that the distribution of locations for
     acts lacking location information in the clerical title is similar to the distribution for acts whose clerical title
     contains location information. Further research with the manuscripts of the full acts will eventually indicate the
     location of all property effected by estate acts.
43
     See Hoppit (2003).


                                                            27
counties, and rights to revenues from fairs, markets, tithes, or townships scattered around the

realm. Table 6 indicates the number of counties referred to in each act. The preponderance,

nearly 80%, affected properties in a single county; roughly 15% affected properties in two

counties; the rest affected properties in three or more counties. These percentages indicate estate

acts typically affected land in one locality, although they could be used to reorganize rights to

land over broad areas. The proportion of acts affecting properties in more than one county

remained stable over time.

        Table 7 indicates the types of estate acts in each county from 1600 to 1830. The county

with the greatest number of acts authorizing sales, leases, and partitions was Middlesex. The

obvious reason for this concentration was the rapid expansion of London. The counties with the

fewest acts authorizing sales or leases were Westmoreland and Cumberland. These counties were

sparsely populated and far from London and other industrializing areas. The county with the

highest number of acts authorizing exchanges, discharges, mortgages, and the harvesting of

timber was York, which was large in terms of land area, densely populated, and contained

expanding industrial cities such as Leeds and Sheffield.

       To control for differences in the land area of each county, Table 8 ranks the number of

acts per square mile in each county. Middlesex ranked highest for every type of transaction.

Surrey, which lies just south of Middlesex and just across the Thames from the City of London,

ranked second in terms of sale and lease acts per square mile. Hertfordshire, which lies just north

of Middlesex, ranked third for acts authorizing sales, exchanges, and discharges per square mile.

Lancashire – home to the cotton textile industry and the rapidly expanding industrial centers of

Manchester and Liverpool – ranked third in acts authorizing leases per square mile. Its rapid

urban growth must have been one reason for the large number of acts authorizing building leases.




                                                 28
          Over time, the geographic distribution of estate acts changed, as Table 9 shows, by

indicating the number of sale and lease acts per square mile in each county during the 160 years

from 1600 to 1759 and the 70 years from 1760 to 1830. During the latter period of

industrialization acts authorizing sales and leases became more concentrated close to London, in

the counties of Middlesex and Surry, and more concentrated in the industrializing counties to the

north and west of London. Lancashire experienced the most rapid rate of growth in acts per

square mile, probably, it is worth repeating, due to the expansion of the cotton centers of

Manchester and Liverpool. Cheshire, which was adjacent to Lancashire, also experienced rapid

growth in lease acts per square mile. Counties lacking industrial centers, such as Hertfordshire

and Buckinghamshire, which ranked highly in acts per square mile before 1760, declined in

rank.44

          These tables demonstrate that estate acts became increasingly concentrated in

industrializing and urbanizing regions during the first Industrial Revolution era from 1760 to

1830. This pattern reveals a correlation between changes in property rights and economic

development in England. The nature of this link remains a matter of research. The restrictions

associated with strict settlements should have become more binding as the pace of urbanization

and industrialization increased and as switching land from agricultural to urban or industrial uses

became more profitable. Moreover, it would have been difficult, if not impossible, for

landowners to reallocate resources in response to urbanization and industrialization without

reorganizing property rights. The Chancery court was not a good substitute for Parliament,

especially in the late 18th and early 19th century (Baker 1971). Without this parliamentary forum,

restrictions on property transactions would have remained and many crucial investments would

have been forgone to the detriment of both static and dynamic efficiency.
44
     See Bogart and Richardson (2008b) for more on the correlation between estate acts and urbanization.


                                                         29
8. Rank, Profession, and Gender of Individuals Named in Estate Acts

       Estate acts reorganized rights held by individuals and families. Who held these rights?

Who was able to get acts from Parliament? Did Parliament intercede on the behalf of all property

holders, or did Parliament help only particular classes of people, such as aristocrats or the

politically powerful? Our database enables us to answer these questions because clerical titles

often named the parties involved. Most clerical titles named the life tenant (or the trustee for

underage landholders) who possessed the property. Many acts named other parties with

beneficial interests in the estate or otherwise involved in the transaction. Some acts named

deceased individuals whose settlements were the source of the property in dispute.

       The social ranks and/or professions of these individuals were often indicated. Ranks

indicating membership in the aristocracy included Baron, Count, Countess, Duke, Duchess, Earl,

Marquess, Marchioness, Viscount, Lord, and Lady. Ranks indicating membership in the gentry

included Baronet, Esquire, Knight, Gentleman, and Dame. Professions included merchants,

doctors, and clerks. Members of the clergy were identified as bishops, reverends, and rectors. In

some cases, acts named individuals without indicating ranks or professions. These individuals, in

all likelihood, did not belong to the nobility, gentry, or clergy, because identifying membership

in these orders would have been valuable before the House of Lords, whose members came from

these orders and represented their interests.

       In many cases, the gender of individuals could also be identified. Women belonging to

the nobility received feminine titles such as Countess, Duchess, Marchioness, or Lady. Women

belonging to the gentry received the title Dame. Women belonging to other orders were often




                                                 30
identified by feminine names, such as Mary or Elizabeth, or by labels such as ‘wife of’ or

‘daughter of.’

         Table 10 reports the number of estate acts and the rank or profession of the individuals

involved. Table 11 reports the same information as a percentage of all estate acts. Noble’s names

appeared in 812 acts or 23% of the total. Within the nobility, Dukes and Earls accounted for 8%

and 4% of the acts respectively. Nobles obtained acts authorizing the sale of land at a slightly

lower rate than the gentry. This may reflect a trend in which noble families were accumulating

property over this period, and where the estates of the largest holders were gradually growing

(see Beckett 1984).

         The share of acts naming nobles can be compared with the percentage of land owned by

the ‘great landowners,’ which consisted largely of the nobility. Beckett (1984) reports that great

landowners controlled 15% to 20% of the land in 1690 and 20% to 25% of the land 1790.45 Since

23% of the acts involved the property of the nobility, nobles access to (or use of) estate acts

seems proportional to the extent of their land ownership. The nobility, in other words, does not

appear to be over-represented in estate acts. This seems surprising. Nobles’ position at the top of

the social and political hierarchy gave them great influence in Parliament, particularly in the

House of Lords, where most estate acts originated. One might think that they would treat

themselves preferentially, use their political power purely for their own immediate benefit, and

pass estate acts only for themselves.

         Of estate acts, 2,217 or 63% of the total named members of the gentry, including the

ranks of Baronet, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, and Dame. Within the gentry, esquire was the

most common title, appearing in 42% of all acts. The title ‘esquire’ included landowners,

lawyers, industrialists and merchants who possessed substantial estates. Beckett reports that the
45
     Beckett’s figures come from Mingay (1963), Thompson (1963), and Cooper (1967).


                                                      31
gentry owned between 40% to 50% of the land in 1690 and about 50% in 1790. ‘Small owners’

held 25% to 33% of all land in 1690 and 15% in 1790. Since 63% of estate acts involved

members of the gentry, the gentry appear to be over represented among those receiving estate

acts. Small holders appear to be under represented, even if one assumes that all of the acts failing

to indicate the ranks of the participants dealt with the land of small holders belonging neither to

the nobility nor gentry.

         It is interesting to note that the gentry participated disproportionately in acts for

partitioning and mortgaging property. These acts allowed them to divide parcels of property,

usually when switching agricultural land to urban uses, and to raise money using their land as

collateral. The gentry’s emphasis on these endeavors may reflect greater involvement in the

expanding capitalist economy.

         Noble women were named in 110 acts or 3.2% of the total. In many cases, Countess,

Duchess, Marchioness, Dames, or Ladies were named in acts because they had recently deceased

and the act represented an attempt to change the rights associated with their will. For example, an

act in 1724 vested “the Real Estate of Dame Elizabeth Holford Widow, deceased, in the Parish of

Saint Olave, Hart Street, London, in Christopher Appleby Gentleman, and his Heirs, for the

better enabling him to sell the same, towards the Discharge of the Charitable and other Legacies

given by her Will.”46 In other cases, estate acts gave women expanded powers. For example, an

act in 1720 enabled “the Lady Viscountess Gage and her Trustees, and Thomas Whorwood

Esquire to purchase Lands of Inheritance with the Money arising by Sale of their Estate in the

County of Bucks.”47 Overall, however, it was not common for women to be given expanded

powers. This could reflect discrimination against women, but it could also be the case that most


46
     HL/PO/PB/1/1724/11G1n72
47
     HL/PO/PB/1/1732/6G2n33


                                                   32
upper class women held their wealth in personal property, like government securities.48

Therefore, it is not inconceivable that women with the title Countess, Duchess, Marchioness,

Dame, or Lady held 5% of the land or less. We should make an important qualification to these

figures. Our figures only include legislation that fit our definition of estate acts. Our figures

exclude any acts dealing with marital arrangements of the aristocracy and gentry which did not

alter rights to real property.

          Among the transactions authorized by estate acts, aristocratic women were most often

named in acts partitioning property. These acts divided parcels of land into separate plots. In

these cases, the act usually divided a parcel into two pieces. The husband received rights to one

of the new plots. The wife received ownership of the other. For example, an act in 1757 was for

“confirming a Partition between William Earl of Dartmouth, and Frances Catherine Countess of

Dartmouth, his Wife, and Sir William Maynard Baronet.”49

          Few estate acts named professionals, like doctors, clerks, businessman, and merchants.

Their scarcity may be due to their accumulation of personal property, such as cash and luxuries,

and urban real estate, which was settled far less often than rural land. Moreover, merchants that

accumulated substantial rural estates would often assume the title of esquire or gentleman.

          Tables 10 and 11’s bottom rows indicate the number of acts failing to refer to individuals

with ranks or professions. These acts refer to individuals that they do not identify as members of

the aristocracy, gentry, or profession. An act in 1826, for example, enabled “the Trustees under

the Will of Benjamin Griffin, deceased, to grant Building and other Leases of Parts of the Estates

thereby devised.”50 Acts such as this probably referred to individuals ineligible for honors or

titles, since such symbols of status received prominent placement in legal documents and had

48
     See Green and Owens (2003) for a discussion of women’s wealth holdings in the early nineteenth century.
49
     HL/PO/PB/1/1757/30G2n123
50
     HL/PO/PB/1/1826/7G4n242


                                                        33
substantial value in class conscious Georgian society. A small number of acts refer to the

property of organizations rather than individuals. For example, an act in 1825 was for

“confirming an Exchange made of certain Parts of the Glebe Lands of the Rectory of

Stowlangtoft.”51 In this case, the rectory as an institution received the authority to exchange land,

presumably at the behest of the rector or his superiors.

         The distribution of ranks, professions, and genders remained stable in the long run. Table

12 indicates the distribution of these categories across time periods. Nobles were named in 25%

of the acts in the Restoration period and 24% in the Industrial Revolution period. The gentry

were named in 61% of the acts in the Restoration period and 61% in the Industrial Revolution

period. The shares of smaller categories, such as the clergy, remained small in all periods.

         In the short run, some patterns appear noteworthy. The proportion of acts naming nobles

fell after the Glorious Revolution. This is significant because many estate acts from 1689 to 1719

authorized property sales. If the nobility were less likely to be named in these years, then the

nobility may have sold less of their property in this period, and it may be one reason that the

share of the land owned by the nobility expanded. Another pattern of interest is the decline in the

number of acts not naming ranks or professions during the period from 1720 to 1759 followed by

an increase in this group during the Industrial Revolution. One possible explanation is that the

political domination by the ‘Whig Oligarchs’ limited access by non-elites to some degree in the

early and mid-18th century.

         Ultimately, estate acts’ distribution across ranks and professions appears to be a

reflection of property’s distribution across these groups. Perhaps this should not have been

surprising. While the nobility often employed strict settlements to establish long-lasting estates,

settlements were also employed by the rural gentry, and at times, were even used on single
51
     HL/PO/PB/1/1826/7G4n238


                                                  34
family farms (English and Saville 1983, p. 12). The arrival of unanticipated opportunities, which

settlements could not accommodate, and which were often the impetus to request estate acts,

may have been relatively random across land holdings.

        The social distribution of estate acts suggests that Parliament was readily accessible to a

broad cross-section of society. As expected the aristocracy certainly made use of estate acts, but

so did the gentry and even smaller holders. The accessibility of Parliament is perhaps surprising

given that aristocrats dominated the House of Lords and the Commons. Aristocrats might have

restricted access to members of their class in an effort to foster their political power. The fact

that they did not is of major political and economic importance and remains a puzzle for future

researchers to solve.


9. Conclusion

       This essay quantifies the legal, economic, geographic, and social characteristics of estate

acts. Estate acts reorganized individuals’ and families’ rights to real and equitable estates. Estate

acts allowed landholders to take some action or complete an economic transaction that they could

not under the prevailing property-rights regime. The majority of estate acts allowed land to be

put on the market. These market-oriented acts facilitated transactions such as the sale, long-term

leasing, exchange, partition, and mortgaging of property. Estate acts also enabled landholders to

harvest timber and mine metal and coal. After 1760, when the pace of industrialization and

urbanization increased, estate acts were particularly concentrated in counties such as Middlesex

and Lancashire, which were the cradle of the Industrial Revolution.

       Our estate-acts database does much more than reveal correlations between adaptable

property rights and economic progress. The data reveal variation in the number and type of

estates acts over time. The number of acts authorizing property sales increased substantially



                                                 35
during the late-seventeenth and early-eighteenth centuries. This increase appears to be linked to

the creation of strict settlements in the 1620s and 1630s, the spread of strict settlements during

the tumultuous period of Civil War and Restoration, and changes in the operation of Parliament

after the Glorious Revolution. The number of estate acts authorizing leases increased rapidly in

the late eighteenth century. This increase appears to be linked to the onset of industrialization.

       The estate-acts data presented in this paper address an array of additional questions of

interest to economic, social, and political historians. Consider the three following examples.

First, during the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries, whose interests did Parliament

promote? Who had access to Parliamentary legislation? The proportion of acts estate acts

pertaining to the nobility, gentry, and other social groups corresponds with these groups share in

total landownership. This finding suggests that access to estate acts was open to all landowners,

even those in the middling ranks of the social and political hierarchy. The shares were roughly

constant over time. The only anomaly comes in the years (1688 to 1719) following the Glorious

Revolution, when the nobility’s share of estate acts fell below the long-run average and the lower

ranks share of estate acts rose above their long-run average. This anomaly probably reflects

political forces at work during the early period of Parliamentary ascendance.

       Second, did Parliament’s actions match its rhetoric about acting in the public’s interest

and to increase the realm’s wealth? Or alternatively, was Parliamentary legislation primarily a

tool for redistribution from the socially powerless to the politically powerful? A great deal of

evidence indicates that estate acts served constructive purposes. Acts authorizing long-term

leases, for example, typically described the projects, such as the opening of mines or construction

of residences, that the leases facilitated. Acts authorizing the sale of property (or otherwise

releasing property from the strictures of settlement) typically specified that a portion of the




                                                 36
proceeds of the sale must be dedicated to purchasing lands and settling them to the old usage (or

taking other actions that would ensure all beneficiaries of the estate remained as well off

financially as they had been in the past. The texts of the acts, in other words, reveal Parliament’s

intentions. Parliament approved reallocating resources to new and more productive uses, as long

as the financial interests of beneficiaries to estates were protected.

        Third, was Habakkuk (1980, 1994) correct? Did aristocratic families struggle to maintain

their social position relative to a rising entrepreneurial and mercantile class? In this struggle, did

aristocratic families sell valuable properties to pay for debts incurred maintaining expensive

lifestyles? Were estate acts a mechanism for facilitating these sales? Does the documentary

record prove that landed families incurred large debts in an ultimately futile struggle to outspend

their class rivals?

        Little in the documents that we analyze supports Habakkuk’s contention. While it is true

that a large number of estate acts mention “to pay debts” as a rationale for the sale of property,

only a handful of acts indicate that the debts arose due to extravagant expenditures or profligate

lifestyles. Most acts mention debts in the context of raising portions and/or jointures (i.e.

payments to dependents such as widows and younger siblings, often upon reaching adulthood, to

pay for education, to establish them in careers, or to fund dowries). Many estate acts also

mention debts in the context of raising funds to invest in improvements.

        Another explanation for the appearance of the phrase “to pay debts” may be the legal

procedure used to break entails, the process of common recovery. This process involved a suit

over a fictitious debt which resulted in the conversion of a settled estate into a fee simple

holding. The ubiquity of this standardized procedure – which involved suits over fictitious debts




                                                  37
– should make scholars wary of using legal and political records as evidence of the debts of

landed families.

       Figure 5 addresses the Habakkuk hypothesis from another perspective. The figure

compares the percentage of acts indicating the proceeds from the sale of land should be used to

pay debts and the percentage of acts indicating that the proceeds from the sale of land should be

used to purchase land of equivalent value which would be settled to the same use. According to

Marxist historians, the phrase ‘to pay debts’ is evidence of a crisis among the aristocracy. Social

competition with the bourgeoisie forced aristocratic families to sell land in order finance lavish

lifestyles and maintain relative social rankings. As entrepreneurs and merchants accumulated

capital and acquired the trappings of privileged lifestyles, competition among classes became

increasingly intense, and the aristocracy acquired even larger debts, forcing them to sell even

more of their most productive lands. The class dynamic driving this model should leave a clear

pattern in the evidence. As the rise of the bourgeoisie forced the aristocracy to acquire larger

debts, more estate acts should refer to debts as the reason for selling property. The opposite

pattern, however, appears in the data. As industrialization progressed, the phrasing ‘to pay debts,’

which Marxist historians used as evidence of their hypothesis, become less common, not more

common, as Marxist theories predicted. The class dynamic at the heart of Marxist historiography,

in other words, does not appear in data on estate acts.

       Another dynamic is clearly evident. As time progressed, estate acts increasingly required

the first use of the proceeds of land sales to be purchasing equivalent land (or at times other

assets) which would provide beneficiaries of the equitable estate with incomes equivalent to what

they would have received under the old arrangement. After beneficiaries’ interests had been

accommodated, the remainder of the proceeds from the sale of lands could be dedicated to the




                                                 38
purchase of additional land or to new uses, such as investment in infrastructure, mercantile

ventures, or industrial concerns. This formulation resembled the Pareto-improving approach to

allocating property rights which Ronald Coase observed in common law courts and

Parliamentary decisions during the nineteenth century (Coase 1960 and 1974).




                                                39
                 Figure 1
                 Political Events and Acts Passed by Parliament, 1500 to 1900



                 400
                                  Annual Number of Acts, 10-Year Moving Average

                                  Acts Per Session

                 300
Number of Acts




                                        STUART RESTORATION
                                       DYNASTY           GLORIOUS
                                        BEGINS          REVOLUTION
                 200                          CIVIL WAR
                                               BEGINS



                 100




                    0
                     1500      1550          1600     1650        1700        1750    1800       1850        1900
                                                                 Year
                        Sources: See text.

                        Notes: Denote as At the number of acts passed in year t. The series ‘acts per session’
                        equals At if At > 0. The series ‘annual number of acts’ is an eleven-year moving average.
                        The formula for the moving average is:
                                                                        ⎛ 5       ⎞
                                                                   At = ⎜ ∑ At +i ⎟ 11 .
                                                                        ⎝ i = −5  ⎠




                                                                  40
                 Figure 2
                 Categories of Legislation Pertaining to Property Rights, 1601 to 1830



                     2500



                     2000
Number of Acts




                     1500



                     1000



                      500



                        0
                        01
                        11
                        21
                        31
                        41
                        51
                        61
                        71
                        81
                        91
                        01
                        11
                        21
                        31
                        41
                        51
                        61
                        71
                        81
                        91
                        01
                        11
                        21
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      16
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      17
                      18
                      18
                      18
                                                estate   enclosure     statutory authority   other

                                                                     Year

                      Source: Database of Acts of Parliament.

                      Notes: The plotted series are eleven-year moving averages of the annual data
                      as defined in the note for Figure 1.




                                                                      41
Figure 3
Number of Estate Acts Authorizing Property Sales, 1600 to 1830

                  35



                  30



                  25
  Acts per Year




                  20



                  15



                  10



                   5



                   0
                   1600              1650               1700               1750               1800


                   Source: Database of Acts of Parliament.

                   Notes: The grey dots indicate the number of acts authorizing property sales passed in each
                   year. The black line is an eleven-year moving averages of the annual data as defined in the
                   note for Figure 1.




                                                             42
Figure 4
Number of Acts Authorizing Property Leases, 1600 to 1830
                  25




                  20
  Acts Per Year




                  15




                  10




                   5




                   0
                    1600              1650              1700               1750              1800


                  Source: Database of Acts of Parliament.

                  Notes: The grey dots indicate the number of acts authorizing property leases passed in each
                  year. The black line is an eleven-year moving averages of the annual data as defined in the
                  note for Figure 1.




                                                            43
Figure 5
Percentage of Acts that Authorized Sales of Land and Required the Proceeds to be Dedicated to
Either the (a) Payment of Debts or (b) Purchase of Land Settled to the Same Use.

                         1.00
                                    Proceeds used
                                    to pay debts

                         0.80
  Percent of Sale Acts




                         0.60




                         0.40


                                Proceeds used to
                                purchase land
                         0.20




                         0.00
                             1660                    1710                     1760                     1810

                         Source: Database of Acts of Parliament.

                         Notes: The horizontal hashes indicate the number of acts authorizing property sales that
                         indicated the proceeds should be used for the payment of debts. The solid line is an eleven-
                         year moving averages of that data as defined in the note for Figure 1. The black dots
                         indicate the number of acts authorizing property sales passed in each year that required the
                         proceeds to be used to purchase land of equivalent value settled to the same use. The solid
                         line is an eleven-year moving averages of the annual data.




                                                                   44
Table 1
Transactions Authorized by Estate Acts, 1600 to 1830

                      Number Percent
Type of Transaction
                      Of Acts of Acts
                           (1)       (2)

Sale                     1814      51.5
Lease                     538      15.3
Exchange                  273       7.8
Discharge                 193       5.5
Mortgage                  137       3.9
Partition                  93       2.6
Harvest Timber             60       1.7
Mine Ore/Coal              44       1.4


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                             45
Table 2
Types of Leases Authorized by Estate Acts, 1600 to 1830


                                    Number Percent of
                                     of acts estate acts


Building Lease                           209        5.9
Housing Lease                             55        1.6
Mining Lease                              33        0.9
Other or No type stated                  262        7.4


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                               46
Table 3
Number of Estate Acts by Year and Type of Transaction, 1601 to 1830




                                     Discharge




                                                                                                                  Discharge
                          Exchange




                                                                                                       Exchange
                                                 Mortgage




                                                                                                                              Mortgage
                                                            Partition




                                                                                                                                         Partition
                                                                        Timber




                                                                                                                                                     Timber
                  Lease




                                                                                               Lease
           Sale




                                                                                        Sale
Year                                                                             Year


                                                                                 1630   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1601   1            0        0           0          0           0         0      1631   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1602   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1632   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1603   5            1        0           0          0           0         0      1633   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1604   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1634   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1605   7            1        0           0          0           0         0      1635   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1606   5            0        0           0          0           0         0      1636   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1607   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1637   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1608   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1638   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1609   9            0        0           0          0           0         0      1639   0        0        0           0          0           0         0

1610   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1640   2        3        0           0          0           0         0
1611   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1641   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1612   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1642   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1613   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1643   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1614   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1644   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1615   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1645   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1616   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1646   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1617   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1647   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1618   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1648   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1619   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1649   0        0        0           0          0           0         0

1620   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1650   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1621   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1651   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1622   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1652   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1623   11           0        1           0          0           0         0      1653   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1624   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1654   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1625   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1655   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1626   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1656   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1627   2            0        0           0          0           0         0      1657   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1628   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1658   0        0        0           0          0           0         0
1629   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1659   0        0        0           0          0           0         0

1660   8            1        0           0          0           0         0      1690   10       3        0           0          1           0         0
1661   7            0        0           1          0           0         0      1691   19       5        0           0          4           0         0
1662   11           0        2           1          0           0         0      1692   15       2        2           0          1           0         1
1663   4            2        0           0          0           0         0      1693   2        0        0           0          0           0         0
1664   11           1        0           0          0           0         0      1694   19       7        1           1          5           0         1
1665   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1695   12       3        2           1          1           0         0
1666   5            0        0           0          0           0         0      1696   15       1        1           0          0           0         1
1667   2            2        2           0          0           0         1      1697   21       4        1           2          1           0         0
1668   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1698   34       7        0           1          4           0         1
1669   0            0        0           0          0           0         0      1699   0        0        0           0          0           0         0




                                                                                 47
Table 3 (continued)
Number of Estate Acts by Year and Type of Transaction, 1601 to 1830




                                   Discharge




                                                                                                                Discharge
                        Exchange




                                                                                                     Exchange
                                               Mortgage




                                                                                                                            Mortgage
                                                          Partition




                                                                                                                                       Partition
                                                                      Timber




                                                                                                                                                   Timber
                Lease




                                                                                             Lease
         Sale




                                                                                      Sale
Year                                                                           Year


1670     21       2        0           0          0           0         0      1700    7       0        0           0          3           0         0
1671      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1701    1       0        0           0          0           0         0
1672      2       1        0           0          0           0         0      1702   30       7        2           1          3           1         1
1673      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1703   17       5        1           1          0           2         0
1674      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1704   31       5        0           0          5           0         0
1675      3       0        0           0          0           0         0      1705   30       5        1           0          1           0         0
1676      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1706   15       3        2           3          0           1         0
1677     18       2        0           1          0           0         0      1707    7       1        0           1          0           0         0
1678      4       0        0           0          1           0         0      1708   17       2        1           0          2           0         0
1679      1       1        0           0          0           0         0      1709   12       1        0           0          0           1         0

1680      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1710   21       6        1           1          0           1         1
1681      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1711   15       3        0           1          1           1         2
1682      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1712    9       2        1           2          3           0         0
1683      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1713   12       1        0           0          2           1         0
1684      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1714    9       2        0           0          2           0         0
1685      1       0        0           0          0           0         0      1715    0       0        0           0          0           0         0
1686      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1716    9       1        2           0          0           2         1
1687      0       0        0           0          0           0         0      1717    4       1        1           2          0           0         0
1688      7       2        0           0          2           0         0      1718    7       1        0           1          1           0         0
1689      9       1        0           0          1           0         0      1719    9       1        1           1          1           1         0

1720     15       0        1           2          0           0         0      1750   10       5        0           3          1           1         0
1721      5       1        0           1          0           0         0      1751    5       4        2           3          1           0         0
1722      8       0        1           0          1           0         1      1752    0       0        0           0          0           0         0
1723     10       1        0           0          1           0         0      1753   12       4        2           1          0           2         0
1724     17       2        1           2          1           0         0      1754   13       3        2           0          1           0         1
1725     13       4        0           2          1           1         0      1755   11       4        5           0          3           2         0
1726     15       1        2           1          2           0         0      1756   14       2        1           1          7           1         0
1727      8       4        0           1          1           1         0      1757   18       5        0           2          2           2         1
1728      9       3        2           2          0           0         0      1758    7       6        2           3          0           1         2
1729      6       1        0           1          1           0         1      1759    9       8        2           2          0           0         0

1730      8       2        2           0          0           0         0      1760    6       2        2           2          1           1         0
1731     13       3        3           0          3           0         0      1761    0       0        0           0          0           0         0
1732     10       4        1           1          1           0         0      1762   13       4        0           4          1           2         0
1733      6       1        1           1          0           0         0      1763    3       1        0           2          1           0         0
1734      5       0        2           1          0           1         0      1764    7       6        0           3          1           2         0
1735      6       1        1           1          0           0         0      1765   18       0        3           1          1           1         0
1736      9       4        0           0          1           2         0      1766   16       5        0           0          1           0         0
1737      4       3        1           2          0           0         0      1767   19       7        2           5          2           2         1
1738     12       3        2           5          0           0         0      1768   10       3        0           1          0           0         0
1739      1       1        2           0          0           0         0      1769   14       5        2           5          3           1         1




                                                                               48
Table 3 (continued)
Number of Estate Acts by Year and Type of Transaction, 1601 to 1830




                                   Discharge




                                                                                                                    Discharge
                        Exchange




                                                                                                         Exchange
                                               Mortgage




                                                                                                                                Mortgage
                                                          Partition




                                                                                                                                           Partition
                                                                      Timber




                                                                                                                                                       Timber
                Lease




                                                                                                 Lease
         Sale




                                                                                         Sale
Year                                                                            Year



1740      9       2        0           3          1           1         0       1770     11        4      1             5          0           2         1
1741     11       2        1           0          2           1         0       1771     14        4      3             2          2           0         0
1742      4       4        2           2          0           1         0       1772     19        9      3             4          3           1         3
1743     12       0        1           0          1           0         0       1773     17        4      4             5          0           2         2
1744     11       0        1           1          1           0         0       1774     16        6      4             2          1           0         0
1745      9       1        1           3          1           0         0       1775     21        5     11             2          1           1         0
1746     15       4        0           1          3           0         0       1776     22        3      2             5          2           0         2
1747     11       0        1           0          1           1         0       1777     14        4      2             5          0           0         0
1748     14       2        0           3          1           1         0       1778     11        2      3             1          0           2         2
1749     10       4        0           0          2           1         1       1779      9        3      2             0          2           1         1

1780   9          0        3           0          3           0         0       1810    11         5        5           2          0           3         3
1781   4          1        1           4          0           0         0       1811    12         4        3           2          0           2         1
1782   5          0        0           2          2           0         0       1812    14         7        6           0          1           0         0
1783   6          5        1           1          0           0         0       1813    29         7        4           2          1           0         0
1784   7          3        4           2          0           0         1       1814    16         3        6           1          0           0         0
1785   10         3        4           3          1           1         0       1815    10         3        1           2          0           2         0
1786   13         5        3           0          1           0         1       1816    11         1        6           2          0           1         0
1787   3          0        1           4          0           0         0       1817    12         4        3           2          0           1         0
1788   3          5        4           1          0           0         2       1818    7          3        3           0          0           2         0
1789   13         2        1           0          1           0         2       1819    13         6        2           2          0           1         1

1790   6         2         3           2          0           1         0       1820    12       4          4           0          0           0         0
1791   6         6         4           1          1           0         1       1821    11       5          3           0          0           1         1
1792   10        7         2           1          1           1         1       1822    14       4          1           0          1           1         0
1793   8        10         3           1          0           0         0       1823    9        3          7           1          0           0         0
1794   7         7         2           1          0           1         1       1824    14       8          2           1          0           0         0
1795   10        5         5           2          1           3         0       1825    15      24          4           1          0           1         0
1796   13        5         3           0          2           2         1       1826    11      12          2           0          0           0         0
1797   14        4         5           3          0           2         1       1827    16      13          2           4          1           3         0
1798   11        3         2           2          0           0         2       1828    16       6          3           1          0           2         1
1799   11        3         2           2          2           2         1       1829    14      10          2           0          0           0         2

1800   17         3        2           0          1           2         0       1830    10         8        3           0          1           1         0
1801   14         3        1           0          3           1         1
1802   16         7        6           1          2           2         2
1803   15         3        7           4          0           1         0
1804   5          3        1           1          1           0         0
1805   14         7        5           2          0           0         0
1806   16         5        3           0          1           0         0
1807   23         5        2           0          1           1         1
1808   18         7        6           2          0           1         0
1809   20         4        1           1          0           2         3      Total   ,814     538 273 193 137                            93          60




                                                                                 49
Table 4
Percentage of Estate Acts by Period and Type of Transaction

Transaction             1660-1688 1689-1719 1720-1759 1760-1830       1660-1830

Sale                          55.0         52.7        51.5    51.1        51.5
Lease                          7.3         10.1        13.2    20.1        15.3
Exchange                       2.1          2.5         6.0    12.0        10.2
Discharge                      1.6          2.4         6.8     7.0         5.5
Mortgage                       1.0          5.0         5.2     3.0         3.8
Partition                      0.0          1.3         2.7     3.7         2.6
Harvest Timber                 0.5          1.1         0.9     2.5         1.7
Mine Ore/Coal

Total Number of Acts           191         793          748   1,692

Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                             50
Table 5
Regional Distribution of Estate Acts Relative to Population and Land Area

                        Number of Percent of      Percent of Population in Percent of Land Area Percent of
                        Estate Acts Estate Acts Located Acts 1801 (000s) Population Square km Land in UK
                                (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)

England                       2,063         58.6           85.3             8,308   70.2   130,395    53.6
Ireland/Isle of Man             131          3.7            5.4             1,388   11.7    13,843     5.7
Scotland                        117          3.3            4.8             1,550   13.1    78,313    32.2
Wales                            93          2.6            3.8               587    5.0    20,754     8.5
Colonies                         14          0.4            0.6
Location Unidentified         1,135         32.2               .                .      .         .       .


Source: Database of Acts of Parliamentt.




                                                                   51
Table 6
Geographic Breadth of Estate Acts within England,
By Number of Counties and Time Period

                               Number of Counties Named in Act
                         1         2        3        4       5+

Number of Acts        1422       287       80        20       10
Percent of Acts       78.4      15.8      4.4       1.1      0.6




                       Percent of Acts    Percent of Acts Naming
Period
                   Naming One County       More than One County

1600-1688                          82.8                     17.2
1689-1719                          78.7                     21.3
1720-1759                          75.0                     25.0
1760-1830                          77.2                     22.8


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                             52
Table 7
Number of Estate Acts Changing Property Rights by County and
Type of Transaction, 1600-1830




                                             Discharge




                                                                                                                                     Discharge
                                  Exchange




                                                                                                                          Exchange
                                                         Mortgage




                                                                                                                                                 Mortgage
                                                                    Partition




                                                                                                                                                            Partition
                                                                                Timber




                                                                                                                                                                        Timber
                          Lease




                                                                                                                  Lease
                   Sale




                                                                                                           Sale
County                                                                                   County

Bedfordshire       16      0         4           7          1           1         0      Lincolnshire      52      3      10          9             5        9            1
Berkshire          32      6         4           4          0           0         0      Middlesex        104     93      13         14             5       13            2
Buckinghamshire    37      0         7           5          1           1         0      Norfolk           49      2      16         10             4        1            1
Cambridgeshire     22      1         6           5          4           0         1      Northamptonshire 26       1       6          6             2        4            3
Cheshire           37     15         6           4          2           2         2      Northumberland    19      4       5          0             2        0            1
Cornwall           12     13       3             3          1           0         0      Nottinghamshire   23      5      11             5          2           2         2
Cumberland          3      1       1             1          0           0         1      Oxfordshire       25      5      16             6          2           2         0
Derby              22      4       9             3          1           1         1      Rutland            4      0       1             0          0           2         0
Devon              53     17       9             7          1           1         0      Shropshire        22      1       5             1          1           0         0
Dorset             26      6      10             4          1           3         1      Somerset          41     11       8             5          0           4         1
Durham             17      3         2           1          0           3         1      Staffordshire     35     10       9             5          1           1         1
Essex              54      8         5           6          0           6         3      Suffolk           43      2      15             4          0           5         2
Gloucester         39     10         9           5          2           3         2      Surrey            69     47       9             9          3           9         2
Hampshire          32      5         7           4          2           2         4      Sussex            47      6      16             7          4           4         3
Hereford            9      1         6           5          0           0         0      Warwick           28      9       6             6          3           1         0
Hertford           38      4      10          9             2           3         1      Westmoreland       3      0       2          1           0          1            1
Huntingdonshire    12      2       4          0             2           2         0      Wiltshire         45     10       8          6           2          5            3
Kent               90     21      17         13             1           7         2      Worcester         20      4       7          5           1          2            1
Lancashire         42     42       4          4             3           4         3      York              82     14      24         16          11         10            5
Leicestershire     38      3       6          4             1           4         0


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                                                                          53
Table 8
Rank of Counties According to the Number of Estate Acts Changing Property
Rights per Square Mile, By Transaction Type, 1600-1830




                                             Discharge
                                  Exchange




                                                                                                                                                      Discharge
                                                         Mortgage




                                                                                                                                           Exchange



                                                                                                                                                                  Mortgage
                                                                    Partition




                                                                                                                                                                             Partition
                                                                                Timber

                                                                                         Mining




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mining
                                                                                                                                                                                         Timber
                          Lease




                                                                                                                                   Lease
                   Sale




                                                                                                                            Sale
                                                                                                  All




                                                                                                                                                                                                           All
County                                                                                                   County

Bedfordshire        8     37      14          2           9         17          31                       Lincolnshire       31     32      30         28          16         13          30
Berkshire           7      8      26         17          31         37          38                       Middlesex           1      1       1          1           1          1           1
Buckinghamshire     5     36      13          8          20         26          33                       Norfolk            27     31      16         15          12         32          34
Cambridgeshire     22     29      20         11           2         31          23                       Northamptonshire   24     30      25         13          11          7           3
Cheshire            9      4      23         21          14         20          10                       Northumberland     36     27      34         39          29         35          24
Cornwall           37      7      37         32          27         33          35                       Nottinghamshire    20     17       4         10          10         18           8
Cumberland         39     35      39         36          38         39          25                       Oxfordshire        11     11       2          5           6         11          29
Derby              28     23      12         25          25         28          21                       Rutland            21     38      22         38          39          2          26
Devon              29     14      32         29          35         38          39                       Shropshire         32     33      31         33          28         34          36
Dorset             23     18      10         18          22         15          15                       Somerset           25     13      27         26          34         23          18

Durham             34     26      38         35          37         24          19                       Staffordshire      17     10      15         19          23         27          20
Essex              10     19      33         23          32         10           6                       Suffolk            18     28      11         24          33         16          16
Gloucester         15      9      18         20          13         19           9                       Surrey              2      2       5          4           4          3           2
Hampshire          30     24      28         30          26         29          12                       Sussex             14     22       8         14           8         12           7
Hereford           35     34      21         12          30         36          37                       Warwick            16      6      17          9           7         25          32
Hertford            3     15       3          3           5          5           4                       Westmoreland       38     39      35         34          36         30          22
Huntingdonshire    13     20       7         37           3          4          27                       Wiltshire          12     12      24         22          24          9           5
Kent                4      5       6          6          18          8          13                       Worcester          19     16       9          7          19         14          14
Lancashire         26      3      36         31          17         22          11                       York               33     25      29         27          15         21          17
Leicestershire      6     21      19         16          21          6          28


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament



                                                                                                        54
Table 9
Sale and Lease Acts per 100 Square Miles in Each County,
1600 to 1759 and 1760 to 1830
                           Sale                Lease                              Sale          Lease

                  Before After      Before After                          Before After   Before After
County                                                 County
                   1760 1760         1760 1760                             1760 1760      1760 1760

Bedfordshire         2.4    1.1                        Lincolnshire       0.9    1.1     0.1
Berkshire            2.3    2.0          0.3     0.5   Middlesex          13.8   23.0    6.4    26.6
Buckinghamshire      2.7    2.3                        Norfolk            1.1    1.3     0.1
Cambridgeshire       1.6    0.9          0.1       0   Northamptonshire   1.5    1.1     0.1
Cheshire             1.5    2.0          0.4     1.0   Northumberland     0.3    0.7     0.1    0.2
Cornwall             0.4    0.4          0.6     0.4   Nottinghamshire    1.3    1.4     0.1    0.5
Cumberland                  0.2                  0.1   Oxfordshire        1.7    1.6     0.1    0.5
Derby                1.1    1.1          0.1     0.3   Rutland            2.7
Devon                1.4    0.6          0.4     0.2   Shropshire         0.6    1.0     0.1    0
Dorset               1.5    1.1          0.5     0.1   Somerset           1.1    1.4     0.5    0.2
Durham               0.6    0.6                  0.2   Staffordshire      1.0    1.9     0.1    0.7
Essex                2.0    1.6          0.1     0.5   Suffolk            1.9    0.9     0.1    0.1
Gloucester           1.4    1.7          0.3     0.5   Surrey             4      5.1     1.1    5.1
Hampshire            1.0    0.9          0.1     0.2   Sussex             1.2    2       0      0.4
Hereford             0.5    0.6                  0.1   Warwick            1.4    1.7     0.2    0.8
Hertford             3.3    2.7          0.3     0.3   Westmoreland       0.1    0.3     0      0
Huntingdonshire      2.4    0.8          0.3     0.3   Wiltshire          1.2    2.1     0.4    0.3
Kent                 2.7    3.1          0.2     1.2   Worcester          1.8    1       0.3    0.3
Lancashire           0.8    1.5          0.2     2.2   York               0.5    0.9     0.1    0.2
Leicestershire       3.3    1.4          0.2     0.1


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament




                                                                55
Table 10: Social Ranks and Professions of Individuals in Estate Acts




                                                     Discharge
                                          Exchange



                                                                      Mortgage

                                                                                 Partition

                                                                                             Timber
                                  Lease
                           Sale
Rank or Profession                                                                                    All

Duke                      37 26 19                   20            6              2           3       134
Marquess                  19   9   7                  1            1              2           0        42
Earl                     109 45 40                   22           14              4           4       295
Viscount                  36   9   2                  3            6              2           1        71
Baron                      7   0   0                  0            1              1           0        13
Lord                      81 43 33                   16            2              6           6       220
Countess                  13   8   4                  4            1              2           0        46
Duchess                    3   6   2                  3            0              0           0        18
Marchioness                1   3   1                  0            1              1           0         9
Lady                      12   3   2                  1            5              0           0        37
Total Noble Rank         306 136 104                 62           32             17          14       812

Baronet                    7   3   1   2                           1              0           0    20
Knight                   278 57 33 25                             18             22           8   536
Esquire                  807 179 135 86                           75             48          34 1,496
Gentleman                107 18 10     6                           5              5           1   169
Dame                      22 12    2   1                           1              7           1    67
Total Gentry Rank      1,198 257 178 118                          99             76          44 2,217

Merchant                  12       6       0             0               0           0         0       25
Doctor                    11       8       2             0               1           3         0       30
Clerk                     29       8      13             7               1           3         1       67
Total Professions         52      22      15             7               2           6         1      122

Bishop                     8       8       7             0               2           0         1       31
Reverend                  16       6      10             2               0           5         1       41
Rector                     4      14      12             3               0           0         0       35
Total Clergy              28      28      29             5               2           5         2      107

Individuals Without      321 122          20         17                  9           9         3      556
Profession or Rank


Source: Database of Acts of Parliament

Notes: The last row indicates individuals who are named in the acts but whose appellations
indicate neither social rank nor profession. Given the prevalence of these honorifics and their
importance in this class conscious society, we suspect that the ranks and professions of
individuals would have been indicated, if they possessed them.


                                                                 56
Table 11: Percentage Distribution of Social Ranks and Professions by Type of Act




                                                  Discharge
                                       Exchange




                                                                   Mortgage

                                                                              Partition

                                                                                          Timber
                               Lease
                        Sale
                                                                                                   All

Duke                   2.0 4.8 7.0 10.4 4.4 2.2 5.0 3.8
Marquess               1.0 1.7 2.6 0.5 0.7 2.2 0.0 1.2
Earl                   6.0 8.4 14.7 11.5 10.2 4.3 6.7 8.4
Viscount               2.0 1.7 0.7 1.6 4.4 2.2 1.7 2.0
Baron                  0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 1.1 0.0 0.4
Lord                   4.5 8.0 12.1 8.3 1.5 6.5 10.0 6.2
Countess               0.7 1.5 1.5 2.1 0.7 2.2 0.0 1.3
Duchess                0.2 1.1 0.7 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5
Marchioness            0.1 0.6 0.4 0.0 0.7 1.1 0.0 0.3
Lady                   0.7 0.6 0.7 0.5 3.6 0.0 0.0 1.1
Total Noble Rank      16.9 25.3 38.1 32.3 23.4 18.3 23.3 23.1

Baronet                0.4 0.6 0.4 1.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.6
Knight                15.3 10.6 12.1 13.0 13.1 23.7 13.3 15.2
Esquire               44.5 33.3 49.5 44.8 54.7 51.6 56.7 42.5
Gentleman              5.9 3.3 3.7 3.1 3.6 5.4 1.7 4.8
Dame                   1.2 2.2 0.7 0.5 0.7 7.5 1.7 1.9
Total Gentry Rank     66.0 47.8 65.2 61.5 72.3 81.7 73.3 62.9

Merchant               0.7     1.1     0.0        0.0              0.0        0.0         0.0      0.7
Doctor                 0.6     1.5     0.7        0.0              0.7        3.2         0.0      0.9
Clerk                  1.6     1.5     4.8        3.6              0.7        3.2         1.7      1.9
Total Professions      2.9     4.1     5.4        3.6              1.5        6.5         1.7      3.5

Bishop                 0.4     1.5 2.6            0.0              1.5        0.0         1.7      0.9
Reverend               0.9     1.1 3.7            1.0              0.0        5.4         1.7      1.2
Rector                 0.2     2.6 4.4            1.6              0.0        0.0         0.0      1.0
Total Clergy           1.5     5.2 10.7           2.6              1.5        5.4         3.3      3.1

Individuals Without 17.7 22.7          7.3        8.9              6.6        9.7         5.0 15.8
Profession or Rank




                                                              57
Table 12: Percentage Distribution of Social Ranks and
Professions by Time Period

                         1660    1688    1720    1760
                      to 1688 to 1719 to 1759 to 1830


Duke                      1.1       2.6      4.9         4.2
Marquess                  0.6       0.6      1.1         1.6
Earl                     10.2       6.8      9.0         8.2
Viscount                  2.8       1.8      2.8         1.7
Baron                     0.6       0.5      0.1         0.3
Lord                      9.0       4.0      6.3         6.6
Countess                  0.6       0.8      1.2         1.5
Duchess                   0.6       0.4      0.8         0.5
Marchioness               0.0       0.1      0.3         0.4
Lady                      1.7       1.6      1.5         0.5
Total Noble Rank         24.9      17.7     25.4        23.5

Baronet                   0.6       1.1      0.7         0.3
Knight                   32.2      15.5     15.8        12.2
Esquire                  26.0      41.0     46.0        44.4
Gentleman                 2.8       9.1      4.1         3.3
Dame                      3.4       1.9      2.1         1.4
Total Gentry Rank        61.0      65.8     66.4        60.5

Merchant                  0.0       1.4       0.8        0.5
Doctor                    1.1       0.5       0.7        1.1
Clerk                     0.0       1.3       2.4        2.2
Total Professions         1.1       3.2       3.9        3.9

Bishop                    0.6       1.0       0.8        0.8
Reverend                  0.0       0.0       0.0        2.4
Rector                    0.6       0.5       0.8        1.4
Total Clergy              1.2       1.5       1.6        4.6

Individuals Without      15.3      17.9     11.1        17.2
Profession or Rank




                                              58
References

Baker, J.H. (1971). An Introduction to English Legal History. London: Butterworth.

Beckett, J.V. (1984). The Pattern of Landownership in England and Wales, 1660-1880.
       Economic History Review. New Series, 37, pp. 1-22.

Bogart, Dan and Gary Richardson. (2008a). Adaptable Property Rights: Britain's Property
       System Before the Industrial Revolution. Working Paper.

Bogart, Dan and Gary Richardson. (2008b). Making Property Productive: Reorganizing rights to
       real and equitable estates in Britain, 1660-1830, NBER Working Paper.

Cannadine, David. (1994). Aspects of Aristocracy. New Haven: Yale.

Clark, Greg “Common Sense: Common Property Rights, Efficiency, and Institutional Change.”
       Journal of Economic History, 58 (March 1998a), pp. 73-102.

----- “The Charity Commissioners as a Source in English Economic History” Research in
        Economic History, 18 (1998b), 1-52.

Coase, Ronald. (1960). The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics, 3, pp. 1-44.

Coase, Ronald. (1974). The Lighthouse in Economics. Journal of Law and Economics, 17, pp.
       357-76.

Cooper, J.P. (1967). The Social Distribution of Land and Men in England, 1463-1700. Economic
      History Review 20, 419-40.

De Soto, Hernandez. (2000). The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and
       Fails Everywhere Else. New York: Basic Books.

English B, and Saville, J. (1983). Strict Settlement: a Guide for Historians. Hull: University of
       Hull Press.

Firth, C.H. and R.S. Rait. (1911). Acts and Ordinances of the Interregnum.

Great Britain. (1810). Statutes of the Realm, 1101 to 1713. London: G. Eyre and A. Strahan.

-----   (1800). Statutes at Large, 1223 to 1806. London: Mark Baskett, Robert Baskett, Henry
        Woodfall, and William Strahan.

Green, David and Alastair Owens. (2003). Gentlewomanly Capitalism? Spinsters, Widows, and
       Wealth Holding in England and Wales, c.1800-1860. Economic History Review 56, 510-
       536.




                                                59
Habakkuk, John. (1980). The Rise and Fall of English Landed Families, 1600-1800.
      Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 30, pp. 199-221.

-----   (1994). Marriage, Debt, and the Estates System: English Landownership, 1650-1950.
        Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Hoppit, Julian (1996). Patterns of Parliamentary Legislation, 1660-1800. Historical Journal. 39,
       pp. 109-131.

-----   Failed Legislation, 1660—1800. London: Hambledon Press, 1997.

-----   A Land of Liberty? England 1689-1727, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

-----   (eds.) Parliaments, Nations and Identities in Britain and Ireland, 1660-1850.
        Manchester:: Manchester University Press, 2003.

Hoppit, Julian and Joanna Innes (1997). ‘Introduction,’ in Hoppit, Julian. Failed Legislation,
       1660—1800. London: Hambledon Press.

Innes, Joanna. “The Local Acts of a National Parliament: Parliament’s Role in Sanctioning Local
        Action in Eighteenth-Century Britain.” pp. 23-47 in Parliament and Locality,1660-1939,
        edited by David Dean and Clyve Jones. Edinburgh University Press, 1998.

Langford, Paul. Public Life and the Propertied Englishman. Oxford, 1991.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shliefer, and Robert W. Vishny. (1997).
       Legal determinants of External Finance. Journal of Finance. 52, pp. 1131-50.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shliefer, and Robert W. Vishny. (1998).
       The Quality of Government. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization. 15, pp. 229-
       279.

Mingay G. E. (1963). English Landed Society in the Eighteenth Century. London: Routledge and
      Kegan Paul.

Neal, Larry. The Rise of Financial Capitalism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990

North, Douglas and Barry Weingast. (1989). Constitutions and Commitment: The evolution of
       Institutions governing public choice in seventeenth century England. Journal of
       Economic History 49, pp. 803-832.

O’Brien, Patrick (1994). “Central Government and the Economy, 1688-1815.” In Floud and McCloskey,
          The Cambridge Economic History of Britain since 1700, I, 2nd Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.

Pollock, Frederick. (1896). The Land Laws. London.



                                                 60
Posner, Richard A. (2003). Economic Analysis of Law. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.

Sheppard, F., V. Belcher, and P. Cottrell. (1979). The Middlesex and Yorkshire Deed Registries
and the study of Building Fluctuations. London Journal. 5, pp. 176-217.

Spring, Eileen. (1964). The Settlement of Land in Nineteenth-Century England. American
       Journal of Legal History. 8, pp. 209-223.

Spring, Eileen. (1983). The Family, Strict Settlement, and Historians. Canadian Journal of
       History. 18, pp. 379-398.

Spring, Eileen. (1993). Law, Land, and Family: Aristocratic Inheritance in England, 1300-1800.
       Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press.

Tate, William Edward. A Domesday of English Enclosure Acts and Awards. Reading: University
       of Reading, 1978.

-----   The Enclosure Movement. New York: Walker, 1967.

Thompson, F. M. L, eds. (1994). Landowners, Capitalists, and Entrepreneurs: Essays for Sir
     John Habakkuk. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Thompson, F. M. L. (1963). English Landed Society in the Nineteenth Century. London.

Williamson, Oliver. (1985). The Economics Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, and
       Relational Contracting. New York: Macmillan Free Press.

Wordie, J. R. “The Chronology of English Enclosure, 1500-1914.” The Economic History
      Review, New Series, Vol. 36, No. 4, (Nov. 1983) pp. 483-505.

Wrigley, E. A. (2007). English county Populations in the later eighteenth century. Economic
      History Review. 60, pp. 35-69.




                                               61
