                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       STABILIZING EXPECTATIONS UNDER MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICY
                             COORDINATION

                                           Stefano Eusepi
                                           Bruce Preston

                                        Working Paper 14391
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14391


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




The authors thank seminar participants at the Bank of Japan, IGIER Universita Bocconi, the CAMA
and Lowey Institute conference on "Fiscal Policy Frameworks", Columbia University, CREI-Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, the European Central Bank conference on "Learning, Asset Prices and Monetary Policy",
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis "Learning Week", Indiana
University, NCER Working Group in Macroeconometics, Riksbank conference on "Refining Monetary
Policy: Transparency and Real Stability" and Yale University. Jordi Gali, Mike Woodford and particularly
Eric Leeper and our discussants Timothy Kam, Donald Kohn and Frank Smets are thanked for useful
conversations and detailed comments. The usual caveat applies. The views expressed in the paper
are those of the authors and are not necessarily reflective of views at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the Natonal Bureau of Economic Research. Preston thanks
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for its hospitality and resources while completing some of
this work.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Stabilizing Expectations under Monetary and Fiscal Policy Coordination
Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston
NBER Working Paper No. 14391
October 2008
JEL No. E52,E62

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the constraints imposed on monetary and fiscal policy design by expectations
formation. Households and firms learn about the policy regime using historical data. Regime uncertainty
substantially narrows, relative to a rational expectations analysis of the model, the menu of policies
consistent with expectations stabilization. There is greater need for policy coordination: the specific
choice of monetary policy limits the set of fiscal policies consistent with macroeconomic stability
--- and simple Taylor-type rules frequently lead to expectations-driven instability. In contrast, non-Ricardian
fiscal policies combined with an interest rate peg promote stability. Resolving uncertainty about the
prevailing monetary policy regime improves stabilization policy, enlarging the menu of policy options
consistent with stability. However, there are limits to the benefits of communicating the monetary
policy regime: the more heavily indebted the economy, the greater is the likelihood of expectations-driven
instability. More generally, regardless of agents' knowledge of the policy regime, even when expectations
are anchored in the long term, short-term dynamics display greater volatility than under rational expectations.


Stefano Eusepi
Macroeconomic and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Libery street
New York, NY 10045-0001
stefano.eusepi@ny.frb.org

Bruce Preston
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bp2121@columbia.edu
1         Introduction
Following Taylor (1993) a large literature has developed arguing that a simple linear relation-
ship between nominal interest rates, in‡ation and some measure of real activity, can account
for the behavior of the Federal Reserve and central banks in a number of developed countries.
Subsequent theoretical and applied work on monetary policy has introduced such rules as
behavioral equations for policymakers in general equilibrium models. Simple rules have the
desirable property of stabilizing expectations when policy is su¢ ciently active in response to
developments in the macroeconomy. This property is often referred to as the Taylor principle.
It assumes that …scal policy is Ricardian or ‘passive’, implying that in‡ation and real activity
are independent of …scal variables, and that agents have complete knowledge of the economic
environment; in particular, the monetary and …scal regime.1
        The appropriateness of this view rests on policy being of a particular kind and on the
absence of regime change. Yet there are clearly historical episodes indicating on-going shifts
in the con…guration of monetary and …scal policy in the U.S. post-war era. They suggest
that policy might better be described by evolving combinations of active and passive policy
rules, for which monetary policy may or may not satisfy the Taylor principle, and …scal policy
may or may not be Ricardian.2 It is then reasonable to assume that in the initial phase of
a policy regime market participants lack full information about policy or its e¤ects on the
macroeconomy. This paper evaluates the consequences of imperfect information about the
prevailing policy regime, speci…ed by simple rules, for the e¢ cacy of stabilization policy.
        We consider a model of near-rational expectations where market participants and policy-
makers have incomplete knowledge about the structure of the economy. Private agents are
optimizing, have a completely speci…ed belief system, but do not know the equilibrium map-
ping between observed variables and market clearing prices. By extrapolating from historical
patterns in observed data they approximate this mapping to forecast exogenous variables
relevant to their decision problems, such as prices and policy variables. Unless the monetary
    1
     The term ‘passive’ follows the language of Leeper (1991). The descriptor ‘Ricardian’ follows Woodford
(1996): for all sequences of prices, the …scal accounts of the government are intertemporally solvent.
   2
     The bond price support regime in the U.S. in the late 1940s discussed by Woodford (2001), and recent
empirical evidence of shifting policy rules by Davig and Leeper (2006), are two examples.


                                                    1
and …scal authority credibly announces the policy regime in place, agents are assumed to lack
knowledge of the policy rules. Because agents must learn from historical data, beliefs need
not be consistent with the objective probabilities implied by the economic model. Hence,
expectations need not be consistent with implemented policy — in contrast to a rational
expectations analysis of the model.3
       A policy regime is characterized by a monetary policy rule that speci…es nominal interest
rates as a function of expected in‡ation and a tax rule that describes how the structural
surplus is adjusted in response to outstanding public debt. The central bank has imperfect
knowledge about the current state: it has to forecast the current in‡ation rate to implement
policy. The central bank therefore reacts with a delay to changing economic conditions:
argued to be characteristic of actual policy-making — see McCallum (1999). Stabilization
policy is harder because it is more di¢ cult to predict business cycle ‡uctuations.
       Policy regime changes are not explicitly modelled. Instead, a stationary model environ-
ment is studied: policy rules are constant for all time. In contrast with rational expectations,
we assume that initial expectations are not consistent with the policy regime in place. The
environment constitutes a best-case scenario. If agents are unable to learn the policy reaction
functions describing monetary and …scal policy in a stationary environment, then learning
such objects when there are changes in policy regime can only occur under more stringent
conditions.
       The analysis commences by identifying a class of policies that ensures determinacy of
rational expectations equilibrium in our model. Within this class, policy rules are considered
desirable if they have the additional property of stabilizing expectations under imperfect
information, in the sense that expectations converge to the rational expectations equilibrium
associated with a given policy regime. This is adjudged by the property of expectational
stability developed by Marcet and Sargent (1989) and Evans and Honkapohja (2001). Hence,
good policy should be robust to both central bank and private agents’imperfect knowledge.
   3
     A further implication of imperfect knowledge is agents respond with a delay to changes in policy. Indeed,
given a change in policy regime, agents have few initial data points to infer the nature of the new regime and
its implications for equilibrium outcomes. This accords with Friedman (1968), which emphasizes the existence
of lags in monetary policy.




                                                      2
This robustness property is assessed in two scenarios: one where agents have no knowledge
of the monetary policy regime and one in which it is known. The latter implies all details
of the central bank’s monetary policy rule are correctly understood so that agents make
policy consistent forecasts. Within each scenario two regimes are considered: one with active
monetary and passive …scal policy and one with passive monetary and active …scal policy.
      The central …nding of the paper is that simple rules of the kind proposed by the recent
literature on monetary policy design generally fail to stabilize expectations if imperfect infor-
mation about the policy regime is explicitly modeled. Four speci…c results are of note. First,
under regime uncertainty, stabilization policy is demonstrated to be more di¢ cult than in
a rational expectations analysis of the model: the menu of policies consistent with expecta-
tions stabilization is narrowed considerably. For a large class of active monetary policies that
satisfy the Taylor principle, there is no choice of …scal policy consistent with expectations
stabilization. Instability arises due to a failure of traditional aggregate demand management.
As real interest rates are not accurately projected, anticipated future changes in monetary
policy are less e¤ective in managing current aggregate demand.
      Second, for passive monetary policies that do not satisfy the Taylor principle, there is
always a choice of …scal policy consistent with macroeconomic stability — though admissible
choices depend on the precise choice of monetary policy, underscoring the need for coordi-
nation in policy design. Stability arises when uncertainty about real interest rates is small
(monetary policy is su¢ ciently passive) and countervailing stabilizing wealth e¤ects are strong
enough (…scal policy is su¢ ciently active). These wealth e¤ects arise under this con…guration
of policy because beliefs tie the evolution of in‡ation and real activity to outstanding pub-
lic debt.4 Shifts in the valuation of the latter are conducive to stability: incipient in‡ation
pressure from excess demand reduces the value of public debt, which restrains demand and,
therefore, in‡ation.
      A corollary to these two results is period-by-period stabilization policy can be harmful.
Interest rate rules that respond to estimates of current in‡ation and tax rules that respond to
outstanding debt can lead to instability. Indeed, the stronger the dependence of policy vari-
  4
      This is the …scal theory of the price level. In‡ation and output are no longer independent of …scal variables.



                                                          3
ables on endogenous macroeconomic developments, the greater the likelihood of expectations-
driven instability. This gives support to concerns about the ability of policy-makers to …ne
tune the macroeconomy expounded in Friedman (1968). However, a policy regime which
guarantees stability of expectations comprises rules for the interest rate and structural sur-
plus that are purely exogenous. A special class of such policies is the bond price support
regime discussed by Woodford (2001).
   Third, resolving uncertainty about the monetary policy regime improves the stabilization
properties of simple rules. Independently of the policy regime in place, the improvement in
macroeconomic stability stems from e¤ective demand management, as the evolution of nom-
inal interest rates becomes more predictable. However, if monetary policy is understood but
market participants face uncertainty about the …scal regime, the set of desirable stabilization
policies depends on the economy’s debt-to-output ratio. The more heavily indebted an econ-
omy, the smaller the menu of policies consistent with stability. That a steady state property
of …scal policy mitigates the e¢ cacy of stabilization policy stems from a second kind of wealth
e¤ect in our model. Because households incorrectly forecast future tax changes, variations
in current taxes lead to wealth e¤ects on consumption demand: there are departures from
Ricardian equivalence — compare Barro (1974). These wealth e¤ects have magnitude pro-
portional to the average debt-to-output ratio of the economy; are destabilizing; and engender
much more persistent dynamics in response to disturbances. These …ndings resonate with
practical policy-making, which frequently cites concern about the size of the public debt for
stabilization policy.
   Fourth, simple policy rules can be a source of macroeconomic instability even when ex-
pectations are anchored in the long term. In a calibrated example, we analyze the dynamic
response of the economy to a small shock to in‡ation expectations (equivalent to a change in
the perceived in‡ation target) under alternative assumptions about knowledge of the mon-
etary policy regime and alternative levels of steady state government debt. Under regime
uncertainty, a shock to in‡ation expectations leads to persistent undesired ‡uctuations in
in‡ation and output before convergence to their equilibrium values. This suggests study of
more sophisticated policy rules, such as targeting rules proposed by Giannoni and Woodford


                                               4
(2002), Svensson (1999) and Svensson and Woodford (2005), is warranted.
   Related Literature: The analysis owes much to Leeper (1991) and the subsequent
literature on the …scal theory of the price level — see, in particular, Sims (1994), Woodford
(1996) and Cochrane (1998). It also contributes to a growing literature on policy design under
learning dynamics — see, inter alia, Howitt (1992), Bullard and Mitra (2002, 2006), Eusepi
(2007), Evans and Honkapohja (2003, 2005, 2006), Preston (2005, 2006, 2008) — but is most
directly related to Evans and Honkapohja (2007) and Eusepi and Preston (2007a). The former
paper considers the interaction of monetary and …scal policy in the context of Leeper’s model
under learning dynamics rather than rational expectations. The analysis here advances their
…ndings by considering a model in which agents are optimizing conditional on their beliefs.
   The latter paper analyzes the role of communication in stabilizing expectations. The
presence or absence of knowledge about the policy regime is adapted from the notions of
full communication and no communication developed in that paper. The results here di¤er
in non-trivial ways as a broader class of …scal policy is considered. Rather than assuming
a zero-debt Ricardian …scal policy, which is understood by households, the analysis here
considers a class of locally Ricardian and non-Ricardian …scal policies determined by the
dual speci…cation of a tax rule, which is unknown to agents, and choice of debt-to-output
ratio. This engenders signi…cantly richer model predictions regarding policy interactions and
expectations stabilization, because agents must forecast future taxes to make current spending
decisions and because holdings of the public debt are treated as net wealth.
   Our analysis also connects to various papers questioning the desirability of the Taylor
principle as a foundation of monetary policy design. In particular, Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohe,
and Uribe (2001) show that incorporating money in household and …rm decisions leads to
indeterminacy in the Ricardian regime even if the Taylor principle is satis…ed. Building on
Edge and Rudd (2002), Leith and von Thadden (2006) show in a Leeper (1991) style model
with capital that conditions for determinacy of rational expectations equilibrium depend on
the debt-to-output ratio as in results presented here. Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2004)
and Bilbiie (2008) develop models of limited asset market participation, and adduce evidence
that the Taylor principle may be neither su¢ cient nor necessary for determinacy of rational


                                              5
expectations equilibrium. Our paper builds on this literature by showing that uncertainty
about the mapping from primitive disturbances to equilibrium prices can similarly compromise
the e¤ectiveness of standard policy advice — despite being a minimal departure from the
standard New Keynesian framework. Finally, Branch, Davig, and McGough (2008) analyze
stability under learning in a model with recurrent regimes, modelled as Markov processes.
Here the issue of imperfect knowledge about policy regimes is addressed in a microfounded
model where regimes are non-recurrent.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out model microfoundations under an arbi-
trary assumption on expectations formation. Section 3 speci…es the adopted belief structure.
Section 4 revisits the analysis of Leeper (1991). Section 5 gives the core results under regime
uncertainty. Section 6 discusses improving stabilization policy by resolving uncertainty about
monetary policy. Section 7 concludes.


2     A Simple Model
The following section details a model similar in spirit to Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999)
and Woodford (2003). A continuum of households faces a canonical consumption allocation
problem and decides how much to consume of available di¤erentiated goods and how much
labor to supply to …rms for the production of such goods. A continuum of monopolistically
competitive …rms produces di¤erentiated goods using labor as the only input and faces a
price-setting problem of the kind proposed by Calvo (1983) and implemented by Yun (1996).
The major di¤erence is the incorporation of near-rational beliefs delivering an anticipated
utility model as described by Kreps (1998) and Sargent (1999). The analysis follows Marcet
and Sargent (1989a) and Preston (2005), solving for optimal decisions conditional on current
beliefs.




                                              6
2.1       Microfoundations

Households: The economy is populated by a continuum of households which seeks to max-
imize future expected discounted utility
                                              X
                                              1
                                       E^ti          T t
                                                           ln CTi + g     hiT                             (1)
                                              T =t

where utility depends on a consumption index, CTi , the amount of labor supplied for the
production of each good j, hiT , and the quantity of government expenditures g > 0.5 The
consumption index, Cti , is the Dixit-Stiglitz constant-elasticity-of-substitution aggregator of
the economy’s available goods and has associated price index written, respectively, as
                       2 1          3 1                2 1           311
                         Z                               Z
                                 1
                 Cti 4 cit (j) dj 5        and Pt 4 pt (j)1 dj 5                                          (2)
                                0                                         0

where      > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between any two goods and cit (j) and pt (j) denote
household i’s consumption and the price of good j. The discount factor is assumed to satisfy
0<       < 1.
      E^ti denotes the beliefs at time t held by each household i; which satisfy standard probability
laws. Section 3 describes the precise form of these beliefs and the information set available to
agents in forming expectations. Households and …rms observe only their own objectives, con-
straints and realizations of aggregate variables that are exogenous to their decision problems
and beyond their control. They have no knowledge of the beliefs, constraints and objectives
of other agents in the economy: in consequence agents are heterogeneous in their information
sets in the sense that even though their decision problems are identical, they do not know
this to be true.
      Asset markets are assumed to be incomplete. The only asset in non-zero net supply is
government debt to be discussed below. The household’s ‡ow budget constraint is

                                i
                               Bt+1      Rt Bti + Wt hit + Pt         t   Tt    Pt Cti                    (3)

where Bti is household {’s holdings of the public debt, Rt the gross nominal interest rate, Wt
the nominal wage and Tt lump-sum taxes.                    t   denotes pro…ts from holding shares in an equal
  5
      The adopted functional form facilitates analytical results.

                                                               7
part of each …rm and Pt is the aggregate price level de…ned below. Period nominal income is
therefore determined as
                                                                             Z1
                                                    Pt Yti = Wt hit +               t    (j) dj
                                                                              0
for each household i. Finally, there is a No-Ponzi constraint

                                                              lim E^ti Rt;T BTi           0
                                                             T !1

                 Y1
                 T
where Rt;T =               Rs 1 for T          1 and Rt;t = 1.6
                     s=t
       A log-linear approximation to the …rst-order conditions of the household problem provides
the Euler equation
                                                   C^ti = E^ti C^t+1
                                                                 i
                                                                             ^{t    E^ti ^ t+1

and intertemporal budget constraint
                           X
                           1
                                            b ^i ^ X
                                                      1
                                                                                                         b
                sC E^ti           T t   ^ i
                                        CT = bt + Et                        T t
                                                                                   Y^Ti           ^T +     ( ^{T     ^T )      (4)
                           T =t
                                            Y        T =t
                                                                                              Y          Y

where

               Y^t           ln(Yt =Y ); C^ti            ln(Cti =C); ^{t           ln(Rt =R); ^ t = ln (Pt =Pt 1 ) ;

               ^t            ln( t = );        t   = Tt =Pt ; ^bit = ln B
                                                                        ~ti =B                    ~ti = Bti =Pt
                                                                                              and B                 1


and z denotes the steady state value of any variable zt .
       Solving the Euler equation recursively backwards, taking expectations at time t and sub-
stituting into the intertemporal budget constraint gives

               C^ti = sC 1              ^bi    ^t +
                                          t

                                        X
                                        1                h                                                                 i
                              sC E^ti
                                  1                T t
                                                             (1     ) Y^T          s^T        (1         ) (^{T    ^ T +1 )
                                        T =t

where
                                         s^t = ^t =s; sC = C=Y and                            = s=Y
   6
    In general, No Ponzi does not ensure satisfaction of the intertemporal budget constraint under incomplete
markets. However, given the assumption of identical preferences and beliefs and aggregate shocks, a symmetric
equilibrium will have the property that all households have non-negative wealth. A natural debt limit of the
kind introduced by Aiyagari (1994) would never bind.

                                                                        8
are the structural surplus (de…ned below), the steady state consumption-to-income ratio and
the steady state structural surplus-to-income ratio.7 Optimal consumption decisions depend
on current wealth and on the expected future path of after-tax income and the real interest
rate.8 The optimal allocation rule is analogous to permanent income theory, with di¤erences
emerging from allowing variations in the real rate of interest, which can occur due to varia-
tions in either the nominal interest rate or in‡ation. Note also, that as households become
more patient, current consumption demand is more sensitive to expectations about future
macroeconomic conditions.
       The steady state structural surplus-to-income ratio, , a¤ects consumption decisions in
three ways: i) it determines after-tax income; ii) it reduces the elasticity of consumption
spending with respect to real interest rates; and iii) it indexes wealth e¤ects on consumption
spending that result from variations in the real value of government debt holdings. To interpret
these e¤ects further it is useful to consider aggregate consumption demand. Aggregating over
the continuum and rearranging provides
                                                                                                                        !
                                                              X
                                                              1
               C^t = sC   1        ^bt    ^t            E^t              T t
                                                                               [(1      ) s^T         (^{T      ^ T +1 )]
                                                              T =t
                                   X
                                   1            h                                                i
                       +sC 1 E^t          T t
                                                    (1          ) Y^T            (^{T    ^ T +1 )                           (5)
                                   T =t

where
                         Z1                     Z1                                      Z1
                              C^ti di = C^t ;            ^bi di = ^bt ;         and             E^ti di = E^t
                                                           t
                          0                         0                                     0

give aggregate consumption demand; total outstanding public debt; and average expectations.
The second line gives the usual terms that arise from permanent income theory. The term
premultiplied by sC 1 in the …rst line is the intertemporal budget constraint of the government.
In a rational expectations analysis of the model, this is an equilibrium restriction known to be
   7
    Calculations are in a technical appendix available at: www.columbia.edu/~bp2121/…scalapp.pdf.
   8
    Using the fact that total household income is the sum of dividend and wage income, combined with the
…rst-order conditions for labor supply and consumption, delivers a decision rule for consumption that depends
only on forecasts of prices: that is, goods prices, nominal interest rates, wages and dividends. However, we
make the simplifying assumption that households forecast total income, the sum of dividend payments and
wages received.



                                                                     9
equal to zero. However, agents might face uncertainty about the current …scal regime in place.9
And under arbitrary subjective expectations, households may incorrectly forecast future tax
obligations and real interest rates, leading to holdings of the public debt being perceived as
net wealth: Ricardian equivalence need not hold out of rational expectations equilibrium.
The failure of Ricardian equivalence leads to wealth e¤ects on consumption demand, and the
magnitude of these e¤ects is indexed by the structural surplus-to-output ratio, or equivalently
the debt-to-output ratio as these steady state quantities are proportional. On average, the
more indebted an economy the larger are the e¤ects on demand. This is shown to be important
in the design of stabilization policy.
       Finally, note that if either the debt-to-output ratio is zero or the intertemporal budget
constraint is for some reason known to hold by households, then consumption demand is
determined by the second term only, delivering the model analyzed by Preston (2005, 2006).10
Those papers consider the case of a zero-debt …scal policy, understood to hold in all future
periods so that households need not forecast taxes. This paper extends that analysis to a
considerably broader class of …scal policies that agents must learn about — with non-trivial
consequence.
       Firms. There is a continuum of monopolistically competitive …rms. Each di¤erentiated
consumption good is produced according to the linear production function yt (j) = At ht (j)
where At > 0 denotes an aggregate technology shock. Each …rm faces a demand curve Yt (j) =
                t
(Pt (j) =Pt )       Yt , where Yt denotes aggregate output, and solves a Calvo-style price-setting
problem where prices can be optimally chosen in any period with probability 0 < 1                         < 1.
A price p is chosen to maximize the expected discounted value of pro…ts
                                                  X
                                                  1
                                           E^tj          T t
                                                               Qt;T   j
                                                                      T   (p)
                                                  T =t

where
                                   j
                                   T   (p) = p1 PT YT            p PT YT WT =AT
   9
     The tax rule is such that each household faces the same tax pro…le. However, agents are not aware of
that: in forecasting future tax obligations they consider the possibility that their individual tax pro…le might
have changed.
  10
     In general, assuming knowledge of the intertemporal budget constraint is questionable as it is just one of
the many equilibrium restrictions that households are attempting to learn.


                                                          10
denotes period T pro…ts. Given the incomplete markets assumption it is assumed that …rms
value future pro…ts according to the marginal rate of substitution evaluated at aggregate
                     T t
income Qt;T =              Pt YT =(PT Yt ) for T              t.11
       Denote the optimal price pt . Since all …rms changing prices in period t face identical
decision problems, the aggregate price index evolves according to
                                                                                               1
                                       Pt =             Pt1   1   + (1         ) pt 1      1
                                                                                                   :

Log-linearizing the …rst-order condition for the optimal price gives
                                             X
                                             1
                                p^t = E^ti          (     )T      t
                                                                      [(1           ) ^T +             T +1 ]
                                             T =t

where p^t = log (pt =Pt ) and ^ t            ln ( t = ) is average marginal costs de…ned below. Each …rm’s
current price depends on the expected future path of real marginal costs and in‡ation. The
higher the degree of nominal rigidity, the greater the weight on future in‡ation in determining
current prices. The average real marginal cost function is                                t    = Wt = (Pt At ) = Yt =At , where the
second equality comes from the household’s labor supply decision. Log-linearizing provides
^ t = Y^t     at , where at = ln (At ) so that current prices depend on expected future demand,
in‡ation and technology.

2.2       Monetary and Fiscal Authorities

Monetary Policy: The central bank is assumed to implement monetary policy according to
a one-parameter family of interest rate rules

                                                    Rt = R Etcb 1               t


where Etcb 1   t   is a measure of current in‡ation and                                 0. The central bank does not observe
in‡ation in real time and, like private agents, has an incomplete model of the economy. For
simplicity, it is assumed the central bank has the same forecasting model for in‡ation as private
agents. This is easily generalized. The nominal interest rate rule satis…es the approximation

                                                         ^{t =         Etcb 1 ^ t :                                            (6)
  11
    The precise details of this assumption are not important to the ensuing analysis so long as in the log
linear approximation future pro…ts are discounted at the rate T t .

                                                                      11
   This class of rule has had considerable popularity in the recent literature on monetary
policy. It ensures determinacy of rational expectations equilibrium if the Taylor principle is
satis…ed under certain assumptions about …scal policy and exhibits other robustness properties
noted by Batini and Haldane (1999) and Levin, Wieland, and Williams (2003). This has led
to advocacy of forecast-based instrument rules for the implementation of monetary policy.
Indeed, such policy rules appear in a number of central bank forecasting models. Furthermore,
Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1998, 2000) adduce empirical evidence for a related class of interest
rate reaction functions in which the central bank responds to forecasts of next-period in‡ation.
Similar results hold for such rules.
   The study of optimal policy is not pursued on two grounds. If appropriately chosen,
simple rules deliver much of the welfare gains inherent in more complex optimal policy rules
— see Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2005). Second, optimal policy in the context of learning
dynamics is not trivial. Assumptions have to be made about the precise information a central
bank has about the structure of the economy. While households and …rms need only know
their own objectives and constraints to make decisions, for a central bank to design optimal
policy requires accurate information on all agents in the economy, including beliefs. However,
Preston (2006) shows that appropriate choice of stochastic intercept in (6) can implement
optimal policy, implying all subsequent stability results would continue to apply.
   Fiscal Policy: The …scal authority …nances government purchases of g per period by
issuing public debt and levying lump-sum taxes. Denoting Bt as the outstanding government
debt at the beginning of any period t, and assuming for simplicity that the public debt is
comprised entirely of one-period riskless nominal Treasury bills, government liabilities evolve
according to
                                Bt+1 = (1 + it ) [Bt + gPt       Tt ] :

It is convenient to rewrite this constraint as

                                                            1
                                  bt+1 = (1 + it ) bt   t       st

where st = Tt =Pt g denotes the primary surplus and bt = Bt =Pt           1   a measure of the real value
of the public debt. Observe that bt is a predetermined variable since Wt is determined a period

                                                 12
in advance.12 The government’s ‡ow budget constraint satis…es the log-linear approximation

                                 ^bt+1 =        1       ^bt      ^t         (1   ) s^t + ^{t :               (7)

       The model is closed with an assumption on the path of primary surpluses fst g.13 Analogous
to the monetary authority, it is assumed that the …scal authority adjusts the primary surplus
according to the one-parameter family of rules

                                                                       bt
                                                        st = s
                                                                       b

where s; b > 0 are constants coinciding with the steady state level of the primary surplus
and the public debt respectively.                         0 is a policy parameter. The …scal authority faces
no uncertainty about outstanding liabilities as they are determined a period in advance. The
tax rule satis…es the log-linear approximation

                                                              s^t =     ^bt :                                (8)

Similar remarks on the matter of optimal policy apply here.

2.3       Market clearing and aggregate dynamics

General equilibrium requires goods market clearing,
                                        Z1
                                               Cti di + g = Ct + g = Yt :                                    (9)
                                           0

This relation satis…es the log-linear approximation
                                                Z1
                                           sC           C^ti di = sC C^t = Y^t :
                                                    0

It is useful to characterize the natural rate of output — the level of output that would prevail
absent nominal rigidities under rational expectations. Under these assumptions, optimal price
setting implies the log-linear approximation Y^tn = at . Movements in the natural rate of output
  12
    See Eusepi and Preston (2007b) for a more general analysis with multiple debt maturities.
  13
    This is without loss of generality. It would be straightforward to specify separate policies for the revenues
and expenditures of the government accounts without altering the substantive implications of the model.

                                                                  13
are determined by variations in aggregate technology shocks. Using this de…nition, aggregate
dynamics of the economy can be characterized in terms of deviations from the ‡exible price
equilibrium. Finally, asset market clearing requires
                                             Z1                           Z1
                                                  Bti di   = Bt and            ^bi di = ^bt ;
                                                                                 t
                                             0                             0

implying the sum of individual holdings of the public debt equals the supply of one-period
bonds.
    Aggregating household and …rm decisions provides

               x^t =          1     ^bt     ^t             1
                                                               s^t +
                             X
                             1
                       E^t            T t
                                            [(1          ) (^
                                                            xT +1        s^T +1 )    (1         ) (^{T   ^ T +1 ) + rTn ]          (10)
                             T =t

assuming for analytical convenience, without loss of generality, g = 0; so that sC = 1, and
                                   X
                                   1
                                ^
                    ^ t = x^t + Et   ( )T t [      x^T +1 + (1    ) ^ T +1 ]              (11)
                                                  T =t

        Z1
where        E^ti di = E^t gives average expectations; xt = Y^t                       Y^tn denotes the log-deviation of out-
         0
put from its natural rate; rtn = Y^t+1
                                    n
                                       Y^tn the corresponding natural rate of interest — assumed
                                                                                                                            1
to be an identically independently distributed process; and                                     = (1     ) (1         )         > 0.
    The average expectations operator does not satisfy the law of iterated expectations due to
the assumption of completely imperfect common knowledge on the part of all households and
…rms. Because agents do not know the beliefs, objectives and constraints of other households
and …rms in the economy, they cannot infer aggregate probability laws. This is the property
of the irreducibility of long-horizon forecasts noted by Preston (2005).
    To summarize, the model comprises the structural relations (6), (7), (8), (10) and (11).
The model is closed with the speci…cation of beliefs, described next.


3     Learning: Belief Formation and the Policy Regime
Beliefs. This section describes the central bank’s and market participants’learning behavior
and the criterion to assess convergence of beliefs. The optimal decisions of households and

                                                                    14
…rms require forecasting the evolution of future real interest rates, income, taxes and in‡ation.
The central bank has only to forecast the current in‡ation rate. For in‡ation and income (or
output gap), agents are assumed to use a linear econometric model, relating in‡ation and
income to the evolution of real government debt. That is

                                         x^t = ! x0 + ! x0 ^bt + ext                                     (12)

                                         ^ t = ! 0 + ! 0 ^bt + et                                        (13)

where ext and et are i.i.d. disturbances. The model contains the same variables that appear
in the minimum state variable rational expectations solutions to the model that result under
the various policy con…gurations described in the next section.14 And while the rational ex-
pectations solution does not contain a constant, it has a natural interpretation under learning
of capturing uncertainty about the steady state.
           Concerning the nominal interest rate, the …scal surplus and debt dynamics, agents’fore-
casts depend on their knowledge about the monetary and …scal regimes in place. Consider
…rst the monetary policy regime. As in Eusepi and Preston (2007a), uncertainty about the
monetary policy regime is captured by assuming that agents do not know the monetary policy
rule (6). In this case agents use the model

                                           ^{t = ! i0 + ! i0^bt + eit                                    (14)

which is consistent with the minimum state variable rational expectations solutions under the
various monetary and …scal regimes described in the next section. If agents know the current
monetary policy regime, then, given their beliefs about future in‡ation, they use the rule (6)
to compute policy consistent forecasts of the future path of the nominal interest rate.15
           Throughout the paper we assume that market participants face uncertainty about the
…scal regime. Agents need to forecast the future evolution of the …scal surplus and the future
evolution of debt (which is also needed to predict the evolution of output and in‡ation). Their
      14
     For example, in a rational expectations equilibrium under a Ricardian regime: ! x0 = 0, ! x1 = 0 and
ext= 0 rtn .
  15
     Eusepi and Preston (2007a) consider the intermediate case where agents know the policy rule but have to
estimate the rule’s coe¢ cients and show that this does not alter the stability properties of the equilibrium.



                                                      15
model is
                                                      s^t = ! s0 + ! s0^bt + est                                                      (15)

and
                                                    ^bt+1 = ! b + ! b ^bt + eb ;                                                      (16)
                                                              0     0        t

which, again, is consistent with the di¤erent monetary and …scal regimes described in the
next section.
       Beliefs updating and forecasting. Each period, as additional data become available,
agents update the coe¢ cients of their parametric model given by (12)-(16) using a recursive
least-squares estimator. Letting ! 0 = (! 0 ; ! 1 ) be the vector of coe¢ cients to estimate, zt =
 x^t ; ^ t ; ^{t ; s^t ; ^bt+1 and qt   1   = 1; ^bt , the algorithm can be written in recursive terms as
                                                                                                           0
                                        !
                                        ^t = !
                                             ^t      1    + gt 1 Rt 1 qt     1       zt    ^ 0t 1 qt
                                                                                           !           1                              (17)
                                                                 1
                                        Rt = Rt       1   + gt       qt 1 qt0    1        Rt   1                                      (18)

where gt is a decreasing sequence and where !
                                            ^ t denotes the current period’s coe¢ cient esti-
mate.16 Agents update their estimates at the end of the period, after making consumption,
labor supply and pricing decisions. This avoids simultaneous determination of the parameters
de…ning agents’ forecast functions and current prices and quantities. However, to compare
the model under learning with the predictions under rational expectations, we assume that
agents’expectations are determined simultaneously with consumption, labor supply and pric-
ing decisions, so that agents observe all variables that are determined at time t, including
^bt+1 . For example, the one-period-ahead forecast for ^ t is

                                                 E^t ^ t+1 = !
                                                             ^ 0;t     1    ^ 1t 1^bt+1
                                                                           +!

where !
      ^ 0;t     1   and !
                        ^ 1t   1   are the previous period’s estimates of belief parameters that de…ne the
period t forecast function. Hence, they observe the same variables that a ‘rational’agent would
observe. The only di¤erence is that they are attempting to learn the ‘correct’coe¢ cients that
characterize optimal forecasts. Finally, the central bank interest rate decision is predetermined
since it is based on t             1 information (including the estimates of belief parameters).
  16
                                                                                                   P1                  P1
   That is, for example, ! 0 = (! x0 ; ! 0 ; ! i0 ; ! s0 ; ! b0 ). It is assumed that                  t=1 gt   = 1,         2
                                                                                                                        t=1 gt   < 1 — see
Evans and Honkapohja (2001).

                                                                     16
      True Data Generating Process. Using (12)-(16) to substitute for expectations in (5)
and solving delivers the actual data generating process

                   zt =         1   (^
                                     ! t 1 ) qt     1   +     2    ! t 1 ) rtn
                                                                  (^                                                                       (19)
                                                                                                                                   0
                   !
                   ^t = !
                        ^t          1    + gRt 1 qt       1            1   (^
                                                                            !t 1)      ^ 0t
                                                                                       !      1    qt   1   +   2    ! t 1 ) rtn
                                                                                                                    (^                     (20)

                  Rt = Rt            1   + g qt 1 qt0         1        Rt   1                                                              (21)

where      1    ! ) and
               (^         2    ! ) are nonlinear functions of the previous period’s estimates of beliefs.
                              (^
The actual evolution of zt is determined by a time-varying coe¢ cient equation in the state
variables ^bt and rtn , where the coe¢ cients evolve according to (20) and (21). The evolution
of zt depends on !
                 ^ t 1 , while at the same time !
                                                ^ t depends on zt . Learning induces self-
referential behavior. The dependence of !
                                        ^ t on zt is related to the fact that outside the rational
expectations equilibrium                 1   (^          ^ 0t
                                              ! t 1 ) 6= !         1   and similarly for                2.   This self-referential behavior
emerges because each market participant ignores the e¤ects of their learning process on prices
and income, and this is the source of possible divergent behavior in agents’expectations.
      Expectations Stability. The data generating process implicitly de…nes the mapping
between agents’beliefs, !, and the actual coe¢ cients describing observed dynamics,                                                    1   (!).
A rational expectations equilibrium is a …xed point of this mapping. For such rational ex-
pectations equilibria we are interested in asking under what conditions does an economy
with learning dynamics converge to each equilibrium. Using stochastic approximation meth-
ods, Marcet and Sargent (1989b) and Evans and Honkapohja (2001) show that conditions
for convergence are characterized by the local stability properties of the associated ordinary
di¤erential equation
                                                        d (! 0 ; ! 1 )
                                                                       =         1   (!)      !;                                           (22)
                                                            d
where          denotes notional time.17 The rational expectations equilibrium is said to be ex-
pectationally stable, or E-Stable, when agents use recursive least squares if and only if this
di¤erential equation is locally stable in the neighborhood of the rational expectations equi-
librium.18
 17
      If 1 (!) = !, it follows from results in section 3 that 2 (!) = 0 in the case of a Ricardian regime and
 2 (!)  = 2 in the case of a non-Ricardian regime.
  18
      Standard results for ordinary di¤erential equations imply that a …xed point is locally asymptotically

                                                                            17
4      Rational Expectations: Leeper Revisited
In the standard account of monetary policy design, nominal interest rates are determined
actively to stabilize in‡ation and output. Less emphasized, but no less important, is the
accompanying assumption that …scal policy is Ricardian — taxes are assumed to adjust in
such a way as to ensure intertemporal solvency of the government budget. Under these
assumptions, a central recommendation is that monetary policy should satisfy the Taylor
principle: nominal interest rates should be adjusted more than one for one with variations in
in‡ation. As shown by Leeper (1991), however, other con…gurations of policy are consistent
with determinacy of rational expectations equilibrium. They involve a more active role for a
…scal policy which is non-Ricardian in nature and has monetary consequences. Here we revisit
the …scal theory of the price level and the determinacy properties of our model under rational
expectations. Ricardian and non-Ricardian …scal policies are formally de…ned. The following
characterizes the set of unique equilibria under the rational expectations assumption. The
analysis is analogous to Leeper (1991), though in the context of the model of section 2. All
proofs are collected in the appendix.
Proposition 1 There exist unique bounded rational expectations equilibria of the indicated
form if and only if the following conditions are satis…ed: either
    1. Monetary policy is active and …scal policy is locally Ricardian such that
                                                         1+
                                             1<     <              and          >1
                                                         1
       with in‡ation dynamics determined as
                                                                 n
                                                   ^t =       0 rt ;   or

    2. Monetary policy is passive and …scal policy is locally non-Ricardian such that
                                                                                     1+
                                  0          < 1 and 0             < 1 or        >
                                                                                     1
       with in‡ation dynamics determined as
                                                  ^t =        ^ +         n
                                                          1 bt         2 rt :

       The coe¢ cients f 0 ;      1;   2g   are reported in the Appendix.
stable if all eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix D [ (! 0 ; ! 1 ) (! 0 ; ! 1 )] have negative real parts (where D
denotes the di¤erentiation operator and the Jacobian is understood to be evaluated at the relevant rational
expectations equilibrium).

                                                         18
       The descriptors locally Ricardian and non-Ricardian refer to the combined implications
of the government’s ‡ow budget constraint and tax policy. When 1 <                       < (1 + ) = (1        )
the eigenvalue of the di¤erence equation (7) is inside the unit circle, and, for all bounded
sequences f t ; it g; real debt converges to its steady state value. Because taxes are adjusted
to ensure intertemporal solvency of the government accounts for all possible paths of the price
level, this con…guration of …scal policy is termed locally Ricardian, where locally refers to the
use of a log-linear approximation. In the language of Leeper this is passive …scal policy. In
contrast, if either 0           < 1 or       > (1 + ) = (1         ), then the eigenvalue is outside the
unit circle and real debt dynamics are inherently explosive. It is this property that requires
a speci…c path of the price level to ensure solvency of the intertemporal accounts. Hence,
locally non-Ricardian, or in the language of Leeper, active …scal policy.
       Whether …scal policy is locally Ricardian or non-Ricardian has implications for macroeco-
nomic dynamics. In the former case, in‡ation dynamics are independent of the public debt.
In the latter case, the path of real debt has consequences for the determination of in‡ation
dynamics. To assist interpretation of subsequent results, note that the equilibrium coe¢ cient

 1   is larger, the smaller are the policy coe¢ cients            and     . In the limit       ;    ! 0, the
elasticity of in‡ation in response to variations in debt is largest. In the non-Ricardian regimes
analyzed in the sequel, agents forecast in‡ation as a function of debt, and debt is shown to
generate stabilizing wealth e¤ects through expectations formation. These wealth e¤ects are
therefore largest when policy responds little to endogenous developments in the economy. The
conditions for determinacy of rational expectations equilibrium in each regime are referred to
as the Leeper conditions.19
  19
    Two other classes of equilibria are possible. One concerns the case of Ricardian …scal policy combined with
a passive monetary policy satisfying 0 <      < 1. In this case, there is indeterminacy of rational expectations
equilibrium for all parameter values. It is easily demonstrated that none of these equilibria is stable under
the alternative non-rational expectations assumption being considered. The second concerns the case of non-
Ricardian …scal policy and monetary policy satisfying the Taylor principle. Under rational expectations it can
be shown that there exist a class of unbounded equilibria that have explosive debt and in‡ation dynamics.




                                                      19
5        Monetary and Fiscal Regime Uncertainty
Having laid out preparatory foundations, the analysis turns to the consequences of regime
uncertainty for stabilization policy. One …nal assumption is required to facilitate analytical
results: the economy is assumed to have only a small degree of nominal rigidity. Formally,
the conditions for expectational stability are studied in the neighborhood of the limit,                ! 0.
This is not equivalent to analyzing a ‡exible price economy. For an arbitrary degree of nominal
friction, 0 <     < 1, analytical results are unavailable except in two special cases.20 Section 7
also provides some more general numerical examples.

5.1       Constraints on Stabilization Policy

Under regime uncertainty, the following results obtain.

Proposition 2 Stabilization policy ensures expectational stability if and only if


    1. Monetary policy is active and …scal policy is locally Ricardian such that
                                              1+                        1
                                  1<      <         and         >           ; or
                                              1                     1

    2. Monetary policy is passive and …scal policy is locally non-Ricardian such that 0                 < 1;
       and either

          (a)
                                                                                 2
                        0      < min (     ; 1) where       =                    1
                                                                                                 ; or
                                                                [(1          )       + (1   )]
          (b)
                                                            1+
                                                        >      :
                                                            1

       Regime uncertainty constrains the menu of policies consistent with expectations stabi-
lization relative to the class of policies given by the Leeper conditions. If …scal policy is
locally Ricardian then monetary policy must be highly aggressive to prevent self-ful…lling
expectations. For many monetary policies satisfying the Taylor principle there is no choice
  20
    For a numerical treatment with locally Ricardian …scal policy, see Eusepi and Preston (2007b), which
explores related issues and the consequences of the debt maturity structure for stabilization policy.


                                                   20
of …scal policy that can guarantee stability. The restriction on the choice of monetary policy
depends on the households’discount factor, , since this parameter regulates the impact of
revisions to expectations about future macroeconomic conditions on current spending and
pricing decisions. The more patient are households the larger will be the impact on current
macroeconomic conditions.
   If …scal policy is non-Ricardian there are greater incentives to coordinate monetary and
…scal policy relative to a rational expectations analysis of the model. Indeed, under ratio-
nal expectations, conditional on monetary policy being passive, any choice of locally non-
Ricardian …scal policy delivers a unique bounded rational expectations equilibrium. Under
regime uncertainty this is no longer true. The precise choice of monetary policy constrains the
set of …scal policies consistent with macroeconomic stability. However, for a given choice of
monetary policy there always exists a choice of …scal policy that prevents expectations-driven
instability. Part 2(b) of the proposition shows that a …scal policy, characterized by either an
exogenous surplus or an extremely aggressive …scal rule, is conducive to macroeconomic sta-
bility for all parameter con…gurations.21 Thus, perhaps surprisingly, non-Ricardian regimes
appear to be more robust to learning dynamics.
   Worth emphasizing is that the learning behavior of both private agents and the central
bank engenders the instability result. If the central bank could perfectly observe current
in‡ation, then the stability conditions under learning are the Leeper conditions: the same
restrictions implied by local determinacy.22 The analysis thus shows that the addition of
realistic assumptions about the information set of the central bank has important implications
for the performance of simple rules that would not emerge under rational expectations.
   Under uncertainty about both the …scal and monetary regime, stability is independent of
average indebtedness. Determinacy of rational expectations equilibrium is similarly indepen-
dent of this object. The sequel demonstrates that under non-rational expectations this is not
generally true. If uncertainty about the monetary policy regime is resolved, the e¢ cacy of
stabilization policy can hinge on the indebtedness of the economy and, therefore, uncertainty
  21
     In fact, it can be shown that with an interest peg and an exogenous surplus, E-stability holds for an
arbitrary degee of nominal rigidities. A proof is available in a technical appendix.
  22
     A proof is available in a technical appendix.



                                                   21
about the intertemporal solvency of the government accounts. This discussion is summarized
in the following corollary.

Corollary 3 Under regime uncertainty, macroeconomic stabilization policy is independent of
the average indebtedness of the economy.

   What are the sources of instability and stability under learning dynamics? The next
section considers a simple example to provide intuition for the robustness of the non-Ricardian
regime. The general case is then discussed.

5.2    Learning to Believe in the Fiscal Theory: An Example

To illustrate the stability properties of the non-Ricardian equilibrium under learning, consider
a deterministic economy with fully ‡exible prices; …scal policy characterized by zero steady
state debt,   = 0, and an exogenous constant surplus,                                = 0; and a central bank with perfect
information about in‡ation so that it =                     t.    Under these assumptions, aggregate supply
equals the natural rate of output, and the model is given by the aggregate demand and debt
equations
                                                                         X
                                                                         1
                                       ^ t = (1                  ) E^t               T t
                                                                                           ^ T +1                         (23)
                                                                         T =t
                                    ^bt+1 =       1   ^bt         ^t :                                                    (24)

Let beliefs be speci…ed by the regressions ^ t = ! ^bt + "                      ;t   and ^bt+1 = ! b^bt + "b;t : For simplicity
assume that the intercept is not estimated. The belief structure implies
                         X
                         1
                                                            !b
                   E^t          T t
                                      ^ T +1 = !                       ^bt+1                                              (25)
                         T =t
                                                      1           !b
                                                            !b           h                                  i
                                                                                1^               1
                                           = !                                   bt        (         )^ t
                                                      1           !b

where the second equality uses the de…nition of the ‡ow budget constraint. Inserting (25) in
(23) and rearranging provides
                                                                                            1
                                1 !b                                     1                                      1^
                ^t =                   + (1                  )(                       )         (1   )           bt
                           ! !b
                    = T (! ; ! b ) ^bt

                                                          22
which denotes the actual evolution of in‡ation as a function of real debt and agents’beliefs.
   In the special case      = 0; where monetary policy is a nominal interest rate peg, the
expression simpli…es to
                                               ^ t = ^bt                                    (26)

and observed dynamics are independent of agents’beliefs. Indeed, relation (26) corresponds to
the restriction between in‡ation and debt that obtains in a rational expectations equilibrium
under the maintained assumptions. Given T (! ; ! b ) = 1, the associated ordinary di¤erential
equations characterizing learning dynamics are

                                 !_ = 1    ! and !_ b =    !b;

implying stability for all parameter values.
   More generally, stability under learning depends on the relation between in‡ation and
government debt. Suppose agents’ in‡ation expectations increase for unmodelled reasons
— formally ! > 1. The increase in in‡ation expectations leads to an increase in current
in‡ation, with the increase being larger the smaller is     . Simultaneously, higher in‡ation
decreases the real value of next-period holdings of the public debt, which in turn lowers
expectations. In the limiting case,    ! 0, in‡ation remains unchanged — the two e¤ects on
in‡ation are equal and opposite. In the more general case, with 0 <      < 1, the initial rise in
in‡ation expectations is not validated by subsequent in‡ation data and the agents’estimate
of ! converges back to its rational expectations equilibrium value. As long as agents’beliefs
permit a possible relation between in‡ation and real debt, as assumed in this paper, their
learning process converges to rational expectations equilibrium.

5.3    Aggregate Demand Management and Instability

Now consider the general case. The mechanism generating instability is the same in both
Ricardian and non-Ricardian regimes and depends fundamentally on monetary policy. Con-
sider an increase in in‡ation expectations in the locally Ricardian regime. Aggregate demand
rises immediately, as does in‡ation. The initial monetary policy response is weak because the
nominal interest rate is set before observing current prices. As in‡ation increases, the central

                                                 23
bank revises its expectations of current in‡ation and starts increasing the nominal interest
rate more than proportionally, as dictated by the Taylor Principle. Because private agents
do not know the policy rule their expected path for the interest rate is ‡atter than under full
knowledge of the policy rule: as a consequence, the gradual increase in the nominal interest
rate has little initial e¤ect on in‡ation expectations. As in‡ation continues to rise, the central
bank adjusts policy until in‡ation expectations and actual in‡ation start declining. Eventu-
ally interest rates are too high and the economy contracts. A process of recessions followed by
expansions ensues, leading to instability. Uncertainty about both the policy rule and the de-
lay in the monetary policy response drive instability. Failure to manage expectations through
                                                                                    23
e¤ective restraint of aggregate demand generates destabilizing dynamics.
       A similar process occurs in the non-Ricardian regime if the policy rule prescribes a su¢ -
ciently aggressive response to in‡ation that it dominates the stabilizing wealth e¤ects of real
debt on in‡ation expectations, as described in the simple example. Proposition 2 also implies
that for      ! 1,     < 0:5 guarantees stability independently of          . For higher values of
stability depends on the …scal rule. Furthermore, a …scal rule with             >        can be shown to
weaken the rational expectations equilibrium relation between real debt and in‡ation, mak-
ing in‡ation expectations less responsive to the level of real debt. As a result, under learning
dynamics, the wealth e¤ects operating through the intertemporal budget constraint of the
government that are embedded in household and …rm beliefs, are weaker, and therefore less
of a stabilizing force. Section 7 further discusses this case.


6        Resolving Uncertainty about Monetary Policy
To isolate the role of uncertainty about the …scal regime, we follow Eusepi and Preston (2007a),
and consider the bene…ts of credibly communicating the monetary policy rule to …rms and
households. The precise details of the monetary policy rule are announced, including the
policy coe¢ cients and conditioning variables. Knowledge of this rule serves to simplify …rms’
and households’ forecasting problems. Indeed, agents need only forecast in‡ation: policy
  23
    Eusepi and Preston (2007a) discuss in detail the case of a known Ricardian regime with zero net supply
of bonds.



                                                   24
consistent forecasts of future nominal interest rates can then be determined directly from
the announced policy rule. It follows that credible announcements have the property that
expectations about future macroeconomic conditions are consistent with the policy strategy
of the monetary authority.24
   Under communication of the policy regime the aggregate demand equation becomes

         x^t =        1     ^bt    ^t         1
                                                  s^t     (1       )        E^t 1 ^ t
                         X
                         1
                  +E^t            T t
                                        [(1   ) (^
                                                 xT +1           s^T +1 )      (1           )(            1) ^ T +1 + rTn ]   (27)
                          T =t

determined by direct substitution of the monetary policy rule into equation (10). The remain-
ing model equations are unchanged with the exception of beliefs. As nominal interest rates
need not be forecast, an agent’s vector autoregression model is estimated on the restricted
state vector zt = x^t ; ^ t ; s^t ; ^bt+1 : Knowledge of the regime does not eliminate uncertainty
about the statistical laws determining state variables, as future output, in‡ation, taxes and
real debt must still be forecasted to make spending and pricing decisions.

Proposition 4 Under knowledge of the monetary policy regime, stabilization policy ensures
expectational stability if the following conditions are satis…ed: either

  1. Monetary policy is active and …scal policy is locally Ricardian such that
                                                      1+                                1
                                        1<        <            and           >                   ; or
                                                      1                          1

  2. Monetary policy is passive, 0                      < 1, and …scal policy is non-Ricardian such that

       (a)                                                       "                                               #
                                                                                        2
                                                                       1         +               (1         )
                          0         < 1 and             < min                                                   ;1   or
                                                                                     (1               )

       (b)
                                                                       1+
                                                                  >       :
                                                                       1

Remark 5 The conditions in 1. and 2.(b) are also necessary conditions.
  24
     Emphasis is given to communication about monetary policy in view of recent developments in actual
central banking pratice.



                                                            25
   Regardless of the regime, guarding against expectations-driven instability for a given choice
of tax rule,     , requires a choice of monetary policy rule that depends on two model para-
meters: the household’s discount factor, , and the steady state ratio of the primary surplus
to output,     (or equivalently the steady state debt-to-output ratio since s = (1     ) b). The
choice of …scal regime, re‡ected in the implied average debt-to-output ratio, imposes con-
straints on stabilization policy. Less …scally responsible governments have access to a smaller
set of monetary policies to ensure learnability of rational expectations equilibrium. In the case
of locally Ricardian …scal policies, the higher is the average debt-to-output ratio, the more
aggressive must monetary policy be to protect the economy from self-ful…lling expectations.
   Similarly, under locally non-Ricardian …scal policies, the choice of monetary policy is again
constrained by the average level of indebtedness of the economy. The higher are average debt
levels the more passive must be the adopted monetary policy rule. Regardless of the policy
regime, for 0 <     < 1, the menu of policies consistent with stabilizing expectations is larger
than when agents are uncertain about the policy regime — compare proposition 2. This
discussion is summarized in the following proposition which presents two special cases of the
above results.

Proposition 6 Communication unambiguously improves stabilization policy under learning
dynamics. That is, for 0 < < 1, a larger menu of …scal and monetary policies is consistent
with expectations stabilization under knowledge of the policy regime than under regime uncer-
tainty. When ! 1, the regions of stability in the communication and no communication
cases coincide. When = 0, the Leeper conditions are restored.

   That the stability of expectations depends on a steady state quantity through      is surpris-
ing when compared to a rational expectations analysis. Indeed, the model indicates determi-
nacy of equilibrium conditions to be independent of this quantity. What then is the source of
this dependence?
   Proposition 4 makes clear that the choice of monetary policy,         , and the steady state
structural surplus-to-output ratio, , play a crucial role in determining stability, in both
Ricardian and non-Ricardian policy regimes. The main source of instability is a second class
of wealth e¤ects — distinct to those discussed earlier — arising from violations of Ricardian
equivalence: agents perceive real bonds as net wealth out of rational expectations equilibrium.

                                               26
       To provide intuition, consider a regime with active monetary policy and passive …scal
policy. Again, suppose that in‡ation expectations increase. Agents correctly predict a steeper
path of the nominal interest rate, which restrains aggregate demand, leading to lower actual
in‡ation. In an economy with zero net debt, this would decrease expectations driving the
economy back to equilibrium. But with holdings of the public debt treated as net wealth,
lower in‡ation generates a positive wealth e¤ect, stimulating aggregate demand and increasing
in‡ationary pressures. The increase in real debt is higher if the monetary authority does not
observe current prices because the nominal interest rate does not immediately decrease with
in‡ation. On the one hand, active policy restrains demand as agents expect higher future
real interest rates. On the other hand, larger real debt and higher expected nominal interest
rates generate wealth e¤ects with in‡ationary consequences. If the monetary policy rule is
not su¢ ciently active and the stock of government debt is large the latter prevail, leading to
instability.
       Further insight into this result can be obtained by considering a more general form of
utility function with constant consumption intertemporal elasticity of substitution,                                        > 0.
Aggregate demand becomes

             x^t =         1     ^bt    ^t         1
                                                       s^t      (1         )        E^t 1 ^ t
                             X
                             1
                      +E^t             T t
                                             [(1   ) (^
                                                      xT +1              s^T +1 )      (        )(      1) ^ T +1 + rTn ]
                               T =t

so that a lower         mitigates the negative output response to an expected increase in the real
rate.25

Proposition 7 Assume > . In a Ricardian …scal regime, under knowledge of the monetary
policy regime, stabilization policy ensures expectational stability if
                                                                          1
                                                               >                :
                                                                     1

       A smaller intertemporal elasticity of substitution reduces the stabilizing e¤ects of antic-
ipated shifts in the expected path of the nominal interest rate while increasing the relative
importance of destabilizing wealth e¤ects. As                                  ! , the stability condition is the same
  25                                                                                            1
       In this case, the Phillips curve coe¤cient            is substituted by ~ =                  .

                                                                   27
as in the case of uncertainty about the monetary policy regime.26 However, the underlying
mechanism that generates instability is quite di¤erent.
       A similar logic operates with passive monetary policy and active …scal policy. Following
an increase in in‡ation expectations, output and in‡ation increase, stimulated by a decline
in real interest rates. As in the simple example discussed in section 5.2, the positive relation
between real debt and in‡ation drives the economy back to equilibrium. But higher in‡ation
can also have a destabilizing e¤ect because it leads to a higher expected path for the nominal
interest rate, increasing the real value of interest payments on outstanding government debt.
This positive wealth e¤ect increases aggregate demand and in‡ation. If the latter e¤ect
is su¢ ciently strong the combination of monetary and …scal policy can be destabilizing.27
That is, if monetary policy is su¢ ciently aggressive and the steady state level of real debt is
su¢ ciently high, then in‡ationary e¤ects dominate, leading to instability.


7        Dynamics, Regime Uncertainty and the Public Debt
The above theoretical results focus on the asymptotic convergence properties of agents’learn-
ing dynamics. This section has two goals. First, it shows that even when policy ensures
convergence to rational expectations, uncertainty about the policy regime still has important
e¤ects on model dynamics. Second, it develops intuition on how the economy responds to
shifts in agents’expectations, elucidating the sources of expectations-driven instability. The
main source of instability is the delayed response of the central bank and private agents to
changing economic conditions. On the one hand, monetary policy a¤ects the economy with
a delay because of agents’ learning process. On the other hand, monetary policy responds
with a delay to developments in current in‡ation because of imperfect information. The in-
teraction between these two delays generates dynamics that are signi…cantly di¤erent from
rational expectations.
       To this end, we present impulse response functions to a “small” shock to in‡ation ex-
  26
    Notice that the conditions for determinacy are not a¤ected by .
  27
    It can be shown that the higher , the smaller the parameter set for which we have stability. In fact
the larger is   the weaker the relation between real debt and in‡ation, and the more important the wealth
e¤ects from higher nominal rates.



                                                   28
pectations. Two experiments are considered. The …rst examines model dynamics under a
non-Ricardian …scal regime when there is either imperfect or perfect knowledge of monetary
policy. The analysis delineates the role of real debt dynamics in stabilizing in‡ation expecta-
tions and clari…es the destabilizing role of monetary policy when agents have no knowledge
of the regime. The second experiment explores the role of the debt-to-output ratio in model
dynamics. The monetary policy regime is assumed to be known and …scal policy is Ricardian.
High debt economies are demonstrated to be prone to instability because holdings of the
public debt are perceived as net wealth. In this case, the wealth e¤ects induced by changes
in the value of real debt from a shock to in‡ation expectations are destabilizing.

7.1       Generating Impulse Response Functions

The impulse response functions to a shock to in‡ation expectations are generated as follows.
The model is simulated 5000 times assuming shocks to the natural rate, monetary policy
and tax policy have standard deviations:            r   = 1,   i   = 0:1 and      = 0:1.28 In contrast to
the analytical results, the simulations make more general assumptions about the degree of
nominal rigidities and the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. For the chosen calibration,
the rational expectations equilibrium is stable under learning. In both experiments we assume
  = 0:99 for a quarterly calibration. The Calvo parameter is …xed at                = 0:6, consistent with
Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd (1998) and Bils and Klenow (2004). Finally, we consider
a utility function with intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption equal to 0:3,
consistent with broad …ndings in the macroeconomics literature.
       The impulse response functions are computed by perturbing each simulated path by an
expectational shock. The di¤erence between these perturbed paths and the original paths
provides the impulse response functions. They are non-linear because of the learning dynam-
ics and the plotted paths correspond to the median impulse response over 5000 simulations.
The perturbation is done by increasing the initial beliefs about the constant in the in‡ation
equation, a    ;0 ,   from zero (the parameter’s rational expectations equilibrium value) to 0:01.
This represents an increase in in‡ation expectations at all forecast horizons. It can be inter-
  28
    Shocks to the policy rules are added to prevent agents from learning the policy coe¢ cients after few data
points. However, their inclusion does not a¤ect the stability results.


                                                        29
preted as a small shift in the perceived in‡ation target, or in the long-run in‡ation average.
All other coe¢ cients are initially set to their rational expectations values.
       A decreasing gain is employed so that gt = gt     1 +1   where g0 is chosen to be large enough to
ensure that beliefs remain in the basin of attraction — recall the theoretical results are local
characterizations of dynamics. Hence, with su¢ cient data the analytical results of the paper
guarantee beliefs will converge to the rational expectations equilibrium of the model, given
appropriate choice of policy. A high choice of g0 is equivalent to having a tight prior on the
initial beliefs (in our experiments we chose g0 = 50). A consequence, relevant to interpreting
the impulse response functions, is the slow convergence to rational expectations equilibrium.
There is no attempt here for empirical realism. Rather we seek to draw out general lessons
about the mechanisms underlying model dynamics.29

7.2       Stabilizing Wealth E¤ects

The …rst experiment considers a shock to in‡ation expectations when monetary policy is
passive but responsive to expected in‡ation:              = 0:9. Fiscal policy is non-Ricardian and
responds weakly to changes in aggregate debt:             = 0:05. This latter assumption emphasizes
the stabilizing wealth e¤ects coming from the revaluation of outstanding debt. The structural
surplus-to-output ratio, , is chosen to give a debt-to-output ratio of 0:5 in steady state.30
       Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate that uncertainty about the monetary policy regime generates
signi…cant ampli…cation of a shock to expectations and impairs control of the macroeconomy.
If market participants have no knowledge of the monetary policy rule, in‡ation, output and
nominal interest rates display substantial variation relative to the case where the monetary
policy regime is known. Irrespective, dynamics converge to rational expectations equilibrium.
       The expectation shock initially increases long-term in‡ation expectations. This leads to
an increase in in‡ation and output, as future real interest rates are expected to fall. This is
  29
     However, Eusepi and Preston (2008) demonstrate that learning dynamics represent a promising approach
to …tting observed business cycles.
  30
     As evidenced by the propositions, the precise choice of is not too important when there is uncertainty
about the regime — the local stability properties are independent of this quantity.




                                                    30
shown in Figure 3, where expected future real rates are de…ned as
                                                  X
                                                  1

                                      t   = E^t          T t
                                                               (^{T   ^ T +1 ) :
                                                  T =t

If there is uncertainty about the monetary policy regime, agents fail to correctly anticipate
the increase in nominal interest rates, producing a much larger drop in the expected real
rate than in the case when agents know the regime. Real debt falls on impact because of
higher in‡ation. Because beliefs about in‡ation in a non-Ricardian equilibrium are a linear
function of debt, short-term in‡ation expectations fall. In fact, Figure 3 shows that the
short term real rate increases.31 Real debt continues to fall after the shock, even though
in‡ation declines (the impulse response for real debt is not reported because it mimics the
response of in‡ation). Figure 2 reveals this happens because the nominal interest rate falls
more than current in‡ation. The lower nominal interest rate re‡ects the fact that the central
bank is initially under predicting in‡ation; actual in‡ation declines less than expected in‡ation
because of higher marginal costs induced by high demand.32 Over time, the persistent decrease
in real debt decreases long-term in‡ation expectations, which induce an increase in expected
real rates, decreasing aggregate demand until convergence back to equilibrium.
       Finally, when the monetary policy rule is known to agents, the economy exhibits much less
variability: the response to the in‡ation shock is actually very close to what would happen
under rational expectations where the economy stays at the steady state (expectations are
anchored by construction in a rational expectations equilibrium). Agents correctly predict
that the nominal interest rate is going to increase with expected in‡ation, resulting in a much
smaller decrease in the long-term real interest rate. The example underscores that even under
a regime where price dynamics are not independent of …scal variables, uncertainty about the
monetary policy regime can have profound in‡uence on the economy’s response to shocks.
  31
     This does not immediately a¤ect long-term expectations because the initial shock to expectations a¤ect
the perceived in‡ation steady state, while changes in real bonds have only temporary e¤ects on in‡ation.
  32
     In particular, according to the Phillips curve, lower in‡ation expectations decrease actual in‡ation but
this decrease is balanced by the high marginal cost of production.




                                                         31
7.3      The Role of Indebtedness: …scal e¤ects in a Ricardian regime

The second experiment explores the constraints imposed on policy by the average level of
indebtedness. Market participants have full knowledge about the monetary policy regime,
but still face uncertainty about the …scal regime. We then consider the dynamic response of
the economy to the same in‡ation shock considered above, under di¤erent assumptions about
the steady state level of government debt in the economy. Monetary policy is speci…ed as
   = 1:5 and …scal policy as                        = 4. Two levels of average indebtedness are considered: a low
debt economy, which has a debt-to-output ratio of zero on average,                                        = 0; and a high steady
state debt economy with a debt-to-output ratio of 4b=Y = 2:3 (in annual terms). While the
latter is arguably large, it is chosen to emphasize the dynamics that operate in a high debt
economy. It is also the only asset that can be held in this economy — there is no capital. The
remaining model parameters are determined as before. Both the low and high debt economies
satisfy the local stability conditions of proposition 4.
   Figures 4 - 6 plot the impulse responses for output, in‡ation and nominal interest rates.
The impulse responses for the high debt economy are distinguished by smaller impact e¤ects
and greater persistence. To understand the nature of these di¤erences it is useful to decompose
aggregate demand into the following terms
                                                                                                                             !
                                                                          X
                                                                          1
         x^t =                   1    ^bt     ^t          1
                                                              s^t + E^t          T t
                                                                                       [(^{T   ^ T +1 )   (1    ) s^T +1 ]
                                                                          T =t
                               X
                               1
                        +E^t            T t
                                              [(1       ) x^T +1          (^{T    ^ T +1 ) + rTn ]
                               T =t
                =         ;t +        R;t                                                                                        (28)

where
                                                                                                                            !
                                                                          X
                                                                          1

               ;t   =           1     ^bt     ^t          1
                                                              s^t + E^t          T t
                                                                                       [(^{T   ^ T +1 )   (1   ) s^T +1 ]
                                                                          T =t

and     R;t   captures remaining terms. The variable                              R;t    represents the dynamics that would
obtain in a zero-debt economy, or equivalently, one in which households understood the gov-
ernment to be intertemporally solvent.                             ;t   captures departures from this benchmark, repre-
senting deviations from Ricardian equivalence because holdings of the public debt are treated

                                                                         32
as net wealth. Precisely, it is the real value of holdings of the public debt once future tax and
interest obligations are accounted for. Figures 7 and 8 plot these two terms. It is immediate
that     ;t   generates destabilizing demand e¤ects in a high debt economy. These wealth e¤ects
are distinct from those analyzed in the previous section, which result from beliefs tying the
evolution of in‡ation and output to real debt.
      In a regime with zero steady state debt, active monetary policy increases the expected
future path of real rates reducing demand, and, in turn, curbing in‡ation until the economy
returns to rational expectations equilibrium — see Figure 9 which plots the real long rate.
In an economy with high steady state debt this channel is still present. However, deviations
from Ricardian equivalence drive aggregate demand in the opposite direction. The term             ;t

initially rises because: i) taxes are predetermined at the time of the shock and only rise over
time; ii) agents anticipate higher future real interest rates, which deliver a positive income
e¤ect from holding the public debt; and iii) there is a valuation e¤ect from the initial fall in
in‡ation. For these reasons, the impact e¤ects of in‡ation shock on output and in‡ation are
smaller in the high debt economy.
      Figure 10 shows that the value of real debt outstanding rises over time as prices fall,
preventing a fast adjustment to the steady state equilibrium. The rise in real debt occurs
because the central bank over predicts in‡ation. As a result, actual in‡ation is below the
nominal interest rate (as a function of expected in‡ation). Since monetary policy is active,
in‡ation below steady state induces negative expected real rates. This stimulates output (as
the    R;t   terms becomes larger than the   ;t
                                                  term), which eventually increases above its steady
state value, together with in‡ation. However, over time long rates and taxes adjust to reduce
outstanding public debt and stabilize in‡ation, inducing convergence. As in the previous
experiment, there is a tight link between monetary and …scal policy. Active monetary policy
might not be su¢ cient to stabilize expectations if market participants face uncertainty about
the …scal regime and the government faces su¢ ciently high long-term debt.




                                                   33
8     Conclusions
A model is developed to explore the constraints imposed on stabilization policy by expec-
tations formation. Speci…c emphasis is given to household and …rm uncertainty about the
prevailing policy regime adopted by the central bank and …scal authority.
    Two central results emerge. First, when agents have no knowledge about the policy
regime, stabilization policy is more di¢ cult than under a rational expectations analysis of the
model. The set of policies consistent with expectations stabilization is substantially reduced.
Indeed, for a class of monetary policies satisfying the Taylor principle, there is no choice
of …scal policy that prevents self-ful…lling expectations. For passive monetary policy, there
is always a choice of non-Ricardian …scal policy that ensures stability. The precise choice
depends on the speci…c monetary policy being implemented. An implication is that under
non-rational expectations, tighter coordination of monetary and …scal policy is desirable.
That non-Ricardian …scal policies emerge to be relatively robust to expectational instability
stems from two model properties: i) passive monetary policies minimize uncertainty about
the future path of nominal interest rates and ii) stabilizing wealth e¤ects that operate through
the intertemporal budget constraint of the government.
    Second, under full knowledge of the monetary policy regime, stabilization policy is unam-
biguously improved across both Ricardian and non-Ricardian regimes. That active monetary
policies are no longer a source of instability is a direct consequence of households being able to
accurately project the future path of real interest rates when the monetary policy strategy is
known. Similarly, under non-Ricardian …scal policies, passive monetary policy induces less un-
certainty about the path of nominal interest rates, enhancing the e¤ectiveness of stabilization
policy.
    Complete knowledge of monetary strategy does not ensure that all policies consistent with
determinacy of rational expectations are similarly consistent with expectational stability un-
der learning dynamics. Whether they are or not, depends on the average level of indebtedness
of the economy. Because households imperfectly forecast future tax obligations, holdings of
the public debt are perceived as net wealth. As a result, variations in outstanding debt lead to
Keynesian expenditure e¤ects, and these e¤ects can be destabilizing. The magnitude of these

                                               34
wealth e¤ects are proportional to the steady state debt-to-output ratio. The more heavily
indebted the economy the more di¢ cult it is to stabilize the macroeconomy.




                                            35
References
Aiyagari, R. (1994): “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,”Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 109, 659–684.

Batini, N., and A. G. Haldane (1999): “Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy,”in
  Monetary Policy Rules, ed. by J. Taylor. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohe, and M. Uribe (2001): “Monetary Policy and Multiple
  Equilibria,”American Economic Review, 91(1), 167–186.

Bilbiie, F. (2008): “Limited Asset Market Participation and (Inverted) Keynesian Logic,”
  forthcoming, Journal of Economic Theory.

Bils, M., and P. Klenow (2004): “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 112, 947–985.

Blinder, A. S., E. R. D. Canetti, D. E. Lebow, and J. B. Rudd (1998): Asking
  about prices: A new approach to understanding Price Stickiness. New York: Russell Sage
  Foundation.

Branch, W. A., T. Davig, and B. McGough (2008): “Adaptive Learning in Regime-
  Switching Models,”unpublished, University of California, Irvine.

Bullard, J., and K. Mitra (2000): “Determinacy, Learnability and Monetary Policy
  Inertia,” Working Paper no. 2000-030A, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. [Available
  online at http://www.stls.frb.org/docs/research/wp/2000-001.pdf].

        (2002): “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules,”Journal of Monetary Economics,
  49(6), 1105–1129.

Calvo, G. (1983): “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,”Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 12, 383–98.

Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (1998): “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some
  International Evidence,”European Economic Review, 42, 1033–1067.

                                             36
        (1999): “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, 37, 1661–1707.

        (2000): “Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some
  Theory,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, 147–180.

Cochrane, J. H. (1998): “A Frictionless View of U.S. In‡ation,” University of Chicago
  mimeo.

Davig, T., and E. Leeper (2006): “Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory,”in
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogo¤, and M. Woodford.

Edge, R., and J. Rudd (2002): “Taxation and the Taylor Principle,”Federal Reserve Board
  of Governors Finance and Economics Discussion Paper 2002-51.

Eusepi, S. (2007): “Learnability and Monetary Policy: A Global Perspective,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, Forthcoming.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2007a): “Central Bank Communication and Macroeconomic
  Stabilization,”NBER Working Paper 13259.

           (2007b): “Stabilization Policy with Near-Ricardian Households,” unpublished,
  Columbia University.

         (2008): “Expectations, Learning and Business Cycle Fluctuations,” unpublished,
  Columbia University and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Evans, G. W., and S. Honkapohja (2001): Learning and Expectations in Economics.
  Princeton, Princeton University Press.

        (2003): “Expectations and the Stability Problem for Optimal Monetary Policies,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 70(4), 807–824.

        (2005): “Policy Interaction, Expectations and the Liquidity Trap,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Dynamics, 8, 303–323.


                                           37
          (2006): “Monetary Policy, Expectations and Commitment,” Scandanavian Journal
  of Economics, 108, 15–38.

          (2007): “Policy Interaction, Learning and the Fiscal Theory of Prices,” Macroeco-
  nomic Dynamics, forthcoming.

Friedman, M. (1968): “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58(1),
  1–17.

Gali, J., J. D. Lopez-Salido, and J. Valles (2004): “Rule of Thumb Consumers and
  the Design of Interest Rate Rules,”Journal of Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37,
  533–572.

Giannoni, M. P., and M. Woodford (2002): “Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. General
  Theory,”NBER Working Paper no. 9419.

Howitt, P. (1992): “Interest Rate Control and Nonconvergence to Rational Expectations,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 100(4), 776–800.

Kreps, D. (1998): “Anticipated Utility and Dynamic Choice,” in Frontiers of Research in
  Economic Theory, ed. by D. Jacobs, E. Kalai, and M. Kamien, pp. 242–274. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.

Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’and ‘Passive’Monetary and Fiscal Poli-
  cies,”Journal of Monetary Economics, 27, 129–147.

Leith, C., and L. von Thadden (2006): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy Interactions ina
  New Keynesian Model with Capital Accumulation and Non-Ricardian Consumers,” ECB
  Working Paper No. 649.

Levin, A., V. Wieland, and J. C. Williams (2003): “Robustness of Forecast-Based
  Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty,” American Economic Review, 93, 622–
  645.




                                            38
Marcet, A., and T. J. Sargent (1989a): “Convergence of Least-Squares Learning in
  Environments with Hidden State Variables and Private Information,” Journal of Political
  Economy, pp. 1306–1322.

         (1989b): “Convergence of Least Squares Learning Mechanisms in Self-Referential
  Linear Stochastic Models,”Journal of Economic Theory, (48), 337–368.

McCallum, B. T. (1999): “Issues in the Design of Monetary Policy Rules,”in Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor, and M. Woodford. North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Preston, B. (2005): “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules when Long-Horizon Expecta-
  tions Matter,”International Journal of Central Banking, 1(2), 81–126.

        (2006): “Adaptive Learning, Forecast-Based Instrument Rules and Monetary Policy,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 53.

        (2008): “Adaptive Learning and the Use of Forecasts in Monetary Policy,” Journal
  of Economic Dynamics and Control, forthcoming.

Sargent, T. J. (1999): The Conquest of American In‡ation. Princeton University Press.

Schmitt-Grohe, S., and M. Uribe (2005): “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy
  in a Medium-Scale Macroeconomic Model,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by
  M. Gertler, and K. Rogo¤.

Sims, C. (1994): “A Simple Model for the Determination of the Price Level and the Interac-
  tion of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,”Economic Theory, 4, 381–399.

Svensson, L. E. (1999): “In‡ation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule,”Journal of Mon-
  etary Economics, 43, 607–654.

Svensson, L. E., and M. Woodford (2005): “Implementing Optimal Monetary Policy
  Through In‡ation Forecast Targeting,” in The In‡ation Targeting Debate, ed. by B. S.
  Bernanke, and M. Woodford. University of Chicago Press.



                                           39
Taylor, J. (1993): “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Con-
  ference Series on Public Policy, 39, 195-214.

Woodford, M. (1996): “Control of the Public Debt: A Requirement for Price Stability,”
  NBER Working Paper 5684.

          (2001): “Fiscal Requirements of Price Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit and
  Banking, 33, 669–728.

         (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
  University Press.

Yun, T. (1996): “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business Cycles,”
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 37, 345–370.


A     Appendix
B     Proof of Proposition 1
The model under rational expectations is given by

                              x^t = Et x^t+1      (^{t       Et ^ t+1       rtn )

                              ^t =     x^t + Et ^ t+1:

The debt dynamics and policy rules are as speci…ed earlier. Solving the model under Ricardian
…scal policy is standard and yields ^ t =      0 rt   where        0    is a time-invariant coe¢ cient, the
speci…c value of which plays not role for the stability results under both learning and rational
expectations. To solve the model under the assumption of non-Ricardian …scal policy note
that the governments ‡ow budget constraint is again solved forward to give

                      ^bt =                 ^bt+1 +       (1              )
                                                                                ^t
                              1   (1   )                 1 (1            )
                               (1       )   X
                                            1                                       j
                         =                                                              Et ^ t+j :    (29)
                              1 (1     )    j=0
                                                         1    (1        )



                                                40
Since the eigenvalue pertaining to debt is great than one that implies that only one of the
remaining two eigenvalues can lie in the unit circle.
   Considering the sub-system in output and prices gives
                 2         3 2                         32     3                                     2       3
                                     1             1
                     ^ t+1                                 ^                                            0
              Et 4         5=4                         54 t 5                                       4       5 rtn
                                        1            1
                    x^t+1                   1+            x^t

with associated characteristic equation

                                   2          1+        +                               1+
                         P( )=                                              +                       :

There will be one eigenvalue inside the unit circle if and only if                                  < 1.
   Denoting the unstable root by       1;   the associated eigenvector can be determined from
                             2                                3
                   h       i                 1            1       h       i
                     1 d1 4                     1           1
                                                              5 = 1 d1       1
                                                    1+

implying that
                                                                      1
                                       d1 =                           1
                                                      1+                            1

                                              =
                                                         2        1
                                                                                                                            1
where the second equality follows from noting that the roots satisfy                                1+ 2     = (1 +   + )       .
Transforming the system with the unstable eigenvector gives

                                  Et zt+1 =           1 zt   +                          rtn
                                                                  1             2

where                                                             2             3
                                              h               i           ^t
                                       zt =       1 d1            4             5:
                                                                          x^t
Solving forward provides
                               ^t =                   x^t +                                   rtn
                                       1          2           (       2             1)    1

placing a linear restriction on output and in‡ation movements in equilibrium.
   Substitution into the Phillips curve gives
                                                                                1
                                      Et ^ t+1 =         2 ^t                       rtn
                                                                            1

                                                        41
and solving backwards recursively and taking expectations at time t implies
                                                                                  1
                                                                 j                      j 1 n
                                               Et ^ t+j =        2 ^t                   2 rt :
                                                                                 1

Using this to evaluate the expectations in the debt equations gives

                                                             1         1
                                                    ^ t = ~ 1 ^bt + ~ 1 ~ 2 rt                                          (30)

                                                         =       1 bt
                                                                     ^ +        2 rt                                    (31)

where

                         ~1 =                    (1              )
                                       1        (1           )              2

                         ~                                            (1                )
                             2   =
                                           1   (1       (1       )                    2 ) (1       (1       )    )

and
                                  1 h                            p                                                 i
                     2   =            1+            +                (1 +       + )2               4 (1 +         ) :
                                 2

C       Constructing the True Data Generating Process
This section outlines the beliefs of agents in our benchmark analysis. We re-write the model
in matrix form. Each agent’s estimated model at date t can be expressed as
                                  h                                        i0
                     Xt =             xt        t    bt+1 it st                 = ! 0;t + ! 1;t Xt          1   + et    (32)

where ! 0 denotes the constant, ! 1 is de…ned as
                                        2                                                      3
                                          0 bx bbx                                0 0
                                        6                                             7
                                        6                                             7
                                        6 0 b bb                                  0 0 7
                                        6                                             7
                                        6                                             7
                                 ! 1 = 6 0 bb bbb                                 0 0 7:
                                        6                                             7
                                        6                                             7
                                        6 0 bi bbi                                0 0 7
                                        4                                             5
                                          0 bs bbs                                0 0

and et represents an i.i.d. estimation error.
    The model, given by equations (6), (7), (8), (10) and (11), can be written as:


                                                                      42
  Output gap
                                                                                      X
                                                                                      1
                                                         1                2 ^                      T t
                                                         x Xt        =    x Et                            XT +1 + rtn
                                                                                      T =t

where
                h                                       i                             h                                                                                      i
        1                                                                 2
        x   =       1         0 1           0                   and       x   =            1                 1                    (1       )        (1       )           0       :

  In‡ation
                                                                                        X
                                                                                        1
                                                            1
                                                                Xt =          2
                                                                                  E^t            (        )T     t
                                                                                                                     XT +1
                                                                                          T =t

where
                              h                                       i                              h                                                           i
                    1                                                                      2
                        =                     1     0 0          0        and                  =                             (1        )        0    0 0             :

  Interest rate
                                                                 1                    2                  2
                                                                 i Xt     =           i !0     +         i ! 1 Xt 1


where
                                          h                                   i                              h                                       i
                                  1                                                                  2
                                  i   =         0   0 1          0 0                  and            i   =       0                     0       0 0       :

  Surplus
                                                                          1                      2
                                                                          s Xt          =        s Xt 1


where
                                          h                                   i                              h                                       i
                                  1                                                                  2
                                  s   =         0   0 0          1 0                  and            s   =       0           0 0           0             :

  Debt
                                                                          1                      2
                                                                          b Xt          =        b Xt 1


where
                          h                                                                    i                              h                                      i
                1                         1                      1                                                   2                                        1
                b   =         0                     1                (1           )       1          and             b   =         0       0 0       0                   :

  Calculating expectations over an in…nite horizon provides
                          X
                          1
                    E^t               T t
                                            XT +1 = (I                    !1)         1
                                                                                            I (1                 )       1
                                                                                                                                  ! 1 (I         !1)     1
                                                                                                                                                             !0
                          T =t
                                                                                                     1
                                                                +! 1 (I                   !1)

                                                        = Fx0 (! 0 ; ! 1 ) + Fx1 (! 1 ) Xt                                    1


                                                                                          43
and
               X
               1
         E^t          (   )T   t
                                   XT +1 = (I           !1)      1
                                                                      I (1                  )       1
                                                                                                        ! 1 (I       !1)       1
                                                                                                                                     !0
               T =t
                                                                                   1
                                                  +! 1 (I             ! 1 :)           Xt   1

                                           = F 0 (! 0 ; ! 1 ) + F 1 (! 1 ) Xt 1 :

The true data generating process is then

                                           1                                                                         1
                      Xt = [A0 (! 1 )]         [A1 (! 0 ; ! 1 ) + A2 (! 1 )] Xt                 1   + [A0 (! 1 )]        rtn

where                                                   2                                           3
                                                                1         2
                                                      6         x         x Fx1        (! 1 )
                                                                                         7
                                                      6         1         2              7
                                                      6                       F 1 (! 1 ) 7
                                                      6                                  7
                                                      6                                  7
                                          A0 (! 1 ) = 6         1                        7
                                                      6         i                        7
                                                      6                                  7
                                                      6         1
                                                                s                        7
                                                      4                                  5
                                                                1
                                                                b

and                                   2                               3                                  2               3
                                                2
                                    6           x Fx0
                                             (! 0 ; ! 1 )
                                                                      7                 6
                                                                                          0
                                                                                                 7
                                    6 2                               7                 6        7
                                    6    F 0 (! 0 ; ! 1 )             7                 6 0      7
                                    6                                 7                 6        7
                                    6                                 7                 6        7
                  A1 (! 0 ; ! 1 ) = 6 2i ! 0                          7 and A2 (! 1 ) = 6 2i ! 1 7 :
                                    6                                 7                 6        7
                                    6                                 7                 6 2      7
                                    6 0                               7                 6 s      7
                                    4                                 5                 4        5
                                                                                                                 2
                                      0                                                                          b

   Finally, the data generating process can be rearranged as

                                      1                                        1                                               1
           Xt = A0 (! 1 )                A1 (! 0 ; ! 1 ) + A0 (! 1 )               A2 (! 1 ) Xt         1   + A0 (! 1 )            rtn
                                           2          3
                                             1
                      =     1 (! 0 ; ! 1 )
                                           4          5;
                                             Xt 1

   E-stability can be computed by evaluating the local stability of the following ODE

                                      d (! 0 ; ! 1 )
                                                     =      1   (! 0 ; ! 1 )           (! 0 ; ! 1 ) :                                     (33)
                                          d




                                                                 44
D      Stability under learning
As explained above, convergence of the learning process depends on the stability properties
of the ODE (33). This is a fairly complicated convolutions of the agent’s beliefs (! 0 ; ! 1 ). In
order to …nd analytical conditions for convergence we make use of Matlab symbolic toolbox.
The expressions can be reproduced by running the appropriate …les, available on request from
the authors.


E     Proof of Proposition 2
Ricardian regime The results reported in this proof can be reproduced using the Matlab …le:
…scal_delay_benchmark.m. First, it can be shown that the beliefs (! 0 ; ! 1 ) evolve according
to two separate sub-systems

                            !_ 0 = (A       I5 ) ! 0 and !_ 1 = (B           I5 ) ! 1 :

where A and B represent components of the Jacobian of T (! 0 ; ! 1 ), evaluated at the rational
expectations equilibrium ! 0 ; ! 1 , de…ned in the previous proposition.
    Consider the evolution of the intercept ! 0 . We take three steps in order to reduce the
matrix A from a …ve dimensional to three dimensional object. First, evaluating the matrix A
reveals that
                                                    !_ s0 =   ! s0 :

Hence, the intercept in the …scal rule equation converges for all parameter values, indepen-
dently of the other elements of the beliefs vector. This reduces dimensionality by one. Second,
using the restriction
                                               1
                              A5;j =                A2;j + A3;j for j = 1:::5

delivers the three dimension system (see the Matlab …le for the details of the variables’trans-
formation):                             2            3        2          3
                                            !_ x0                 ! x0
                                        6      7      6     7
                                        6      7      6     7
                                        6 !_ 0 7 = A~ 6 ! 0 7 :
                                        4      5      4     5
                                             i            i
                                          !_ 0          !0

                                                         45
   For the real parts of the three eigenvalues to be negative requires

                                                 ~ < 0, det(A)
                                             T r(A)         ~ <0

and
                                MA~ =             ~ T r(A)
                                               Sm(A)    ~ + det(A)
                                                                ~ >0

         ~ denotes the sum of all principles minors of A.
where Sm(A)                                            ~ We are interested in the limit

case where    ! 0. In this case, the trace, determinant and MA~ become arbitrarily large.
Consider the trace …rst. We can calculate the limit

                                                       ~ =                     1
                                       lim+        T r(A)
                                       !0                                  1

which is negative if and only if
                                                                  1
                                                         >             :                                      (34)
                                                             1
Likewise, the determinant
                                                         ~ =                           1
                                             lim+    det(A)
                                              !0                           1
which is negative if and only if              > 1. For MA~ we have

                                   2                (2   2        +      ) (1                  +          )
                         lim+           MA~ =
                         !0                                           (1     )2
which is positive provided (34).
   Consider now the coe¢ cients on real debt. An identical process reduces the dimensionality
                                              ~ Considering the trace we get
of the matrix B to a three dimensional matrix B.

                            lim+                ~ =1
                                            T r(B)
                                                                      (1           )(          + 1)
                              !0                                           (1              )

which is decreasing in    . In a Ricardian regime,                     > 1. Evaluating the expression at      = 1,
                              ~ matrix is negative. Evaluating the determinant we get
if (34) then the trace of the B
                                                                                   1
                          lim+                  ~ =1
                                            det(B)
                                                                                            (1        )
                           !0                                               (1             )

which is decreasing in    . Again, imposing                   = 1 gives

                                                       ~ =                         1
                                   lim+            det(B)                                  < 0:
                                       !0                              (1              )

                                                             46
Finally,

                  2               [    (     1) (           + 2)                 + 2] [ (           1) (        + 1) + 1]
           lim+       MB~ =                                             2 2                                                   :
           !0                                                                   (1     )2
which is, again, decreasing in              .Imposing              = 1 yields

                                       2            (2       2        +           ) (1          +      )
                                lim+        MB~ =                           2
                                !0                                              (1     )2
which is positive if (34) is satis…ed.
   Non-Ricardian regime The matrices A and B corresponding to the non-Ricardian
regime can be reduced to three dimensional matrices by following the same steps as above.
To further simplify the problem, we use two Lemmas.

Lemma 8 Consider the model where                        ! 0. Then                2   !      .

Proof. Recall that

                           1 h                          p                                                          i
                  2   =        1+          + ( )            (1 +        + ( ))2             4 (1 + ( )            ) :
                          2

We can then evaluate
                                                            lim     2   =
                                                             !0
                  8 h              p                        i 9
                  < 1 + + ( ) + (1 + + ( ))2 4 (1 + ( ) )       =
                     h                                        i
                  : 1 + + ( ) p(1 + + ( ))2 4 (1 + ( ) ) ;
            1
              lim     h            p                         i    =
           2 !0         1 + + ( ) + (1 + + ( ))2 4 (1 + ( ) )
                   1                                        4 (1 + ( )               )
                     lim h                              p                                                         i:
                  2 !0 1 +             + ( )+               (1 +        + ( ))2             4 (1 + ( )           )
Using L’Hôpital
                 "                                                                                                       !#
            1               0                0         (1 + + ( )) 0 ( ) 2 0 ( )
              lim 4             ( )    =         ( )+ p                                                                       =
           2 !0                                         (1 + + ( ))2 4 (1 + ( )                                      )

                  "                                                                                        !#
             1                                          (1 +       + ( ))            2
               lim 4             = 1+ p                                                                          =
            2 !0                                 (1 +    + ( ))2                 4 (1 + ( ) )
                                                                                        1
                                                                                          lim 2                  =        :
                                                                                       2 !0

                                                                 47
      We then conjecture that as         ! 0, one eigenvalue of A~ and B
                                                                       ~ tends to                     1. The conjecture
is veri…ed in the following Lemma.

Lemma 9 Consider the model where                        ! 0. Then one eigenvalue                  of A~ and B
                                                                                                            ~ converges
to 1:

Proof. The characteristic equations of A~ and B
                                              ~ are

                              ~
                              A
                                  ( )=      3
                                                    tr A~       2        ~
                                                                    + Sm(A)                 ~
                                                                                        det(A)

and
                              ~
                              B            3       ~           2         ~                  ~
                                  ( )=          tr B                + Sm(B)             det(B):

It can be shown that33

                                  ~
                        lim       A
                                      ( 1) =    1       tr A~              ~
                                                                        Sm(A)              ~ =0
                                                                                       det(A)
                         !0


and
                               ~
                               B                           ~               ~               ~ = 0:
                        lim        ( 1) =       1       tr B            Sm(B)          det(B)
                         !0




      Let us consider the local stability of the intercept coe¢ cients. The remaining two eigen-
values of A~ are negative if

                            ~ + 1 = z1 + z2 < 0 and det(A)
                         tr(A)                          ~ =                             z1 z2 < 0:

The trace is
                                                    1    [1             (1       )]
                         tr A~ =           1+                                                     :                (35)
                                                          1        (1        )
(a) Consider the case of 0                < 1: the trace can be re-arranged to deliver the following
relationship between          and        at tr A~ = 0,

                                                                    2
                                            =                       1
                                                [(1            )        + (1      )]
 33
      The limit is computed in the matlab …le …scal_delay_benchmark.m.



                                                              48
in the text. Then, 0           < min (          (    ) ; 1), where

                                                                         2
                                       (      )=                         1
                                                                                                      ;
                                                    [(1              )           + (1            )]

and where we use @tr (A) =@            > 0 for            2 [0; 1). The determinant is

                                             (1                  )(                     1)
                                   det A~ =                                                      > 0:                           (36)
                                            (1                  ) +                          1

Finally, consider the B matrix. Proceeding in the same way as for the A~ matrix, the trace
can be shown to be
                                                                                   2 2
                             ~ =                                (1           )
                          tr(B)         2                                                                            :          (37)
                                                ( (1           )                    + 1)(                       1)

which gives the following expression for

                                                                         2
                                   (       )=       2 2                                    (1             )
                                                           + 2 (1                   )    (1                )2

                ~ = 0 (also shown to have positive derivative with respect to
which solves tr(B)                                                                                                       ). It can be
shown that         (   )>      (                               ~ matrix is equal to
                                   ).34 The determinant of the B                                                         1 for every
parameter value.
      (b) Straightforward algebraic manipulations of (35)-(37) show that the stability condition
holds for all parameter values with                 > (1 + ) =(1                    ).


F        Proposition 4
The proof follows the same steps as in Proposition 2.
      Ricardian Regime. The matrices A and B are three dimensional, given that agents do
not have to forecast the nominal interest rate and the surplus. The expressions below are
calculated using the …le …scal_analytical_trsp.m. Let us consider …rst the matrix A. We …nd

                                                                    1+(                 1)
                                       lim+         tr(A) =                                                                     (38)
                                       !0                              1
 34
      It can be shown that the di¤erence betwen the denominator of                           and the denominator in        is equal to
                                                           2
                                            (         1)       (1            )    > 0:




                                                               49
which gives the stability condition in the main text. Thus, for                                          = 0, we the Taylor principle
obtains. Using        = (1     ) yb we can re-write the stability condition as

                                                                    b
                                               (1    (1            ) )            1>0
                                                                    y

so that for high levels of debt-to-output ratio and for intermediate values of the discount
factor instability is likely to arise. As           ! 0, the determinant is

                                                                                              1
                                           lim+      det(A) =
                                            !0                                   1

and negative provided (             1) > 1. Finally,

                  2                                                (        (2                    )     2) ( (1            )   1)
           lim+       [ Sm(A) T r(A) + det(A)] =                                                                                    ;
           !0                                                                                         (1    )2
which is positive provided (38) is satis…ed.
   Consider now the matrix B. The trace is satis…es
                                                          2
                                         ( 1+       +                                     )            (1      )       +1
                  lim+       tr(B) =
                  !0                                                   (1             )

and is negative provided the trace of the matrix for the constants is negative (                                                > 1 in the
Ricardian …scal regime). As              ! 0, the determinant is always negative, that is

                                                                   1         (                    1)
                               lim+       det (B) =                                                     < 0;
                               !0                                           (1                )

if (38) is satis…ed.
   Finally, letting      ! 0, the sum of all principle minors becomes

                                           2
                                 lim+          [ Sm(B) T r(B) + det(B)] =
                                    !0

            2                                                                                                      2
 ( 2              +          + 2)          2            +2                      (1 +                                   )       1+
                                                        2     2
                                                                  (1             )2 ;
which is positive provided            > 1 (Ricardian …scal Regime) and (38) is satis…ed.
   Non-Ricardian Regime. As in proposition 2, it can be shown that one eigenvalue of
both matrices A and B is equal to                1. We de…ne the trace of the constant coe¢ cients as

                                                                       A
                                         lim+ tr(A) + 1 =                   (     ;           ; ):
                                          !0


                                                              50
First notice that
                                                                                                                    2
                                      A                                                       (1                )
                                          (       ;           ; )=                                                                          >0
                                                                              (1            ) (1    (1              )                   )

if 0           < 1 and
                                       A                                        (1    )(                              + 1)
                                              (           ;       ; )=                                                     >0
                                                                                 ( 1+                               +   )2
                                                                                                    A                                                      A
for all admissible values of ,                                 , and               ; where          x    denotes the derivative of                             with respect
                                                                                                                         TA
to the argument x. Second we show that for values of                                                                <            the trace is negative. Consider
                                                                                                                TA
     < 1. Using the inequality above, we can solve for                                                                  as
                                                      2                   2 2               2 2 TA                                  TA
           A              TA                  (                                    +                    +                                               + 1)
               (1;   ;         )=                                                                                                                                  =0
                                                                                              (1         )(1                 )

where
                                                                                                    2
                                                          TA              (1                +            (1              )
                                                                  =                                                          > 0:
                                                                                             (1            )
                                                              A                                                              A
If      > (1 + )=(1                   ) then                      (       ;     ; ) < 0. Evaluating                              at         = 0 gives
                                                                                             3 2
                              A                                       (C                         +3 2                        2              2 + 2)
                                  (    ;          ; 0) =
                                                                                   (1         )((1   )                       1+             )

where
                                                                      3                 2           2
                                           C          =(                           2                    +               +3            2):

The denominator is positive for                                               > (1 + )=(1                           ). For the numerator, substituting
     = ((1 + )=(1                 )) gives

               3 2        2                                                             2                   2                                2                 3        3 2
(C                   +3               2                       2 +2) =                              +                              +(2               2 )                       <0

       Last, the coe¢ cient C                         is positive since

                                                                      3                2
                                                                                                  + R(          ; )<0

       where
                                                                                       2            2
                                                  R(           ; )=                                     +               +3          2



                      R(0; ) =                    (               1)2          1+            < 0;        R(1; ) =                 2(             1)2 < 0

                                                                                              51
    and
                                                                                                 2
                                                            R (           ; )=                       +            > 0:

    Hence, for                > (1 + )=(1                        ) the trace is negative. Finally, the determinant of the
Jacobian is
                                                                                       (1            )(1                    )
                                           lim+ [ det(A)] =                                                                          > 0:
                                               !0                                  1        (1         )
    Following the same steps for matrix B :

                                                                                                 B
                                                           lim+ tr(B) + 1 =                          (        ;       ; ):
                                                           !0

First notice that
                                                                                                     2 2
                                       B
                                           (       ;   ; )=                                                                               >0
                                                                     (1            ) (1          (1               )                   )
for 0 <         < 1 and
                                                                                                              2 2
                                               B                              (1                      )
                                                   (   ;     ; )=                                                                    > 0:
                                                                          ( 1+                                    +             )2
                             TB
    Solving for                   from
                                           2 3             2 3 TB                  2 2                    2              2 TB
      B                  TB            (                                                         2         +                         +2        +2               2)
          (1;    ;            )=                                                                                                                                     =0
                                                                                       (1                )(1                )
provides
                                                                 2                                            2
                TB                (1               )+                + (1                    )                    (1             ) (1          )       TA
                         =                                                     2                                                                   >        :
                                                                                   (1                 )
Moreover, for                > (1 + )=(1                     )

                     B                                                 B                                              2 2
    tr(B) =              (    ;        ; ) < 0; and                        (       ;        ; 0) =            (                  2          + 2)=(1              ) < 0:

    Finally, the determinant is equal to one for all parameter values.


G      Proof of Proposition 6
Ricardian regime. Given the results in the Propositions above, it is su¢ cient to evaluate
the matrix A. Evaluating the expression (38) at                                                      = 1 gives

                                                                     1+(                    1)        <0

                                                                                        52
which coincides with the stability condition in the case where the agents have no knowledge
about the policy rule. Thus, communication is always stability enhancing. The case of                                    =0
is trivial.
       Non-Ricardian regime. Let                   = 1. then
                                                   2
                      A                        (           +2                              +2       2)
                          (   ;     ; 1) =
                                                            1 (1     )
                                                          1 [1     (1                 )]
                                         =             1+
                                                              1 (1     )
                                                                                                             A
which is the trace obtained about for the case of no communication. The function                                 is de…ned
in the proof35 of Proposition 4. Since                     A
                                                               > 0 for 0 <      < 1 we have that    A
                                                                                                         <   A
                                                                                                                 (   ;   ; 1)
for     < 1. Hence, communication improves stability. Finally,
                                                       2           2 2
                              A                                          + (1       ) (1   )
                                  (1;   ; 0) =                                                 <0
                                                                  (1      )(1        )

thus restoring the Leeper conditions. The case where                                > (1 + ) = (1       ) is trivial from
the proof of proposition 4.


H         Proof of Proposition 7:
As in proposition 4, we can show that

                                                                       +
                                         lim       tr (A) =
                                          !0                            (1      )

which gives the desired result.                  The expressions below are calculated using the …le …s-
cal_analytical_trsp.m.




  35
       The expressions below are generated by the same Matlab …le used for the poof of Proposition 7.


                                                                  53
                                                0.3


                                               0.25


                                                0.2


                                               0.15
     Output




                                                0.1


                                               0.05


                                                  0


                                              -0.05
                                                      0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                                              Q

Figure 1: The solid line describes the output response under uncertainty about the monetary
policy regime. The dotted lines shows the output response when agents know the monetary
polic rule.




                                                0.4


                                                0.2
        Inflation and nominal interest rate




                                                  0


                                               -0.2


                                               -0.4


                                               -0.6


                                               -0.8


                                                 -1
                                                      0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                                              Q

Figure 2: The …gure shows the response of in‡ation (solid line) and nominal interest rate
(dotted line) in the economy where agents face uncertainty about the monetary policy regime.
Notice that the nominal interest rate is below current in‡ation for 25 quarters.




                                                                             54
                               0.4


                               0.2


                                 0
        Real interest rate




                              -0.2


                              -0.4


                              -0.6


                              -0.8


                                -1
                                     0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                             Q

Figure 3: The …gure shown the response of real rates. The solid line show the response of t ,
the long-term interest rate, under uncertainty about the monetary policy regime. The dashed
line shows the response of t when agents know the monetary policy rule. Finally, the dotted
line show the short-term real interest rate (it E^t t+1 ) under uncertainty about the monetary
policy regime.




                              0.05



                                 0



                             -0.05
     Output




                              -0.1



                             -0.15



                              -0.2
                                     0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40   45   50
                                                             Q

Figure 4: The …gure shows the impulse response of output in the high debt economy (solid
line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).



                                                            55
                      0.02

                         0

                     -0.02

                     -0.04
     Inflation




                     -0.06

                     -0.08

                      -0.1

                     -0.12

                     -0.14
                             0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40    45    50
                                                     Q

Figure 5: The …gure shows the impulse response of in‡ation in the high debt economy (solid
line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




                      0.02
     Interest rate




                         0




                     -0.02




                     -0.04
                             0   5   10   15   20    25   30   35   40    45    50
                                                     Q

Figure 6: The …gure shows the impulse response of the nominal interest rate in the high debt
economy (solid line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




                                                    56
             0.1


            0.05


               0


           -0.05
     δ,t
    Ψ




            -0.1


           -0.15


            -0.2


           -0.25
                   0   5   10   15    20     25    30     35     40     45          50
                                             Q


Figure 7: The …gure shows the impulse response of the nonricardian term        ;t   in the high
debt economy (solid line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




            0.25

             0.2

            0.15

             0.1
     R,t




            0.05
   Ψ




               0

           -0.05

            -0.1

           -0.15
                   0   5   10   15    20     25    30     35     40     45          50
                                             Q

Figure 8: The …gure shows the impulse response of the ricardian term   R;t   in the high debt
economy (solid line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




                                           57
                0.5




                  0
      t
    ρ




               -0.5




                 -1
                      0   5   10   15   20    25     30     35     40     45    50
                                              Q

Figure 9: The …gure shows the impulse response of the expected long-term interest rate   t   in
the high debt economy (solid line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




                1.4


                1.2


                  1


                0.8
        Debt




                0.6


                0.4


                0.2


                  0
                      0   5   10   15   20    25     30     35     40     45    50
                                              Q

Figure 10: The …gure shows the impulse response of real debt in the high debt economy (solid
line) and in the zero debt economy (dashed line).




                                             58
