                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SUDDEN STOPS, SECTORAL REALLOCATIONS, AND THE REAL EXCHANGE
                                 RATE

                                          Timothy J. Kehoe
                                            Kim J. Ruhl

                                        Working Paper 14395
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14395


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




This paper has benefited from discussions with George Alessandria, David Backus, Michael Devereux,
Patrick Kehoe, Enrique Mendoza, Carlos Végh, and the participants at the Micro Foundations of Real
Exchange Rates Conference at the Carnegie Bosch Institute, the Workshop on Structural Analysis
of Business Cycles in the Open Economy at the Sveriges Riksbank, the XXXI Simposio del Análisis
 Económico, the New Perspectives on Financial Globalization Conference at the International Monetary
Fund, and seminars at Arizona State University, UCLA, MIT, and Washington University in St. Louis.
  This work was undertaken with the support of the National Science Foundation under grant SES-0536970.
 All of the data used in this paper are available at www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Sudden Stops, Sectoral Reallocations, and the Real Exchange Rate
Timothy J. Kehoe and Kim J. Ruhl
NBER Working Paper No. 14395
October 2008
JEL No. E13,F34,F41

                                             ABSTRACT

A sudden stop of capital flows into a developing country tends to be followed by a rapid switch from
trade deficits to surpluses, a depreciation of the real exchange rate, and decreases in output and total
factor productivity. Substantial reallocation takes place from the nontraded sector to the traded sector.
We construct a multisector growth model, calibrate it to the Mexican economy, and use it to analyze
Mexico's 1994-95 crisis. When subjected to a sudden stop, the model accounts for the trade balance
reversal and the real exchange rate depreciation, but it cannot account for the decreases in GDP and
TFP. Extending the model to include labor frictions and variable capital utilization, we still find that
it cannot quantitatively account for the dynamics of output and productivity without losing the ability
to account for the movements of other variables.


Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and NBER
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tkehoe@umn.edu

Kim J. Ruhl
NYU Stern School of Business
Department of Economics
44 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10012-1126
kruhl@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

A sudden stop of capital flows into a developing country tends to be followed by a switch
from trade deficits to surpluses, a depreciation of the real exchange rate, and decreases in
output and total factor productivity. Substantial reallocation takes place from the
nontraded sector to the traded sector. We construct a simple dynamic general equilibrium
model and calibrate it to Mexico in 1988. We find that the model can capture the large
capital inflows into Mexico following its financial opening in 1989–90, both because
Mexico was initially capital poor and because its working age population was growing
rapidly. When we subject the model to a sudden stop — the debt crisis in 1994–95 — it
can reproduce the movements of the trade balance, the real exchange rate, and the relative
price of nontraded goods. When the sudden stop is the only exogenous shock, the model
cannot reproduce the observed decreases in output and TFP. We then quantitatively
assess two frequently mentioned mechanisms that, at least qualitatively, could account
for the decline in output and TFP, frictions in reallocating labor and variable capital
utilization. We find that these mechanisms cannot account for the observed behavior of
output and TFP without causing the model to generate wild movements of the trade
balance, the real exchange rate, and the relative price of nontraded goods.
       There have been numerous theories of why sudden stops occur; see, for example,
Calvo (1988, 1998), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999), Cole and Kehoe (2000), and
Mendoza (2006). The models constructed to analyze a government’s decision to default
on its debt or a foreign lender’s willingness to lend typically take the effects of the default
on output as exogenous. This is done to maintain tractability. In contrast, a second line
of research has focused on the effects of sudden stops, taking the sudden stop as given,
which is our approach. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005), Cook and Devereux
(2006), and Meza and Quintin (2007) exogenously impose sudden stops and study their
effects on aggregate variables.
        The empirical literature regarding sudden stops has mainly focused on aggregate
variables. Calvo and Talvi (2005), Guidotti, Sturzenegger and Villar (2004), Chari,
Kehoe and McGrattan (2005), and Meza and Quintin (2007) document the declines in
GDP and TFP that accompany sudden stops. Our findings regarding aggregate output
and productivity are similar to theirs.


                                              1
       This paper focuses on the effects of a sudden stop on the disaggregated economy.
When credit is restricted, we find that traded output falls by less than nontraded output
and that labor and investment move from the nontraded sector to the traded sector, as is
also emphasized by Tornell and Westermann (2002). We also find that the movement in
the relative price of nontraded to traded goods accounts for about 20 percent of the
movement in real exchange rates. We document these characteristics for the sudden stop
in Mexico in 1994–95. Our findings are in line with Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo
(2005) and Mendoza (2005), who study the real exchange rate depreciations that
accompany sudden stops and also find that nontraded goods prices play a large role in
these depreciations.
       Accounting for the declines in GDP and TFP that coincide with sudden stops is
challenging. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2005) show that equilibrium models with
standard preferences predict not an output decrease, but an increase because of a decrease
in the consumption of leisure following a reversal of the current account balance. They
note that generating an output decrease requires frictions that have negative effects on
output large enough to overcome the natural response to a decrease in credit.
       Our analysis follows the analysis of great depressions of Cole and Ohanian (1999)
and Kehoe and Prescott (2002, 2007) in insisting that the model generates growth
accounting that matches that in the data. The growth accounting in the data indicates that
most of the drop in output during the sudden stop is due to a drop in TFP. We start by
explaining that the negative terms of trade shock generated by the sudden stop cannot
result in drops in TFP if output is measured as real GDP in base period prices as in the
data. We then extend our baseline model to incorporate two mechanisms that could
generate this drop in TFP. The first is costs to adjusting the amount of labor used in
production in each sector. These costs are modeled as drops in output, so the reallocation
of labor between the two sectors generates a decrease in TFP. In our calibrated model,
however, these costs cannot account for the observed decrease in TFP; increasing these
costs beyond a certain point just results in less reallocation. The second is variable
capital utilization, as in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) and Meza and
Quintin (2007). To the extent that the aggregate capital stock does not change but the
amount of output falls, the drop in utilization during the sudden stop appears as a


                                             2
decrease in TFP. In our model, however, while capital in the nontraded sector is
underutilized during the sudden stop, capital in the traded sector is overutilized.
Consequently, we find that variable capital utilization alone cannot account for the
observed decrease in TFP. Combining the labor adjustment costs and variable capital
utilization and pushing these frictions towards their limits, we find that the model is able
to generate the observed decrease in TFP. Doing so, however, produces wild movements
of the trade balance, the real exchange rate, and the relative price of nontraded goods.
        Other researchers have suggested that financial constraints are important for
understanding sudden stops: see, for example, Calvo (1998), Mendoza and Smith (2004),
Neumeyer and Perri (2005), and Schneider and Tornell (2004). We abstract from the
financial sector in our model to quantitatively assess how far a standard model can go in
explaining the effects of sudden stops. As discussed above, our simple model can go a
long way in accounting for the effects of a sudden stop, although the effects of a sudden
stop may work through the financial sector in generating declining TFP. It is worth
noting that the papers in existing literature on financial constraints and sudden stops
generate decreases in output largely through a decrease in labor, however, rather than
through the observed decrease in TFP.
       As a final extension, we consider a specification of our model in which the
economy is subject to an aggregate negative TFP shock. We find that the extended
model can also account for a large share of the decline in output without distorting our
ability to account for prices and trade flows. Although we do not view modeling the
decrease in TFP as an exogenous shock as an appealing explanation for the observed
decrease in output, we consider it an important robustness check.

2. The 1994–95 Mexican debt crisis

In this section, we present the properties of Mexico’s opening to foreign capital in 1989–
90 and its sudden stop in 1994–95. The successes and failures of our model depend on its
ability to account for these properties. The properties that we identify are typical of
sudden stop episodes in a large sample of countries; see Tornell and Westermann (2002).
       Figure 1 plots Mexico’s trade balance as a share of GDP. (All of the data used in
this paper are available at www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe .) As Mexico opened its capital


                                              3
markets, the country went from being a net lender to a net borrower. In 1994, the trade
deficit was 4.83 percent of GDP. In the final weeks of 1994, the sudden stop began as
the government had trouble rolling over its debt. (See, for example, Kehoe 1995b.) The
trade deficit became trade surpluses of 2.66 and 2.06 percent of GDP in 1995 and 1996.
When the sudden stop ended in 1997, the trade balance returned to a deficit, reaching
2.14 percent of GDP in 1998. The trade balance reversal is a robust feature of sudden
stops; see Guidotti, Sturzenegger, and Villar (2004).
        To address the natural question of whether there were foreseeable conditions in
Mexico that led to the sudden stop, consider the interest rate on Mexican dollar
denominated debt. (Our measure of this interest rate is the J.P. Morgan Emerging Market
Bond Index spread on Mexican Brady Bonds, computed after stripping out the
collateralized principal.) We decompose this interest rate into two parts: The first is the
U.S. Treasury bill rate, which is our proxy for the risk free rate. The second is the
Mexico-specific interest rate spread, which is commonly used to measure the country
specific interest rate premium. We find that the interest premia on Mexican debt did not
increase before the crisis. In November 1994, the interest premium on Mexican debt was
4.56 percent, less than the average premium from 1991 through November 1994. Not
until December, the first month of the crisis, did the premium increase to 8.90 percent
and then peak at 16.37 in March 1995. We take this behavior of interest premia as
evidence that the sudden stop was sudden and largely unforeseen.
        The sudden stop was accompanied by a large depreciation of the real exchange
rate. We define the real exchange rate for Mexico, vis-à-vis the United States, as

                                                                Pus ,t
(1)                             RERmex ,us ,t = NERmex ,us ,t
                                                                Pmex ,t

where NERmex ,us ,t is the peso-dollar exchange rate and Pj ,t is the price level in country j ,

as measured using gross output deflators. We plot the natural logarithm of the real
exchange rate for Mexico in figure 2. After the opening to foreign capital, the real
exchange rate appreciated; at the onset of the sudden stop, the real exchange rate
depreciated by 31.49 percent from 1994 to 1995 and appreciated again as the sudden stop
ended, approaching its 1994 level in 2000.


                                                 4
       To decompose the movements of the real exchange rate into sectoral components,
we follow Stockman and Tesar (1995) and Betts and Kehoe (2001) in defining
agriculture, mining, and manufacturing as the traded goods sector and construction and
services as the nontraded goods sector. We rewrite (1) as

                        ⎛               PT       ⎞ ⎛ Pmex
                                                       T
                                                          ,t Pmex ,t
                                                                       ⎞
(2)     RERmex ,us ,t = ⎜ NERmex ,us ,t Tus ,t   ⎟⎟ ⎜⎜ T               ⎟⎟ = RERmex ,us ,t × RERmex ,us ,t ,
                                                                               T               N
                        ⎜              Pmex ,t
                        ⎝                         ⎠ ⎝ Pus ,t Pus ,t     ⎠

where the price of traded goods, PT , is the gross output deflator for agriculture, mining,
and manufacturing. The first term in the decomposition measures the traded good real
exchange rate. The second term in the decomposition is the price of nontraded goods in
the United States relative to that in Mexico. We plot the log of RER N in figure 2. When
Mexico opened to foreign capital, the price of nontraded goods increased by 15.84
percent from 1988 to 1994. This accounts for 42.24 percent of the appreciation of the
real exchange rate. During the sudden stop, the price of nontraded goods decreased by
6.19 percent, accounting for 19.66 percent of the real exchange rate depreciation.
       We plot real GDP per working age (age 16–54) person and total factor
productivity in figure 3. The figure shows the sharp contraction of output during the first
year of the sudden stop. Real GDP per working age person fell by 9.05 percent in 1995.
To measure TFP we use the aggregate production function,

(3)                                         Yt = At K tα L1t−α ,

where Yt is real GDP, At is total factor productivity, K t is capital, and Lt is hours

worked in period t . We choose a capital share of α = 0.38 , in line with the estimates of
García-Verdú (2005). We compute TFP as

                                                       Yt
(4)                                          At =      α 1−α
                                                                .
                                                    K t Lt

The capital stock is constructed from investment data using the perpetual inventory
method, and labor is measured as total hours worked. TFP fell by 7.89 percent in 1995,
almost matching the decline in output.
       We have seen that the sudden stop was accompanied by a decline in output. The
sectoral data allow us to say more. In figure 4, we plot real value added for the traded

                                                      5
and nontraded sectors in Mexico. During the crisis, value added in the nontraded sector
fell more than in the traded sector and then recovered at a much slower rate. This shift in
production is the focus of our analysis and a key ingredient in our model below. In
response to a sudden stop, the relative price of traded to nontraded goods increased,
leading to a shift of resources away from the nontraded sector and into the traded sector.
In the next section, we construct a general equilibrium model to help us account for the
features of the data we have highlighted here.

3. Baseline model

We model Mexico as a semi-small open economy with perfect foresight over the paths of
interest rates, TFP, population, and tariffs. Mexico is a small open economy in the sense
that it takes world interest rates as exogenous, but Mexico is not small in the goods
market. The price of Mexico’s exported good changes in order to clear the market. In
1988 and 1989, the economy is closed to foreign capital. The economy opens to foreign
capital in 1990; five years later, there is a sudden stop when foreign investors
unexpectedly stop lending to the country in 1995 and 1996. From 1989 to 1993, Mexico
liberalized its financial markets, internally and externally; see, for example, Kehoe
(1995a). We choose 1990 as the date to model the financial opening because, as figure 1
shows, it was the first year in which Mexico had a large trade deficit. Our model
combines elements of the multisector, static applied general equilibrium models used to
study NAFTA (see, for example, Kehoe and Kehoe 1994), the models of Fernández de
Córdoba and Kehoe (2000) and Bems and Jönsson Hartelius (2006) used to study
financial liberalization in small open economies, and the models in the collection of
Kehoe and Prescott (2007) used to study great depressions.

3.1 Production

There are 5 types of goods in the model: a domestically produced traded good, yD , an

imported good, m , a composite traded good, yT made up of the domestic traded good

and imports, a nontraded good, y N , and an investment good, i . All goods markets are
perfectly competitive.



                                             6
        The domestic traded good is produced using capital, k Dt , labor, A Dt , the

composite traded good, zTD , and the nontraded good, z ND , according to


                                                                     ( g t A Dt ) ⎤⎥ .
                                                                                 1−α D
(5)                  yDt = min ⎡⎢ zTDt / aTD , z NDt / aND , AD k Dt
                                                                  αD
                                ⎣                                                      ⎦

The producer chooses capital, labor, and intermediate inputs to minimize costs, which
implies marginal product pricing conditions for capital and labor of the form

                                                                       ( g t A Dt )
                                                                                  1−α D
(6)                   rt = ( pDt − aTD pTt − aND pNt ) α D AD k Dt
                                                                α D −1
                                                                                          ,

and similarly for the wage wt . Perfect competition and constant returns to scale imply
that the producer earns zero profits in equilibrium:

(7)                       pDt yDt − rt k Dt − wt A Dt − pTt zTDt − pNt zTNt = 0 .

The production function for the nontraded good and the corresponding profit
maximization conditions are defined analogously. We assume that productivity in each
sector grows at the same, constant rate g − 1 .
        The composite traded good is made up of imports and the domestic traded good
using an Armington aggregator:
                                                                         1
(8)                                yTt = M ( μ xDt
                                                ζ
                                                   + (1 − μ ) mtζ ) ζ .

The imported good is the numeraire in this model, making its f.o.b. price equal to 1, but
imports are subject to domestically levied tariffs, τ t .
        The investment good is produced using a Cobb-Douglas production function:
                                           γ 1−γ
(9)                                yIt = GzTIt z NIt .

        Mexico is a semi-small open economy in the sense that it faces a downward
sloping demand curve for its exports. Foreign demand for the domestic traded good is
                                                                    −1
(10)                                  xFt = Dt ( (1 + τ Ft ) pTt )1−ζ ,




                                                      7
where τ Ft is the tariff imposed by the rest of the world on its imports. This export
demand function implies that the rest of the world has an Armington aggregator that is
analogous to the one in Mexico (8). The factor Dt grows over time, reflecting the
increasing demand for the goods produced in Mexico. This growth is driven by
population growth in the rest of the world as well as by technological progress.

3.2 Households

The economy is populated by a continuum of identical households. We differentiate the
total population from the working age population. We denote the working age population
At and match it to the evolution of the population aged 15–64 in Mexico. Letting nt
denote total population, we calculate the adult equivalent population as

                                                       1
(11)                                       nt = At +
                                                       2
                                                         ( nt − At )
to evaluate consumption per capita. We normalize the amount of time available for work
by a working age person to be 1 and denote the total labor supply in period t as A t .

Households choose this labor supply, A t , consumption of traded goods and nontraded

goods, cTt and cNt , investment in capital it , and bond holdings, bt , to maximize utility,

                                                                   ηψ
                             ⎛              ρ                  ρ                 (1−η )ψ ⎞
                             ⎜ ⎛    ⎛ c   ⎞            ⎛ c   ⎞   ⎞  ρ
                                                                      ⎛ A −  A ⎞         ⎟
               ∑ t =1988 β t ⎜ ⎜⎜ ε ⎜ nTt ⎟ + (1 − ε ) ⎜ nNt ⎟ ⎟⎟ ⎜ t A t ⎟ − 1⎟ / ψ
                 ∞
(12)
                             ⎜⎝ ⎝ t ⎠                  ⎝ t ⎠ ⎠ ⎝           t   ⎠         ⎟
                             ⎝                                                           ⎠

subject to the budget constraint,

(13)                pTt cTt + pNt cNt + qt it + bt +1 = wt A t + (1 + rt ) bt + rKt kt + Tt ,

the law of motion for capital,

(14)                                       kt +1 = kt (1 − δ ) + it ,

the appropriate nonnegativity constraints, initial conditions for the capital stock, k1988 ,

and bond holdings, b1988 , and a condition on bond holdings,



                                                       8
(15)                                                bt ≥ − nt g t B ,

where B is chosen large enough so that this constraint rules out Ponzi schemes but does
not otherwise bind in equilibrium.
           If the economy is open to foreign capital, so that consumers can buy and sell
foreign bonds, the first order conditions for bt and kt imply the arbitrage condition

(16)                                     1 + rt = ( (1 − δ ) qt + rKt ) / qt −1 .

When the economy is closed to foreign capital, the interest rate rt is endogenously

determined by the return to domestic capital and payments on debt, −bt , are made at an

exogenous rate rt . When the economy is open to foreign capital rt = r * +σ t , where the

world interest rate is constant at r * and the interest rate premium is σ t . Bonds are
denominated in units of the imported good, which implies that a real depreciation makes
debt more expensive in terms of domestically produced goods. Households receive a
lump sum transfer, Tt , of tariff revenues collected on imports. In our calibration, we also
impose a tax on net capital income in 1989 to account for the low level of investment in
1988 relative to future periods, replacing rK 1989 in the budget constraint (13) by

(1 − τ K 1989 ) rK 1989 .   The revenue from this tax is also rebated in the lump sum transfer T1989 .


3.3 Market clearing and equilibrium

The market clearing conditions are
(17)                                                   xDt = yDt

(18)                                    cNt + z NIt + z NDt + z NNt = y Nt

(19)                                   cTt + zTIt + zTDt + zTNt + xFt = yTt

(20)                                                    it = yIt

(21)                                               k Dt + k Nt = kt

(22)                                              A Dt + A Nt = A t .



                                                            9
The balance of payments condition is

(23)                                mt + bt +1 = pTt xFt + (1 + rt ) bt .

Here pDt xFt − mt = bt +1 − (1 + rt ) bt is the balance of trade and bt +1 − bt = pTt xFt − mt + rt bt is

the balance of payments.
        In the model without a sudden stop, an equilibrium consists of sequences of all
relevant variables such that households maximize utility subject to the budget constraints
and other constraints, the prices and quantities satisfy the profit maximization conditions
for producers, the rest of the world demands Mexican exports according to its demand
function, the market clearing conditions and balance of payments conditions hold, and
tariff and tax revenues equal the lump sum rebate in each year. The economy is closed to
foreign capital flows in 1988 and 1989, and we assume that net foreign bond holdings
stay constant at b1990 = b1989 = b1988 and that payments on the debt −bt are made at the rate

r1990 = r1989 = r1988 . In the model with a sudden stop in 1995, the equilibrium is that of the
model without the sudden stop up until 1995. The equilibrium in 1995 and thereafter is
that of a model starting in 1995, with initial capital and foreign bond holdings given by
the model without a sudden stop, but in which the economy is closed to foreign capital
flows in 1995 and 1996, and in which net foreign bond holdings stay constant at
b1997 = b1996 = b1995 and that payments on the debt −bt are made at the rate

r1997 = r1996 = r1995 . In other words, we model the equilibrium as one of perfect foresight,
except that the sudden stop is completely unexpected.
        The period in the model is one year. To compute the equilibrium of the model,
we truncate the model after 100 years, requiring the equilibrium to converge to a
balanced growth path in 2088. See Conesa, Kehoe, and Ruhl (2007) for information
about how to do this sort of computation, including an algorithm.

4. Calibration

As in the multisector, static applied general equilibrium models analyzed by Kehoe and
Kehoe (1994), most of the model’s parameters are calibrated so that the equilibrium of
the model in 1988 replicates the data in an input-output matrix. Table 1 presents such a


                                                    10
matrix for Mexico in 1988. We take the United States to stand in for the rest of the
world; in 1994, the United States accounted for 68.97 percent of total merchandise
imports to Mexico and 84.22 percent of total merchandise exports from Mexico.
        The dynamic nature of the model makes several other features of the calibration
of crucial importance. The initial capital stock k1988 and the initial tax on capital

income τ K 1989 are calibrated so that Mexico is capital poor. (We could impose a tax

τ K 1988 , but it is irrelevant since k1988 is fixed and tax revenues are rebated to consumers.)
In 1990, Mexico not only opens itself to foreign capital flows, but also undertakes
reforms to domestic financial markets that we model as an elimination of τ K 1989 . Also of
crucial importance to the dynamics of the model are the calibration of the paths for
working age population and adult equivalent population, At and nt , and the growth in

these variables compared to growth in the United States, captured by Dt . When Mexico
opens to capital flows, it borrows, not only because it is capital poor, but also because it
has a rapidly growing working age population. The rapidly growing population causes
this borrowing to persist over time. The interest premia σ t play an important role in
determining the path of borrowing, in particular, slowing it initially. Of less importance
are the paths for Mexican tariffs τ t and U.S. tariffs τ Ft . We summarize the baseline
model’s calibration in table 2.

4.1 Production parameters

The parameters in the production functions for the domestic traded and nontraded goods
are computed from the input-output matrix in table 1. We choose quantities for the
model so that all prices and the wage rate are equal to 1 in 1988. Quantity units have
been normalized so that GDP is 100. Since prices have been normalized to 1, this means
that every quantity is expressed as a percent of 1988 GDP.
        Using the profit maximization conditions for producers, we calibrate the
parameters of the production functions so that the quantities in the input-output matrix
are equilibrium values in 1988. Consider, for example, the production function for the
investment good (9). The first order conditions for profit maximization imply that



                                               11
                                         pT 1988    γ z NI 1988
(24)                                             =                 .
                                         pN 1988 (1 − γ ) zTI 1988

Setting pT 1988 = pN 1988 = 1 and plugging in the values zTI 1988 = 10.158 and z NI 1988 = 12.403 ,

we obtain γ = 0.450 , which is in line with the estimates of Bems (2008). We calculate

                                            yIt           22.561
(25)                             G=       γ    1−γ
                                                   =                   = 1.990 .
                                         zTIt z NIt 10.158 12.4030.550
                                                          0.450




        To calibrate the Armington aggregator, we must choose the elasticity of
substitution between imports and domestic traded goods, 1 (1 − ζ ) . As discussed in Ruhl

(2008), there is debate over this elasticity since business cycle models tend to imply low
elasticities while analysis of trade policy episodes suggests elasticities much higher. We
choose 1 (1 − ζ ) = 2 . The first order conditions for profit maximization imply that

                                                                  ζ −1
                                    μ    p         ⎛m ⎞
(26)                                   = D1988 ⎜ 1988 ⎟                  .
                                  1 − μ 1 + τ 1988 ⎝ xD1988 ⎠

With prices normalized to 1 in the base year, μ can be calculated using the data on
imports and domestic traded goods. The parameter M is chosen so that the output of the
composite traded good in equation (8) is that observed in the data.
        We choose the growth rate g − 1 to be 2 percent, which is the growth rate of U.S.
GDP per working age person during the twentieth century, and which Kehoe and Prescott
(2007) argue is the growth rate implied by technological progress. Our results indicate
that this value may be a little too high for Mexico, at least during 1988–2000.
        We set r1988 = 0.1574 . This value comes from setting r* = 0.0400 and from our
data on interest premia and is similar to that obtained by the calculation of how much of
the income difference between Mexico and the United States can be accounted for by
differences in capital stocks by Kehoe (1995b). Given that depreciation was 10.566
percent of GDP in 1988 while gross capital earnings were 37.295, we can calculate

                                         37.295 − 10.566
(27)                           k1988 =                   = 169.817
                                             0.1574



                                                    12
                                         10.566
(28)                               δ=           = 0.062 .
                                        169.817

4.2 Household parameters

We set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1 (1 −ψ ) = 0.5 . Following McGrattan

and Prescott (2003), we set the world interest rate in the balanced growth path
r* = 0.040 . Requiring this interest rate to be consistent with balanced growth implies
that β = g 1−ψ (1 + r *) = 0.987 . Following Kravis, Heston, and Summers (1982) and

Stockman and Tesar (1995), we set the elasticity of substitution between traded and
nontraded goods in consumption as 1/ (1 − ρ ) = 0.5 . The first order conditions from the
household’s problem yields the condition
                                                         1− ρ
                                   ε    p      ⎛c        ⎞
(29)                                  = T 1988 ⎜ T 1988 ⎟       ,
                                 1 − ε pN 1988 ⎝ cN 1988 ⎠

which can be used to calibrate ε . Given the value of A t / At = 0.267 from the data set of

Bergoeing, Kehoe, Kehoe, and Soto (2002), we can similarly calibrate η .
       In 1989, Mexico ran a trade surplus of 1.390 percent of GDP. We set the initial
stock of bonds held by the consumer, b0 , so that the model replicates this statistic. To
account for the level of investment in 1989 in the input-output matrix, we set
τ K 1989 = 0.201 in the baseline numerical experiment. Since the return to capital in 1989

varies in our other numerical experiments, we need to recalibrate τ K1989 in each one.

4.3 Exogenous processes

To account for any changes that might be due to the North American Free Trade
Agreement, we include falling tariffs in the model. We model Mexican tariffs on U.S.
goods as being 10.00 percent until 1994, at which time they fall to 5.00 percent. From
1994 to 2004 the tariff rates fall by 0.50 percentage points a year, until they are 0. U.S.
tariffs on Mexican goods are 3.00 percent until 1994, at which time they fall to 1.50
percent. From there, tariffs fall by 0.15 percentage points per year until they reach 0 in



                                             13
2004. Both tariffs remain at 0 forever after 2004. (See Kehoe 1995a for information on
the Mexican trade reform.)
        As can be seen in figure 5, the interest premium on Mexican debt fell from 11.74
percent in December of 1990 to 4.56 percent in November of 1994. These higher interest
rates are usually regarded as country specific risk premia, and the gradual elimination of
these premia reflect the idea that Mexico gradually gained credibility as it instituted
structural changes. Since we do not model the structural changes taking place in the
Mexican economy, we take as exogenous a time varying interest premium on the rate at
which Mexico can borrow from the rest of the world. This approach is also used in Bems
and Jönsson Hartelius (2006) and Cook and Devereux (2006).
        We use the J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index spread on Brady Bonds as
our measure of the Mexican interest premia, as discussed previously in section 2. The
premia spike in 1995, reflecting the increase in the perceived country risk following the
sudden stop. Since the post-1994 premia would not have evolved in the same way if the
country had not experienced the crisis, we assume that agents believed the path of interest
premia to be that same as in the data up to 1994, and that the premia gradually decline to
zero by 2005. These anticipated premia are graphed in figure 5. Once the sudden stop
has occurred, agents perfectly foresee the path of interest rates that are the same as in the
data until 1998, at which point they gradually decline to zero by 2015. Our data start in
1991, and we assume that the premia for 1988–90 are the same as in 1991.
        Population growth rates for the United States and Mexico are exogenous to the
model. These population growth rates are constructed from the observed data for 1988–
2005 and from population projections made by the United Nations for 2005–50. (See the
data appendix available at www.econ.umn.edu/ ~tkehoe.) We determine the series for
Dt using the calibrated value for D1988 , the growth factor g = 1.020 , and the growth of
working age population in the United States. It is worth noting that the constant interest
rate r* = 0.040 is not consistent with varying population growth, but we do not intend to
carefully model the dynamics of U.S. interest rates.
        In the formula for the real exchange rate in (1) and that for the relative price of
nontraded goods in (2), we need a series for the relative price PusT ,t Pus ,t . We take this



                                               14
series from the data. Given our modeling of Mexico as a semi-small open economy, this
series plays no role in our model, only in the comparison of the results with the data.

5. Results

Before subjecting the model to a sudden stop, it is useful to study briefly the model
without a sudden stop. When Mexico opens to capital flows, its capital-output ratio is
lower than it will be in the balanced growth path. Figure 6 plots the capital-output ratio
for the model without a sudden stop. Mexico accumulates capital until it reaches the
balanced growth path. To smooth consumption over the transition, the country borrows
from abroad initially, running trade deficits. The deficits switch to surpluses as the
country pays back the debt.

5.1 Baseline model

When the sudden stop occurs, the traded good, whose use was being financed by a trade
deficit, becomes relatively scarce and its price increases. Since the sudden stop is
unexpected, capital and labor are not efficiently allocated across the two sectors, so they
are reallocated from the nontraded to the traded good sector. The results of the baseline
numerical experiment are summarized in figure 7 and table 3.
       Figure 7(a) plots the trade balance in the model and the data. As in the graphs
that follow, the data are plotted as a solid line and the model results are plotted as a
dashed line. The model does a good job of reproducing the shape of the trade balance.
The trade balance goes negative when the country opens to capital flows and sharply
reverses when the sudden stop occurs. As the sudden stop ends, the trade balance returns
to a deficit, though it takes longer in the model, not turning negative until 2002. In the
model, Mexico does not return to borrowing immediately following the sudden stop
because the interest premia, shown in figure 5, remain high until 1999.
       Figure 7(b) plots the real exchange rate. The real exchange rate in the model does
not appreciate as quickly as in the data, but it displays the same sharp depreciation as the
data during the sudden stop. In the model, the real exchange rate depreciates by 41.36
percent compared to the 31.49 percent in the data. As the sudden stop ends, the real
exchange rate appreciates, as in the data, although less so. During the sudden stop, the


                                              15
price of nontraded goods in Mexico decreases. This can be seen in figure 7(b), which
displays the relative price of nontraded goods, − log RER N . From 1994 to 1995 the price
of nontraded goods in the model falls by 6.10 percent, compared to 6.19 percent in the
data.
        Mendoza (2000) and others show that changes in RERT and those in RER N are
negatively correlated in periods of managed exchange rates and positively correlated
otherwise. The period 1988–2000 straddles a regime change; Mexico allowed the peso to
float starting in 1995. In the data, the correlation between first differences in RERT and
those in RER N is −0.30 for 1988–94 and 0.79 for 1995–2000. Our real model cannot
address issues of nominal exchange rate management. Nevertheless, it captures 36
percent of the difference between the two correlations. The relevant correlation is 0.54
for 1988–94 and 0.93 for 1995–2000, suggesting that the relevant differences between the
two subperiods involve more than just differences in exchange rate management.
        Our model departs from the small open economy framework by assuming that the
terms of trade, which are plotted in figure 7(d), are not exogenous. The terms of trade in
the model depreciate much more than those in the data; the boom in exports that
accompanies the sudden stop drives the traded good price too low relative to the data.
Some of this is a result of model specification. In the model, all domestically produced
traded goods are exported, in contrast to a model where the good that is exported differs
from the basket of all traded goods. Data that are more closely related to our model’s
terms of trade are the traded good real exchange rate, RERT . Figure 7(d) shows that the
depreciation in RERT is larger than that in the terms of trade and is almost identical to
that in model. In section 5.5, we study a model with exogenous terms of trade.
        Much of the model’s failure to capture the speed at which the trade balance
returned to a deficit and the real exchange rate appreciated is due to the high interest
premia in 1998 and 1999, due to the Asian crisis and the Russian crisis. A model in
which the jump in these premia is sudden and unforeseen could do better in capturing the
trade deficits and the real exchange rate depreciation. So could a model in which a
period is a quarter rather than a year — notice that, in figure 5, the interest premia are not
high during all of 1998 or 1999.



                                             16
        Figure 7(c) shows that the model reproduces the shift of production from the
nontraded to the traded sector, but it fails to capture the falling output in the traded sector.
Output in the nontraded sector does fall, but not by as much as it does in the data. Figure
7(f) compares GDP per working age person and TFP in the model and in the data. The
model does a poor job of generating the decline in output and TFP that we see in the data.
We discuss this feature of the model in detail in section 6.
        The qualitative features of our results come from having two goods, one of which
is nontraded, and an initial capital stock that is below its balanced growth levels. The
quantitative features of our results are determined by many factors, but the most
important two are the specifications of the interest rate premia and of the population
growth rates. In extensive sensitivity analysis not reported here, we have found that it is
these sorts of factors — those related to the model’s dynamics — that are most important
to our results. The specifications of the static features are far less important. When we
model the combination of intermediate goods and value added in the production functions
for goods in (5) as being Cobb-Douglas rather than fixed proportions, for example, we
find that the results change by negligible amounts.

5.2 Model without interest rate premia

To see how the interest premia determine our results, we consider a model without them.
We recalibrate parameters to match the same targets as in the baseline model. Table 3
summarizes the model’s results. The results for the model without interest premia are
qualitatively similar to those of the baseline model, but are far more volatile, as can be
seen in figure 8(a). Without the gradually falling premia, Mexico immediately runs large
trade deficits, quickly accumulating debt. When the sudden stop occurs, the current
account reversal is much larger than in the baseline model. When the sudden stop ends,
the country immediately returns to borrowing.
        Immediately being able to borrow at the world interest rate leads to a larger
movement out of the traded good sector in the early 1990s. This increases the price of
the domestic traded good and drives the sharp real exchange rate appreciation in figure
8(b). During the sudden stop, the real exchange rate depreciates even more so than in the
baseline model as the larger debt that has been accumulated requires larger interest


                                              17
payments, which brings about a larger boom in exports. As is clear from table 3, the
interest premia have little effect on the aggregate quantities.

5.3 Model without population growth

Mexico is experiencing a demographic transition; the population of age 15–64 is growing
faster than the total population. The growing working age population increases the
demand for capital, creating a greater incentive to borrow abroad. In this section, we
consider the baseline model, but without population growth. The results are summarized
in table 3. Figure 9(a) plots the trade balance. It is clear from the figure that population
growth is a key driver of the model. Without population growth, Mexican households
quickly accumulate enough capital to make borrowing unnecessary, which can be seen by
comparing figure 9(b) to 7(f). In fact, after the sudden stop, agents would like to lend to
the rest of the world in order to take advantage of the high interest rate premia in 1998.

5.4 Model without trade liberalization

During the period we study, Mexico was liberalizing its trade, both unilaterally and
through the North American Free Trade Agreement. To capture this in the baseline
model, we have tariffs falling over time, as described in section 4. We test the sensitivity
of the model to this assumption by solving the model with tariffs set to zero in every
period. The recalibration to 1988 requires us to modify the input-output matrix to
eliminate the initial tariff. The results of this model are summarized in table 3. Besides
speeding up import growth in the early 1990s and slightly increasing the overall volatility
of our results, removing trade liberalization has little effect.

5.5 Exogenous terms of trade

In the baseline model, Mexico faces an export demand function (10). This specification,
although standard in static applied general equilibrium trade models, is a departure from
the common assumption that the export price is an exogenous variable in open economy
macro models. The terms of trade in the baseline model depart significantly during the
sudden stop, as was seen in figure 7(d). In this version of the model, we allow the terms
of trade to be endogenous in all periods except for 1995. We adjust Dt , the scale



                                              18
parameter in the export demand function, (10), in 1995 and thereafter by the factor of
1.638, so that the increase in the terms of trade in the model is exactly the same as it is in
the data. This is an increase in U.S. demand for Mexican exports resulting from NAFTA,
but not captured by our Armington specification (10). We can think of Ruhl (2008) as
providing a justification, but we should note that we assume that the increase is not
foreseen. The results are summarized in table 3 and figure 10.
       In table 3, the results from the model with exogenous terms of trade differ from
the baseline results in two significant ways: during the sudden stop, the real exchange
rate does not depreciate enough, and imports increase. The smaller depreciation of the
real exchange rate is, again, the product of the model specification; the terms of trade are
RERT , so dampening the terms of trade dampens RERT , which dampens the response of
the real exchange rate. Given the specification that the exported good is the same as the
traded good, the model accounts either for the terms of trade or the real exchange rate,
but not both. To do both, we would need to model exports as having a different price
than the basket of all traded goods.

6. Output and productivity

The baseline model can account for the trade balance, real exchange rates, and relative
prices. Yet, as seen in figure 7(f), it cannot reproduce the output dynamics in Mexico.
       We decompose the growth of GDP using an accounting framework based on the
neoclassical growth model. Following Hayashi and Prescott (2002) and Kehoe and
Prescott (2002), we write the production function in (3) in terms of output per working
age person and measures of factor inputs that are constant along a balanced growth path,
                                                      α
                                            1 ⎛ K ⎞
                                                     1−α
                                    Yt                   Lt
(30)                                   = At1−α ⎜ t ⎟        ,
                                    Nt         ⎝ Yt ⎠ N t

where N t is the working age population. We take the logarithm of (30) and use it to
decompose changes in output per working age person into changes in labor, capital
accumulation, and TFP.
       The growth accounting is presented in table 3. In 1988–94 output per working
age person grew at a rate of 1.06 percent per year, more than half of which came from an


                                              19
increase in hours worked. During the sudden stop, output per working age person fell by

8.89 percent, the TFP factor, At1−α , fell by 12.69 percent, the capital factor, ( K t Yt )1−α ,
                                        1                                                                         α




increased by 6.18 percent, and hours worked per working age person fell by 2.38 percent.
Since the end of the crisis, output per working age person grew at 3.16 percent per year,
mostly accounted for by growth in TFP and hours worked. Our results are similar to
those in Meza and Quintin (2007) who also use a growth accounting framework to study
sudden stops in Mexico and countries affected by the Asian crisis in the late 1990s.
        Growth accounting makes it clear that any theory that hopes to explain the drop in
output following a sudden stop must also deliver a sharp decline in aggregate TFP. Our
growth accounting provides discipline — as in the papers in Kehoe and Prescott (2007)
— to our search for a model of output dynamics. In what follows, we consider candidate
explanations for the output drops that have been suggested in the literature: the increased
price of intermediate inputs, frictions in the labor market, variable capital utilization, and
quasilinear utility functions.
        In analyzing the results from our model, we do growth accounting using equation
(30), treating the data generated by our model just as the Mexican statistical agency, the
Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía, e Informática, and we treat the data from
Mexico. We calculate real output, Yt in equation (30), as GDP in 1993 base year prices:


                                                                     ( g t A Dt )
                                                                                   1−α D
             Yt = ( pD1993 − aTD pT 1993 − aND pN 1993 ) AD k Dt
                                                              α D −1

(31)                                                                                                          .
                                                                             (g A )
                                                                                        1−α N
                   + ( pN 1993 − aTN pT 1993 − aNN pN 1993 ) AN k Ntα N −1     t
                                                                                   Nt           + τ 1993 mt

Similarly, we calculate the investment that goes into calculating the capital stock in
equation (30) by dividing investment expenditures in current prices pTt zTIt + pNt z NIt by
the GDP deflator formed by dividing GDP in current prices by constant prices in equation
(31). Notice that the resulting measure of the capital stock differs from that in the model
in equations (9) and (14). This is true especially in the model with variable capital
utilization and allows the model to account for some of the changes in measured TFP.




                                                        20
6.1 Imported intermediate goods

At the onset of the sudden stop, the terms of trade turned against Mexico. Consequently,
the exports that Mexico was producing now bought fewer imported intermediate goods.
Thus, negative terms of trade shocks have an effect similar to a negative TFP shock. Was
the deterioration in the terms of trade important for understanding Mexico’s output and
TFP? Quantitatively, the answer is no. The terms of trade in the baseline model
depreciate — even more so than in the data — yet there is no noticeable drop in either
output or TFP. Not only do terms of trade changes not quantitatively affect output in the
model, but, when output is measured as real GDP in (31), the terms of trade shocks
cannot qualitatively effect output either. This is because the terms of trade enter GDP
calculations as a price. As discussed in Kehoe and Ruhl (2008), the national accounting
procedures imply that terms of trade shocks can rarely affect real GDP.

6.2 Labor frictions

In this section, we introduce a cost to firms that adjust their labor inputs. During the
sudden stop the economy wants to move workers from the nontraded sector to the traded
sector. In doing so, some output is lost. Qualitatively, this creates a drop in GDP and a
drop in TFP. In this section, we assess the quantitative relevance of this friction.
       The model is identical to the baseline model except that firms lose some output if
they adjust employment. The adjustment function takes the quadratic form used by
Sargent (1978). The production function for domestic traded goods becomes
                                                                                          2
                                                                                ⎛ A       ⎞
                                                         ( g t A Dt ) ⎤⎥ − g tθ ⎜ Dt − 1⎟ A Dt −1 .
                                                                     1−α D
(32)     yDt = min ⎡⎢ zTDt / aTD , z NDt / aND , AD k Dt
                                                      αD
                    ⎣                                                      ⎦    ⎝ A Dt −1 ⎠
The production function for nontraded goods changes similarly. We assume that the
costs grow at the same rate as productivity, g − 1 , so that the costs are nontrivial in the
model’s balanced growth path. We assume that labor in each sector has grown
proportionately between 1987 and 1988. Not imposing some sort of adjustment cost in
1988 results in a sharp drop in output in 1989. The adjustment costs in 1988 require us to
recalibrate all of the parameters of each production function so that the equilibrium
replicates the 1988 input-output matrix.



                                                   21
       The labor adjustment cost function adds a new parameter, θ , that we calibrate to
match the reallocation of labor across the two sectors that we find in the data. In Mexico,
as in most industrialized countries, the share of labor used in the traded sector has a
negative trend. During the sudden stop, labor stops moving out of the traded sector and
even increases by a small amount; this amounts to — relative to the trend — a significant
reallocation of workers to the traded sector. We could model this by specifying different
rates of growth of technological progress, g D > g N , in the production functions. Instead,
we abstract from the secular trend in employment, so we remove a least-squares linear
time trend both from the data and from the model. Figure 11(a) plots the detrended ratio
of traded labor to total labor. We set θ = 6.468 so that the reallocation from 1994 to
1997 is the same in the model as in the data.
       The results for the model with labor frictions are summarized in table 4. Labor
frictions have their largest impact on the price of nontraded goods, as shown in figure
11(b). The frictions restrict the amount of traded goods that can be produced, leading to
higher traded good prices in this model relative to the baseline model. The bilateral price
of nontraded goods in Mexico falls 31.38 percent, more than five times that in the
baseline model. The large movement in the relative price of nontraded goods causes the
real exchange rate to depreciate during the sudden stop by 61.30 percent compared to
41.36 in the baseline model.
       Returning to the original argument for including these costs, we can see from
table 4 that GDP rises by about half as much as in the baseline model and TFP falls by
0.26 percent; the movements are nowhere near as large as those in the data. It is worth
noting that movements in TFP are not monotonic in the cost parameter θ : setting θ very
high results in very little movement of labor and very low costs incurred.

6.3 Variable capital utilization

Our third candidate explanation is variable capital utilization. Firms choose how much to
utilize the capital stock, but the more that capital is used, the higher is the depreciation
rate. The trade-off implies that when the marginal product of capital is low, the agents
will choose not to use it as much. In the eyes of the statistician, though, capital is




                                              22
measured the same way regardless of utilization, which is unobserved. This
measurement issue implies that a decrease in utilization will appear as low productivity.
        The law of motion for capital in the domestic traded sector is

(33)                             k Dt +1 = (1 − δ ( u Dt ) ) k Dt + iDt ,

where

                                                      χ ω
(34)                               δ ( uDt ) = δ +     ( u − 1) .
                                                      ω Dt

                                                                                 (g A )
                                                                                            1−α D
Value added in the production function (5) is now AD ( uDt k Dt )
                                                                            αD     t
                                                                                       Dt           . We assume

that the traded sector has the same utilization technology. Here capital utilization is u ;
the parameter ω governs the curvature of the depreciation function; and δ and χ are
parameters calibrated so that depreciation in 1988 is equal to that in the data and so that
uD1988 = u N 1988 = 1 . This specification nests our baseline specification in the limiting case

where ω tends to infinity and the specification of Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman
(1988) in the case where χ / ω = δ .

        We first consider the case where we calibrate ω = 3.751 so that χ / ω = δ . The
results are summarized in table 4. The model can generate about one-third of the drop in
the TFP factor, but GDP still increases during the sudden stop. This is because utilization
is another margin on which to adjust. During the sudden stop, traded capital utilization
increases and nontraded capital utilization decreases, as in figure 12(b). This allows the
economy to produce more traded output than it could in the baseline model.
        If we combine the labor frictions and variable capital utilization, we can account
for the observed fall in TFP. We set ω = 6.510 and θ = 8.964 , producing both the drop
in TFP and the reallocation of labor observed in the data. In this specification, χ / ω < δ .
The labor friction makes it more difficult to move labor across the sectors, so the change
in capital utilization is larger, creating the larger drop in TFP. The model with both
frictions also decreases GDP almost as much as in the data. Notice, however, that the
other results generated by the model are sharply at odds with the data: the trade balance,
real exchange rate, and relative price of nontraded goods fluctuate wildly. By limiting


                                                  23
the movements in labor, the model forces adjustments to take place elsewhere. While
combining frictions can match the observed drop in TFP, it destroys the model’s ability
to account for other parts of the data.

6.4 Quasilinear utility

When the baseline model is hit with a sudden stop, the labor input increases because the
wealth effect of the sudden stop overwhelms the substitution effect. Households prefer to
work more during the sudden stop and to consume less leisure to make up for the loss of
income. In some small open economy models, however, the period utility function is
specified as a quasilinear function, as in Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988),
                                                                                       ψ
                                    ⎛⎛                                                   ⎞
                                                                                    η ⎞
                                                                       1
                                                 ρ                 ρ ρ
                                    ⎜   ⎛
                                  1 ⎜ ⎛c ⎞                   ⎛c ⎞   ⎞         ⎛A ⎞ ⎟     ⎟
(35)       u ( cTt , cNt , A t ) = ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ε ⎜ Tt ⎟ + (1 − ε ) ⎜ Nt ⎟ ⎟ − λ g t ⎜ t ⎟ ⎟ − 1⎟ ,
                                  ψ ⎜ ⎜ ⎜ ⎝ nt ⎠             ⎝ nt ⎠ ⎟⎠        ⎝ At ⎠ ⎟   ⎟
                                    ⎜⎝⎝                                               ⎠  ⎟
                                    ⎝                                                    ⎠

so that there is no wealth effect on labor supply. As Chakraborty (2006) points out, using
this utility function in a one sector model of sudden stops eliminates the increase in labor
because of the wealth effect generated by a standard utility function.
       We consider a model with a utility in which ψ = 0 , that is, in which
intertemporal utility is logarithmic, because we cannot calibrate a value of β less than 1
if ψ = −1 . We set η = 3 and calibrate λ to match hours worked in 1988. Table 5
reports the results. These results are very similar to the baseline model, except the
increase in labor during the sudden stop is less than half of that in the baseline model.
Labor still increases because of the increase in working age population. Labor per
working age person declines slightly because of a small drop in the wage relative to the
prices of consumption goods. One problem with the quasilinear utility function is that it
produces a large positive trend in labor as the economy increases its capital-output ratio.

6.5 Exogenous decrease in TFP

Our simple model, in which a sudden stop acts on an economy through the interaction of
traded and nontraded goods, is successful in reproducing many features of the Mexican
crisis, but is unable to account for the change in GDP. In this section, we consider a


                                                 24
version of the model with an exogenous TFP shock. This exercise is not to suggest we
should be content to model the observed decrease in TFP as exogenous, but rather to
show that our model is capable of delivering decreases in aggregate output while still
accounting for the trade flows and prices.
       We modify the baseline model by allowing for a one-time, exogenous TFP drop.
We introduce variation in TFP at the aggregate level by allowing the technological
growth rate parameter in the domestic traded production function to vary with time,


                                                                  (               )
                                                                                  1−α D
                  yDt = min ⎡⎢ zTDt / aTD , z NDt / aND , AD k Dt
                                                               αD
                                                                  (ν t g ) A Dt           ⎤,
                                                                          t
(36)                                                                                      ⎥⎦
                             ⎣

and similarly for the nontraded production function. The shock to total factor
productivity, ν t , is the same across industries. We assume that ν t is equal to 1 for all

years before 1995, and is equal to ν < 1 for 1995 and thereafter. This implies that TFP in
the model falls exactly as much as it does in the data, as can be seen in figure 13(b).
       We assume that agents are surprised by the TFP shock in the same way they are
surprised about the sudden stop; they do not foresee the TFP drop, but they perfectly
foresee the path of TFP afterward. We compute the model using both the standard utility
function, where we calibrate ν = 0.880 , and the quasilinear utility function, where we
calibrate ν = 0.878 . The results of the models are summarized in table 5. In both
models, the TFP drop has little effect on the results on prices and the trade balance.
Where the TFP shock does matter is in the labor supply decision. The drop in
productivity makes wages fall during the sudden stop. In the model with standard
preferences, this causes labor to rise less than in the baseline model, but the wealth effect
is still strong enough to increase labor. With quasilinear utility, the substitution effect
causes labor input to fall, even more so than in the data. Overall, the exogenous drop in
TFP makes the model fit the data — particularly the data on output — better.
       To capture the drop in labor during the sudden stop, there are alternatives to
quasilinear utility. Meza (2007), for example, shows that increases in taxes on labor and
consumption in 1995 can account for the decrease in labor in a model with a standard
utility function. Including taxes in our model, as in Conesa, Kehoe, and Ruhl (2007),
could also help us account for the sharp drop in consumption that occurred in Mexico in



                                                   25
1995. As Meza (2007) points out, the value added tax in Mexico increased sharply that
year. Tornell and Westermann (2002) point out that the severity of this drop was unusual
among sudden stop experiences, and our model has trouble accounting for it.
       That large exogenous changes in TFP can account for large changes in output in
models like this is not a new result. For example, many of the papers in Kehoe and
Prescott (2007) have shown that the large declines in output that make up great
depressions can be accounted for by exogenous drops in TFP. We do not, however,
believe that, for an exogenous reason unrelated to the sudden stop, TFP fell in 1995, but
we leave identifying the inefficiencies set into motion by the sudden stop to future work,
such as Mendoza (2006). In this section, we have shown that, when the model is
modified to produce a large decline in aggregate output, our results concerning prices and
trade flows are largely unchanged.

7.   Conclusion

We have studied sudden stops focusing on their effects on the traded sector relative to the
nontraded sector. In the data, we find that the nontraded sector suffers a larger decline in
output and a slower recovery from the sudden stop. Resources are transferred from the
nontraded sector to the traded sector and the relative price of traded goods increases.
These facts provide insights into how sudden stops may move through the economy —
namely, through relative price effects.
       We have constructed a simple model with traded and nontraded goods and
calibrated it to Mexico. When we subject the model to a sudden stop — and nothing else
— the model can account for the depreciation in real exchange rates and the trade balance
reversal. Though the simple model can account for prices and the behavior of the
disaggregated economy, it cannot account for the changes in aggregate TFP and GDP.
       Introducing frictions in terms of labor adjustment costs and variable capital
utilization into the model can produce a decline in TFP. If these frictions are large
enough to account for the observed decrease in TFP, however, they generate wild results
for the other variables. The results for a model with an exogenous decrease in TFP
indicate that identifying another mechanism by which the sudden stop causes a drop in
TFP — possibly in combination with the frictions that we have studied — is needed.


                                             26
                                      References

Bems, R. (2008), “Aggregate Investment Expenditures on Tradable and Nontradable
Goods,” Review of Economics Dynamics, 11(4), 852–83.

Bems, R. and K. Jönsson Hartelius (2006), “Trade Deficits in the Baltic States: How
Long Will the Party Last?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9(1), 179–209.

Bergoeing R., P. J. Kehoe, T. J. Kehoe, and R. Soto (2002), “A Decade Lost and Found:
Mexico and Chile in the 1980s,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 166–205.

Betts, C. M. and T. J. Kehoe (2001), “Tradability of Goods and Real Exchange Rate
Fluctuations,” University of Minnesota.

Burstein, A., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2005), “Large Devaluations and the Real
Exchange Rate,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(4), 742–84.

Calvo, G. A. (1988), “Servicing the Public Debt: The Role of Expectations,” American
Economic Review, 78(4), 647–61.

Calvo, G. A. (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics
of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, 1(1), 35–54.

Calvo, G. A. and E. Talvi (2005), “Sudden Stop, Financial Factors and Economic
Collapse in Latin America: Learning from Argentina and Chile,” NBER Working Paper
11153.

Chakraborty, S. (2006), “Modeling Sudden Stops: The Role of Preferences,” Baruch
College, City University of New York.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2005), “Sudden Stops and Output
Drops,” American Economic Review, 95(2), 381–87.

Cole, H. L. and L. E. Ohanian (1999), “The Great Depression in the United States from a
Neoclassical Perspective,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review,
23(1), 2–24.

Cole, H. L. and T. J. Kehoe (2000), “Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises,” Review of Economic
Studies, 67(1), 91–116.

Conesa, J. C., T. J. Kehoe, and K. J. Ruhl (2007), “Modeling Great Depressions: The
Depression in Finland in the 1990s,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly
Review, 31(1), 16–44.

Cook, D. E. and M. B. Devereux (2006), “External Currency Pricing and the East Asian
Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, 69(1), 37–63.




                                          27
Fernández de Córdoba, G. and T. J. Kehoe (2000), “Capital Flows and Real Exchange
Rate Fluctuations Following Spain's Entry into the European Community,” Journal of
International Economics, 51(1), 49–78.

García-Verdú, R. (2005), “Factor Shares from Household Survey Data,” Banco de
México Working Paper 2005-05.

Greenwood, J., Z. Hercowitz, and G.W. Huffman (1988), “Investment, Capacity
Utilization, and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402–17.

Guidotti, P. E., F. Sturzenegger, and A. Villar (2004), “On the Consequences of Sudden
Stops,” Economia: Journal of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association,
4(2), 171–203.

Hayashi, F. and E. C. Prescott (2002), “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade,” Review of
Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 206–35.

Kaminsky, G. L. and C. M. Reinhart (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking
and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” American Economic Review, 89(3), 473–500.

Kehoe, P. J. and T. J. Kehoe (1994), “A Primer on Static Applied General Equilibrium
Models,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 18(2), 2–16.

Kehoe, T. J. (1995a) “A Review of Mexico's Trade Policy from 1982 to 1994,” World
Economy, 18(4), 135–51.

Kehoe, T. J. (1995b), “What Happened in Mexico in 1994–95?” in P. J. Kehoe and T. J.
Kehoe, editors, Modeling North American Economic Integration, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 131–47.

Kehoe, T. J. and E. C. Prescott (2002), “Great Depressions of the Twentieth Century,”
Review of Economic Dynamics, 5(1), 1–18.

Kehoe, T. J. and E. C. Prescott, editors (2007), Great Depressions of the Twentieth
Century. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Kehoe, T. J. and K. J. Ruhl (2008), “Are Shocks to the Terms of Trade Shocks to
Productivity?” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 804–19.

Kravis, I. B., A. W. Heston, and R. Summers (1982), World Product and Income:
International Comparisons of Real Gross Product. Published for the World Bank by the
Johns Hopkins University Press.

McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2003), “Average Debt and Equity Returns:
Puzzling?” American Economic Review, 93(2), 392–97.




                                           28
Mendoza, E. G. (2000), “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real
Exchange Rate across Exchange Rate Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United
States,” NBER Working Paper 7768.

Mendoza, E. G. (2005), “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and the Price of Nontradables in
Sudden-Stop-Prone Economies,” NBER Working Paper 11691.

Mendoza, E. G. (2006), “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with
Collateral Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s Q,” NBER Working Paper
12564.

Mendoza, E. G. and K. A. Smith (2004), “Quantitative Implication of A Debt-Deflation
Theory of Sudden Stops and Asset Prices,” NBER Working Paper 10940.

Meza, F. (2007), “Financial Crises, Fiscal Policy, and the 1995 GDP Contraction in
Mexico,” Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.

Meza, F. and E. Quintin (2007), “Factor Utilization and the Real Impact of Financial
Crises,” B. E. Journal of Macroeconomics (Advances), 7(1), article 33.

Neumeyer, P. A. and F. Perri (2005), “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The
Role of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(2), 345–80.

Ruhl, K. J. (2008), “The International Elasticity Puzzle,” University of Texas at Austin.

Sargent, T. J. (1978), “Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under Rational
Expectations,” Journal of Political Economy, 86(6), 1009–44.

Schneider, M. and A. Tornell (2004), “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and
Financial Crises,” Review of Economic Studies, 71(3), 883–913.

Stockman, A. C. and L. L. Tesar (1995), “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country
Model of the Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American
Economic Review, 85(1), 168–85.

Tornell, A. and F. Westermann (2002), “Boom-Bust Cycles in Middle Income Countries:
Facts and Explanation,” NBER Working Paper 9219.




                                            29
                                                          Table 1
                                          1988 Input-Output Matrix
                                             Inputs                                             Final demand




                                                             Total intermediate




                                                                                                                                      Total demand
                                                                                  Consumption



                                                                                                Investment
                                              Nontraded




                                                                                                                       Total final
                                                             demand




                                                                                                                       demand
                                                                                                             Exports
                                 Traded
Commodity

Traded                           33.54          9.28           42.82              27.05         10.16        19.93      57.14         99.96
Nontraded                        13.13        20.53            33.66              49.00         12.40          0.00     61.40         95.06
Total intermediate consumption   46.67        29.81            76.48              76.05         22.56        19.93 118.54            195.02
Labor compensation               22.11        38.74            60.85                                                                  60.85
Return to capital                10.79        26.51            37.30                                                                  37.30
Value added                      32.89        65.26            98.15                                                                  98.15
Imports                          18.54          0.00           18.54                                                                  18.54
Tariffs                           1.85          0.00               1.85                                                                    1.85
Total gross output               99.96        95.06          195.02               76.05         22.56        19.93 118.54            313.56




                                                            30
                                               Table 2
                                        Calibration of model
Parameter     Value                                    Statistic                         Target
Consumer parameters
   b1988     -8.831       Trade balance to GDP in 1988, in percent                        1.390
   k1988    169.817       Real interest rate in 1988, in percent                         15.740
    β          0.987      U.S. real interest rate, in percent                             4.000
    ε          0.234      Traded good share in consumption in 1988                        0.356
    ρ         -1.000      Elasticity of substitution: traded to nontraded                 0.500
    η          0.306      Ratio of hours worked to available hours in 1988                0.267
    ψ         -1.000      Intertemporal elasticity of substitution                        0.500
      δ        0.062      Depreciation to GDP in 1988, in percent                        10.566
   τ K 1989    0.201      Investment in 1988                                             22.561
Producer parameters
    aTD        0.422      Share of traded inputs in domestic traded in 1988               0.422
    aND        0.165      Share of nontraded inputs in domestic traded in 1988            0.165
    aTN        0.098      Share of traded inputs in domestic nontraded in 1988            0.098
    aNN        0.216      Share of nontraded inputs in domestic nontraded in 1988         0.216
     AD        2.770      Traded gross output in 1988                                    79.564
     AN        1.546      Nontraded gross output in 1988                                 95.065
     αD        0.328      Capital’s share of domestic traded value added in 1988          0.328
     αN        0.406      Capital’s share of nontraded value added in 1988                0.406
      γ        0.450      Share of traded inputs in investment good production in 1988    0.450
     G         1.990      Investment in 1988                                             22.561
      g        1.020      Growth rate of U.S. GDP per working age person, in percent      2.000
Trade parameters
     M         1.866      Total traded goods in 1988                                     99.955
     μ           0.653    Ratio of imports to domestic traded good in 1988                0.233
     ζ           0.500    Elasticity of substitution: domestic traded to imports          2.000
   D1988        21.141    Exports in 1988                                                19.928
Time series of parameters
    At                    Mexican working age population data and projections
    nt                    Mexican adult equivalent population data and projections
    σt                    Mexican interest premia
     Dt                   U.S. working age population data and projections
    τt                    Mexican tariffs on U.S. imposts
    τ Ft                  U.S. tariffs on Mexican imports

                                                 31
                                                    Table 3
                               Numerical experiments: Sensitivity analysis

                                                       No interest No population
                                  Data    Baseline                                 No tariffs   Terms of trade
                                                       rate premia    growth

   TB/Y*100        1988-1994      -1.04     -1.36           -2.20      -0.21         -1.41          -1.36
  (difference)     1994-1995       7.49     11.80           17.29       0.14         13.21          10.68
                   1995-2000      -0.93     -0.80           -2.79       1.46         -1.05          -0.65
      RER          1988-1994      -6.25     -2.06           -4.97       1.15         -2.79          -2.06
(percent change)   1994-1995      31.49     36.93           54.93       3.69         42.00          14.17
                   1995-2000      -5.81     -3.05           -8.28       1.88         -3.99          -2.47
     RERN          1988-1994      -2.64     -1.05           -1.16      -0.82         -1.03          -1.05
(percent change)   1994-1995       6.19      5.52            7.63       0.60          5.93           3.73
                   1995-2000      -0.99     -2.32           -2.76      -1.42         -2.41          -2.17
      Tot          1988-1994      -1.77     -0.63           -2.76       1.73         -1.42          -0.63
(percent change)   1994-1995       8.31     25.31           37.39       2.59         29.74           8.31
                   1995-2000      -1.70     -0.51           -4.34       2.80         -1.33          -0.14
      C/N          1988-1994       2.54      3.97            4.98       1.30          3.92           3.97
(percent change)   1994-1995     -15.86     -1.08            5.76      -2.79         -0.21          -0.78
                   1995-2000       3.34      3.52            2.83       2.23          3.35           3.81
      I/N          1988-1994       0.42     14.82           16.82      12.57         14.95          14.82
(percent change)   1994-1995     -18.03    -10.64          -65.36      18.09        -14.64          -5.71
                   1995-2000       6.81      2.86           15.01      -7.32          3.68           2.44
      X/N          1988-1994      -1.76     -1.28           -7.61       4.59         -3.89          -1.28
(percent change)   1994-1995      50.32     65.90           97.71       6.24         75.82          73.70
                   1995-2000       3.52     -0.89          -10.40       6.55         -3.10           0.15
      M/N          1988-1994       3.64      7.06            8.56       4.93          5.92           7.06
(percent change)   1994-1995      15.94      0.62          -10.04       5.50         -3.04          15.57
                   1995-2000       6.61      2.82            5.33       0.08          2.10           2.90
     GDP/N         1988-1994       1.06      5.82            6.43       4.41          5.79           5.82
(percent change)   1994-1995      -8.89      7.26            1.30       5.56          7.92           8.00
                   1995-2000       3.16      2.48            3.59       0.30          2.37           2.67
   TFP factor      1988-1994       0.20      2.14            2.65       1.80          2.13           2.14
(percent change)   1994-1995     -12.69      0.00           -1.24       1.75          1.42           1.11
                   1995-2000       2.77      1.81            2.26       1.64          1.77           1.95
 Capital factor    1988-1994       0.20      2.39            3.16       3.16          2.46           2.39
(percent change)   1994-1995       6.18      0.77            5.22       0.63          0.22           0.32
                   1995-2000      -0.94      1.56            1.20       2.18          1.52           1.65
  Labor factor     1988-1994       0.65      1.29            0.97      -0.54          1.20           1.29
(percent change)   1994-1995      -2.38      6.49           -2.30       3.18          6.29           6.57
                   1995-2000       1.33     -0.89            0.30      -3.53         -0.92          -0.93


                                                      32
                                       Table 4
                     Numerical experiments: Adjustment frictions

                                                               Variable         Labor
                                                   Labor
                              Data    Baseline                  capital     frictions and
                                                  frictions
                                                              utilization       VCU
   TB/Y*100        1988-1994 -1.04       -1.36      -1.63           -2.13      -2.50
  (difference)     1994-1995   7.49      11.80      17.40           21.04      37.50
                   1995-2000 -0.93       -0.80      -1.93           -2.64      -5.92
      RER          1988-1994 -6.25       -2.06      -2.91           -2.90      -4.99
(percent change)   1994-1995 31.49       36.93      65.59           61.73     110.77
                   1995-2000 -5.81       -3.05      -8.06           -6.38     -14.80
     RERN          1988-1994 -2.64       -1.05      -1.29           -1.05      -1.38
(percent change)   1994-1995   6.19       5.52      31.30            6.80      44.69
                   1995-2000 -0.99       -2.32      -7.19           -2.38      -9.49
      Tot          1988-1994 -1.77       -0.63      -1.11           -1.28      -2.61
(percent change)   1994-1995   8.31      25.31      27.51           44.74      53.26
                   1995-2000 -1.70       -0.51      -0.63           -3.27      -4.34
      C/N          1988-1994   2.54       3.97       3.44            2.77       2.64
(percent change)   1994-1995 -15.86      -1.08      -2.93            2.45      -5.43
                   1995-2000   3.34       3.52       4.36            4.21       6.67
      I/N          1988-1994   0.42      14.82      17.70           27.67      27.09
(percent change)   1994-1995 -18.03     -10.64     -33.72          -34.81     -84.49
                   1995-2000   6.81       2.86       8.37           10.01      21.29
      X/N          1988-1994 -1.76       -1.28      -2.96           -3.14      -7.45
(percent change)   1994-1995 50.32       65.90     102.29          112.24     179.99
                   1995-2000   3.52      -0.89      -7.05           -7.27     -18.65
      M/N          1988-1994   3.64       7.06       7.73           12.10      12.01
(percent change)   1994-1995 15.94        0.62      14.88          -13.39       7.57
                   1995-2000   6.61       2.82       0.31            5.88       2.56
     GDP/N         1988-1994   1.06       5.82       6.36           10.45       9.74
(percent change)   1994-1995 -8.89        7.26       2.98            3.89      -2.19
                   1995-2000   3.16       2.48       3.81            4.46       6.80
   TFP factor      1988-1994   0.20       2.14       3.00            1.36       4.39
(percent change)   1994-1995 -12.69       0.00      -1.98           -4.75     -12.69
                   1995-2000   2.77       1.81       2.29            2.49       5.28
 Capital factor    1988-1994   0.20       2.39       2.80            3.88       3.73
(percent change)   1994-1995   6.18       0.77       4.42            6.81      10.84
                   1995-2000 -0.94        1.56       1.06            2.03       0.39
  Labor factor     1988-1994   0.65       1.29       0.55            5.20       1.62
(percent change)   1994-1995 -2.38        6.49       0.54            1.84      -0.35
                   1995-2000   1.33      -0.89       0.47           -0.07       1.14


                                         33
                                             Table 5
                   Numerical experiments: Quasilinear utility and exogenous TFP

                                                       Quasilinear   Exogenous Exogenous TFP and
                                Data       Baseline
                                                         utility       TFP      quasilinear utility

   TB/Y*100        1988-1994    -1.04        -1.36          -1.36       -1.36           -1.36
  (difference)     1994-1995     7.49        11.80          11.55       12.09           11.88
                   1995-2000    -0.93        -0.80          -0.76       -0.70           -0.59
      RER          1988-1994    -6.25        -2.06          -2.00       -2.06           -2.00
(percent change)   1994-1995    31.49        36.93          34.90       34.36           31.79
                   1995-2000    -5.81        -3.05          -2.67       -3.01           -2.62
     RERN          1988-1994    -2.64        -1.05          -1.05       -1.05           -1.05
(percent change)   1994-1995     6.19         5.52           5.63        5.84            5.99
                   1995-2000    -0.99        -2.32          -2.34       -2.38           -2.40
      Tot          1988-1994    -1.77        -0.63          -0.58       -0.63           -0.58
(percent change)   1994-1995     8.31        25.31          23.58       22.94           20.72
                   1995-2000    -1.70        -0.51          -0.18       -0.43           -0.09
      C/N          1988-1994     2.54         3.97           3.73        3.97            3.73
(percent change)   1994-1995   -15.86        -1.08          -2.44       -8.30          -11.04
                   1995-2000     3.34         3.52           4.00        2.97            3.09
      I/N          1988-1994     0.42        14.82          15.46       14.82           15.46
(percent change)   1994-1995   -18.03       -10.64         -17.71      -22.17          -31.66
                   1995-2000     6.81         2.86           4.05        2.32            2.97
      X/N          1988-1994    -1.76        -1.28          -1.14       -1.28           -1.14
(percent change)   1994-1995    50.32        65.90          62.00       60.80           55.83
                   1995-2000     3.52        -0.89          -0.16       -0.76            0.01
      M/N          1988-1994     3.64         7.06           7.15        7.06            7.15
(percent change)   1994-1995    15.94         0.62          -1.90       -5.13           -8.82
                   1995-2000     6.61         2.82           3.33        2.37            2.58
     GDP/N         1988-1994     1.06         5.82           5.91        5.82            5.91
(percent change)   1994-1995    -8.89         7.26           3.56       -1.10           -6.48
                   1995-2000     3.16         2.48           3.24        2.03            2.44
   TFP factor      1988-1994     0.20         2.14           2.14        2.14            2.14
(percent change)   1994-1995   -12.69         0.00           0.32      -12.69          -12.69
                   1995-2000     2.77         1.81           1.78        1.85            1.83
 Capital factor    1988-1994     0.20         2.39           2.27        2.39            2.27
(percent change)   1994-1995     6.18         0.77           3.49        5.89            9.64
                   1995-2000    -0.94         1.56           1.03        1.00            0.44
  Labor factor     1988-1994     0.65         1.29           1.50        1.29            1.50
(percent change)   1994-1995    -2.38         6.49          -0.24        5.70           -3.42
                   1995-2000     1.33        -0.89           0.44       -0.82            0.17


                                               34
                                         Figure 1

                                      Trade balance

              4.0



              2.0
percent GDP




              0.0



              -2.0



              -4.0



              -6.0
                 1988    1990    1992         1994       1996   1998   2000




                                         Figure 2

                                  Real exchange rate

              0.30



              0.20



              0.10
log(RER)




              0.00                    RERN



              -0.10
                                RER


              -0.20
                  1988   1990     1992            1994   1996   1998   2000




                                             35
                                            Figure 3

                                       Output and TFP

                     110




                     105
                                                                      GDP/N
index (1994 = 100)




                     100




                      95
                                                                      TFP



                      90
                       1988   1990   1992       1994         1996         1998   2000




                                            Figure 4

                                     Value added by sector

                     140


                     130


                     120
                                                             Traded
index (1994 = 100)




                     110


                     100

                                                              Nontraded
                     90


                     80


                     70
                      1988    1990   1992       1994         1996         1998   2000




                                              36
                                                           Figure 5

                                                  Interest rate premia

                       18.0


                                          Data
                       15.0
                                                                Beliefs in
                                                                sudden stop case
annual interest rate




                       12.0



                        9.0



                        6.0



                        3.0
                                 Beliefs in
                                 no sudden stop case
                        0.0
                          1988     1992           1996           2000         2004          2008           2012




                                                           Figure 6

                                            Model without sudden stop

                        6.0                                                                              5.0


                        4.0
                                          Trade balance (left scale)
                                                                                                         4.0
                        2.0
    percent GDP




                        0.0
                                                                 Capital-output ratio (right scale)
                                                                                                               ratio



                                                                                                         3.0
                       -2.0


                       -4.0
                                                                                                         2.0

                       -6.0


                       -8.0                                                                              1.0
                          1988   1998      2008          2018        2028     2038      2048          2058




                                                                37
                                                                                          Figure 7
                                                                                       Baseline model
                                                Trade balance                                                                                          Real exchange rate

                       6.0                                                                                                     0.30

                                                                                                                                                                                 RER model
                       4.0
                                                                                                                               0.20
                                                                                                                                         RER data

                       2.0                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                               0.10                    RER model
percent GDP




                                                                                                             log(RER)
                       0.0
                                                                                                                               0.00
                       -2.0                  Data
                                                                                                                              -0.10
                       -4.0
                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                          RER data
                                                                                                                              -0.20
                       -6.0      Model

                       -8.0                                                                                                   -0.30
                          1988    1990        1992         1994       1996         1998      2000                                 1988          1990    1992       1994      1996        1998      2000

                                                           a.                                                                                                     b.



                                             Value added by sector                                                                                      Terms of trade

                       160                                                                                                    140

                                                                  Traded model
                       140                                                                                                    130
                                                                                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                       RER data                                         Model
  index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                                         index (1994 = 100)




                       120               Nontraded model                                                                      120


                       100                                                       Nontraded data                               110


                        80                                               Traded data                                          100                                           Tot data


                        60                                                                                                     90


                        40                                                                                                     80
                         1988      1990        1992        1994        1996        1998       2000                              1988           1990    1992       1994      1996        1998       2000

                                                           c.                                                                                                     d.



                                             Aggregate labor input                                                                                      Output and TFP

                       120                                                                                                    130


                                                            Model                                                             120                                             GDP/N model
                       110
  index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                                         index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                                                              110
                       100                                                                                                                                                          TFP model
                                                                      Data
                                                                                                                              100

                        90
                                                                                                                                                                                        TFP data
                                                                                                                               90
                                                                                                                                                                          GDP/N data
                        80
                                                                                                                               80


                        70                                                                                                     70
                         1988      1990        1992        1994        1996        1998       2000                              1988           1990    1992       1994      1996        1998       2000

                                                           e.                                                                                                     f.




                                                                                                    38
                                                                           Figure 8
                                                                 Model without interest premia
                                               Trade balance                                                                          Real exchange rate

                     10.0                                                                                      0.60

                                                                                                                                                                 RER model
                      5.0                                                                                      0.40

                                                                                                                                             N
                      0.0                                                                                      0.20                   RER model
percent GDP




                                        Data




                                                                                          log(RER)
                      -5.0                                                                                     0.00

                                                                                                                                                                           N
                     -10.0                                                                                     -0.20                                              RER data
                                                                                                                                                    RER data

                     -15.0                                                                                     -0.40
                                Model
                     -20.0                                                                                     -0.60
                         1988   1990      1992         1994      1996      1998   2000                             1988      1990      1992          1994        1996          1998   2000

                                                      a.                                                                                            b.
                                                                           Figure 9
                                                                Model without population growth
                                               Trade balance                                                                                     Output

                     16.0                                                                                      120


                     12.0                                                                                                                                         GDP/N model
                                                                                                               110
                                                                                          index (1994 = 100)




                      8.0
percent GDP




                                                                                                               100

                      4.0
                                        Model
                                                                                                                90                                                GDP/N data
                      0.0

                                                                                                                80
                     -4.0
                                         Data
                     -8.0                                                                                       70
                        1988    1990      1992         1994      1996      1998   2000                           1988       1990      1992          1994        1996           1998   2000

                                                      a.                                                                                            b.
                                                                           Figure 10
                                                              Model with exogenous terms of trade
                                               Terms of trade                                                                         Real exchange rate

                     115                                                                                        0.30

                                                                   Model
                                                                                                                0.20
                     110                                                                                                                                    RER data
index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                                                0.10
                     105
                                                                                           log(RER)




                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                      RER model
                                                                        Data                                    0.00

                     100
                                                                                                                                                                       N
                                                                                                               -0.10                                            RER data
                                                                                                                          RER model
                      95
                                                                                                               -0.20


                      90                                                                                       -0.30
                       1988     1990      1992        1994      1996       1998   2000                             1988      1990      1992          1994        1996          1998   2000

                                                      a.                                                                                            b.




                                                                                     39
                                                                                        Figure 11
                                                                                 Model with labor frictions
                                         Traded labor/total labor (detrended)                                                                               Real exchange rate

                             10.0                                                                                                   0.60

                                                                                                                                    0.50
                               8.0                                                                                                                                                 RER model
percent deviation (1994=0)




                                                                                                                                    0.40
                                                                                                                                                                N
                               6.0
                                                                                                                                                            RER model
                                                                Model                                                               0.30
                                                                                                                                             RER data
                                                                                                                                    0.20




                                                                                                           log(RER)
                               4.0
                                                                                                                                    0.10
                               2.0
                                                                                                                                    0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                              -0.10                                              RER data
                               0.0                                              Data
                                                                                                                              -0.20
                               -2.0
                                                                                                                              -0.30

                               -4.0                                                                                           -0.40
                                  1988   1990     1992      1994         1996          1998        2000                           1988           1990        1992         1994      1996       1998   2000

                                                           a.                                                                                                           b.
                                                                          Figure 12
                                                  Model with labor frictions and variable capital utilization
                                                   Output and TFP                                                                                        Capital utilization by sector

                               130                                                                                                  110

                                                                                 GDP/N model
                               120
                                                                                                                                    105
                                                                                                                                                                                   Traded
                               110
          index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                       TFP model
                                                                                                               index (1994=100)




                                                                                                                                    100

                               100
                                                                                                                                     95
                                90
                                                                        GDP/N data
                                                                                                                                     90
                                80                                          TFP data

                                                                                                                                     85                             Nontraded
                                70


                                60                                                                                                   80
                                 1988    1990     1992      1994          1996         1998        2000                               1988       1990        1992         1994      1996       1998   2000

                                                            a.                                                                                                          b.
                                                                            Figure 13
                                                         Model with quasilinear utility and exogenous TFP
                                                Aggregate labor input                                                                                          Output and TFP

                               120                                                                                                  110
                                                                                                                                                             GDP/N data
                                                                                                                                             TFP data
                                                                          Data
                               110                                                                                                  100
          index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                                               index (1994 = 100)




                                                                                       Model
                               100                                                                                                   90      TFP model


                                90                                                                                                   80



                                80                                                                                                   70          GDP/N model



                                70                                                                                                   60
                                 1988    1990     1992      1994          1996         1998        2000                               1988       1990        1992         1994      1996       1998   2000

                                                           a.                                                                                                             b.




                                                                                                          40
