                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              INTERNATIONAL POLICY COORDINATION IN
                    HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE:
                 A VIEW FROM THE INTERWAR YEARS


                       Barry Eichengreen


                     Working   Paper No. l)44O




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                         September 198)4




Prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research/Centre for
Economic Policy Research Conference on International Policy
Coordination held in London, June 28—29, 198)4, and forthcoming in
the conference volume. This paper as written during visits to
Stanford University and INSEE. I am grateful to Paul David and
Jacques Melitz for helpful discussions, and to the French Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, the French Ministry of Finance and the
Controller of I-I. M. Stationery Office for permission to refer to
the Public Records. The French Ministry of External Affairs pro-
vided financial support. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity (World Econonr). Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #1440
                                           September 1984




               International Policy Coordination in
                      Historical Perspect ive:
                  A View from the Interwar Years


                                ABSTRACT




     This paper examines the international financial relations of the inter—

war period to see what light this experience sheds on current concerns

over international policy coordination. The analysis proceeds in three

parts. The first part considers the role for policy coordination as

viewed by contemporaries at the start of the period; it takes as a case

study the Genoa Economic and Financial Conference of 1922. Efforts at

Genoa to coordinate policies ended in failure; the second part therefore

considers the effects of noncooperative strategies within the framework

of the interwar gold standard. The analytical model developed in this

section suggests that the failure to coordinate policies lent a deflationary

bias to the world economy which may have contributed to the onset of the

Great Depression. The third part asks what policymakers learned from

this failure to coordinate policies, taking evidence from the next effort

to establish a framework for international financial collaboration: the

Tripartite Monetary Agreement of 1936.

                                              Barry Eichengreen


                                              Department of Economics
                                              Harvard University
                                              Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                              (617) 495—1871

                                              National Bureau of Economic
                                                Research
                                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                              Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
        "Measures of currency reform will be facilitated if the
        practice of continuous cooperation among central banks of
        issue, or banks regulating credit policy in the several
        countries can be developed. Such cooperation of central
        banks, not necessarily confined to Europe, would provide
        opportunities of coordinating their policy, without hamper-
        ing the freedom of the several banks.'



                            from Resolution 3 of the
                            Report of the Financial
                            Commission of the Genoa
                               Conference, 1922.



      in the days of the gold standard, it is sometimes said, international

policy coordination was a moot point.1 Popular accounts based more on

caricature than on careful historical analysis portray the gold standard as

a remarkably efficient mechanism for coordinating the actions of national

authorities. Policies were so easily reconciled, it is argued, because

those responsible for their formulation, regardless of nationality, shared

a belief of balanced budgets and a common overriding objective: pegging the

domestic currency price of gold. When central banks intervened in

financial markets, it is suggested, they did so mechanically, obeying

"rules of the game" which dictated that they only reinforce the impact on

domestic money and credit markets of balance of payments conditions. For

example, a central bank losing reserves would raise its discount rate while

the central bank gaining reserves would lower its discount rate, thereby

reinforcing one anothers efforts to restore external balances Hence

monetary policy under the gold standard is a favorite example of those who

argue that international policy coordination is most readily achieved under

a rules—based regime rather than one that depends on discretion.

      This naive vision of the days of the gold standard as a simpler, more
 harmonious era is at best partial and at worst misleading. The very

 actions of central banks suggest that their objectives were not in fact so

 easily reconciled by the operation of gold standard constraints. Discount

rates tended to move together, not     inversely   as the 'rules of the game

would suggest.2 Central banks      sterilized   international gold flows more

often than they   intervened   to reinforce their impact on domestic

markets. These and other actions resemble the outcome of a

noncooperative game, in which the participants act to neutralize rather

than accommodate the efforts of their counterparts. Yet on occasion central

banks and governments managed to achieve cooperative solutions to their

problems, such as when they negotiated swap arrangements, earmarked gold,

or extended international loans.4 Both central banks and governments

clearly recognized their interdependence, if they did not always succeed in

coordinating their actions.

      Still, it is fair to say that the interwar period opened the modern

era of interdependence.   In the 1920s questions of policy coordination and

central bank cooperation acquired a new tone of urgency.       In part this

reflected greater opportunities for coordinating policies in a world with a

Bank for International Settlements, an international telegraph, and a

trans-tlantic telephone. In part it reflected the higher costs of

ignoring interdependence in a world of rapid communication, integrated

markets and volatile capital flows. above all it reflected the widening

scope far conflict as governments attached growing importance to domestic

economic objectives and put less weight or balance of payments targets.

     The interwar period provides examples of various forms of successful

collaboration. The League of Nations provided stabilization loans to

countries experiencing hyperinflation in return for their accession to

protocols which precluded their central banks from monetizing budget
deficits and committed them to return to gold. international conferences

held at Brussels in 1920 and Genoa in 1922 laid the basis for

reconstructing the international monetary system. The United States saw

Britains return to gold as the iinchpin upon which the gold standard's

resurrection depended, and it provided credits of $300 million to

facilitate Britains restoration of the prewar sterling parity.6 These

efforts were fully successful in reconstructing the international system:

once its renewal had been signaled by Britain's return to gold, some fifty

nations joined the U.S. and the U.K. as participants in the interwar gold

standard.

      Yet the interwar period provides equally dramatic illustrations of

failures of cooperation and their costs. The brief duration and early

demise of the interwar gold standard is taken to indicate the inability of

major participants to effectively coordinate their actions.     prime

example is the failure of the countries at the center to harmonize their

choice of parities. The important cases are Great Britain, where over—

valuation of sterling was associated with unprecedented levels of

unemployment and depression in the export trades; and France, where

undervaluation of the franc was associated with sustained economic growth

and until 1931 insulation from the worst effects of the Great

Depression. One corollary of this competitive imbalance was an uneven

international distribution of gold. Nations such as the United States and

France whose international competitive positions were relatively strong

acquired and retained a large portion of the worlds monetary gold, leaving

others such as Britain to defend the convertibility of their currencies on

the basis of slender reserves. Another indication of this inability to

coordinate policies was the widespread failure to play by the rules of the
    gold standard game; instead central banks sterilized international reserve

    flows and hesitated to adjust their discount rates in response to exterral

    pressures.

          This paper takes a new look at the financial history of the interwar

    period to see what light this experience sheds on current concerns over

    international policy coordination. After a review of the literature and

    the historical preconditions, it tells a story in     three parts. The First
    part examines the role for oiiCy coordination as envisaged by

    contemporaries at the start of the period.      It takes as a case study the

    Genoa Economic and   Financial Conference of 1922. We will argue that the
    advantages of   policy   coordination were in fact well understood in the

    'twenties but that political disagreements impeded efforts to establish a

    mochanss for cooperative action. Instead, policymakers ultimately pursued

    noncooperative strategies within the framework of the international gold

    standard.

          The second part considers the effects of noncooperative behavior once

    the gold standard was again in operation. Identifying these effects

    requires an explicit model. Yet the idea of strategic behavior by national

    authorities is wholly incompatible with standard models of the gold

    standard's operation. The analysis therefore requires the development of

    an alternative model of the interwar gold standard. While the model

    developed below bears little resemblance to previous frameworks used to

    analyze gold standard adjustment, it indicates clearly not only the

    advantages of coordinated action but suggests why cooperative solutions

    proved 50 difficult to achieve.

          The final part concerns the question of what the principal

    participants learned from their pursuit of noncooperative strategies. The

    lessons of the interwar gold standard as they were understood by



4
    contemporaries found reflection in the next attempt to reconstruct the

    international monetary order: the Tripartite Monetary Agreement concluded

    by   Gritain,   France and the United States in the autumn of l936. The

    terms of the Tripartite Agreement were remarkably similar to the Genoa

    Resolutions of 1922. Where they differed was in the absence of favorable

    references to fixed parities and to the gold—exchange standard. They

    differed as well by mare tightly circumscribing the range of issues subject

    to collaboration. This along with the decline of political obstacles to

    cooperation permitted the noble sentiments of the Tripartite Agreement to

    be implemented. Thus, the history of international financial collaboration

    in the interwar period sheds light not only   on the rationale for policy
    coordination but also on the circumstances conducive to its practice.


    I.   Leadership and Cooperation Under A Gold Standard Regime

           In theoretical treatments of the gold standards operation, there is

    no scope for policy coordination. The adjustment process works

    automatically, affecting surplus and deficit countriesalike. The price—

    specie—flow variant of the adjustment mechanism emphasizes the role of relative

    prices in restoring external balance. A gold outflow leads to monetary

    deflation and falling prices until the international competitiveness of the

    goods produced by the deficit country is enhanced sufficiently to restore

    equilibrium to the external accounts. The monetary variant of the

    adjustment mechanism stresses the role of wealth and real balance effects.

    A gold outflow reduces absorption through the real balance effect on

    consumption until the equality of income and expenditure is restored. In

    each case, the surplus country is affected symmetrically. Beyond standing

    ready to buy and sell gold at the official price, the only role for central

    banks is to mechanically reinforce the impact on domestic money and credit



5
    markets of incipient gold flows.

          Strikingly, these theoretical treatments bear little resemblance to

    historical analyses of the gold standard's operation either at the end of

    the 19th century or between the wars. Where theoretical models describe

    central banks as mechanically reinforcing one another's actions, historical

    accounts emphasize instead the potential for conflict between national

    authorities and their strategic interaction. Yet in none of these

    accounts is the scope for conflict adequately defined, leaving unclear the

    advantages of leadership and   cooperation.
          Historical descriptions of the classical gold standard place great

    weight on asymmetries in the system's operation. Great Britain in

    particular is seen as possessing unrivaled abilities to manipulate the

    process of adjustment. Britain's market power is attributed to her

    position as the world's foremost trading and lending nation. British

    exports, which had already quadrupled between 1800 and 1850, increased

    eightfold between 1850 and 1913, and on the eve of the first World War

    Britain accounted for 14 percent of world exports, a figure far exceeding

    her share of world production or income. The world's principal organized

    commodity markets all were centered in England. Not the least of these was

    the London gold market, which regularly received the bulk of South Africas

    gold production. In addition, Britain had no close competitor as the

    world's preeminent international lender. By 1913, British overseas

    investments amounted to nearly 45 percent of the external investments of

    the major creditor countries of the West. Britain's annual capital export

    was nearly five times that of France, her nearest rival. Never before

    or since have a nation's overseas investments been such a large share of

    national income.8




6
          Britain's commercial and financial preeminence had profound

    implications for the international role of sterling, which had implications

    in turn for the operation of the adjustment mechanism. Sterling was the

    world's leading vehicle currency in international transactions. Trade that

    neither touched British shores nor passed through the hands of British

    merchants overseas might nonetheless be invoiced in sterling. Transactions

    the world over were settled with the transfer of sterling balances between

    foreign accounts maintained in London. Securities denominated in sterling

    were the most popular form of international reserves with which central

    banks might supplement their stocks of gold.9

          Under these circumstances, it   is   argued, the Bank of England

    exercised powerful leverage over international flows of commodities,

    capital and gold —   leverage it could employ to manipulate the process of
    adjustment by which external balance was restored. Changes in Bank Rate

    (the rate charged by the Bank of England for loans to discount houses and

    other dealers in Treasury and commercial bills) exerted an influence not

    shared by foreign discount rates and to a large extent determined credit

    conditions not merely at home but abroad.'° A rise in Bank Rate is

    typically thought to have forced up the required rate of return on Treasury

    and commercial bills, and by rendering these assets more attractive

    increased the opportunity cost to the banking sector of extending loans and

    overdrafts to borrowers. Given the share of sterling loans and advances in

    international markets for short—term capital, rates of return on foreign—

    currency—denominated assets that were substitutes for sterling were forced

    up as well. Moreover, because the world's most important gold market also

    was located in London, the Bank of England by altering the cost and

    availability of short—term credit directly influenced the tendency of non—

    residents to purchase and ship abroad gold newly delivered to market.



7
            To paraphrase Walter Bagehot's famous aphorism, raising Bank Rate to

    a sufficiently high level would succeed in drawing gold from the moon.

    This leverage over capital flows followed from the Fact that no foreign

    power   could match the   Bank of England's influence in international

    financial markets. The United States, without even a central bank, lacked

    the resources and the expertise to rival Britain in the market. The Bank

    of Frances sphere of influence was limited to Russia and France's colonial

    possessions. Foreign authorities possessed no feasible alternative but to

    respond to Bank of England initiatives, as the British understood. Hence,

    the Bank of England could anticipate with considerable accuracy the

    response of foreign authorities to a change in Bank Rate in London, and it

    could frame its policy accordingly. To the Deputy Governor of the Bank of

    England Keynes described the reaction of foreign governments in the

    following way: "In prewar days it used to be maintained——I think truly——

    that to a large extent we led the world; that is to say, if we reduced Bank

    rate it probably brought about a corresponding reduction in the rates in

    other countries."11 As he framed the argument when helping to draft

    the report of the Macmillan Committee, Britain could "by the operation of

    her Bank Rate almost immediately adjust her reserve position. Other

    countries had, therefore, in the main, to adjust their conditions to
            1,,
            £4..
    her
            There is little agreement on the costs and benefits of the Bank of

    England's exercise of leadership. The benign view of the prewar

    arrangement is that it operated to the benefit of both the leader and her

    followers by permitting the participants in the gold standard system to

    economize in their use of gold. The Bank of England could maintain a

    slender gold reserve because she had the power to reverse a gold outflow




B
    through unilateral initiative. Other central banks, such as those of

    France, Germany, ustria-Hungary and Russia, had less leverage over

    financial flows and were therefore forced to hold larger reserves in order

    to accommodate wider swings in their reserve positions. But due to the

    Bank of England's capacity to operate with relatively slender reserves, the

    gold backing of the world's monetary base could be efficiently reduced.

    Since the Bank     of England's leverage over international capital flows

    erased any lingering doubts about the convertibility of sterling, other

    countries were encouraged to supplement their holdings of gold with this

    key currency further augmenting international reserves to the benefit of

    all concerned.

                less sanguine view is that through her exercise of market power

    Britain was capable of shifting the burden of adjustment abroad. Triffin

    has argued that, due to London's singular importance as a source of credit

    for financing international transactions in foodstuffs and raw materials,

    Britain was through the impact of Bank Rate overseas more than compensated

    for the economic costs of stringent credit conditions.'3 The argument

    is that a temporary credit stringency swung the terms of trade in Britains

    favor by increasing the cost to foreign producers of carrying stocks of

    primary products. Given the higher cost of holding inventories, stocks of

    foodstuffs and raw materials were dumped onto world markets, reducing the

    cost of British imports. Obviously, carrying costs were important as well

    to British producers of manufactured exports, who had the same incentive as

    producers of primary commodities to liquidate stocks in the face of tighter

    credit conditions. assuming however that the market for primary products

    was characterized by exceptionally low price elasticities of demand,

    Britain's international terms of trade would still have improved on
                '4
    bal ance.




9
      By the interwar period, it is frequently suggested, circumstances had

been transformed. Britain no longer possessed unparalleled influence aver

the international adjustment mechanism. Other nations had acquired

sufficient leverage to formulate if not independent then at least

distinctive national policies, leaving the Bank of England in no better

position than its rivals to ignore developments abroad.   In particular, the

interwar period has been characterized as the era when London declined at

the expense of New York) The war and its aftermath had transformed

the United States from a net debtor to a net creditor, and she suddenly

found herself in possession of a large share of the world's monetary gold.

When Britain returned to gold in 1925, U.S. gold reserves were roughly six

times those of the Bank of England. The British government owed the U.S.

4.7 billion in war debts, although their ultimate magnitude and the

schedule by to which they might be repaid remained very much in doubt.

Moreover, Washington was newly equipped with a Federal Reserve Board and

New York with a Federal Reserve Bank to direct and carry out financial

market intervention.

      Through the first part of the 'twenties New York surpassed London as

a source of funds invested abroad. The U.K. 's share of world export value

declined from 14 percent in 1913 to barely 12 percent in 1925 and little

more than ii percent in 1928. Before the war, Britain had consistently run

current account surpluses; in the century ending in 1913 there had been but

two years of deficit. The situation was different between the wars; in the

short span from 1925 to 1931 there were already two years of current

account deficit. Bankers and merchants, finding themselves to be

dealing with both financial centers and running down the balances on

sterling accounts maintained in London, increasingly held diversified
      portfolios of the two key currencies.

            The British position was not eased by concurrent developments in

     France. Unlike Britain, France's share of world trade was stable after

      1913. Following de facto stabilization in 1926 at a rate which

     undervalued the franc, France's external position remained strong until

     Britain's devaluation in 1931 In 1928, when de jure convertibility of

     the franc was restored, the Bank of France's holdings of liquid sterling

     assets roughly matched in value the Bank of England's entire gold reserve.

     Over the next four years, the Bank of France engaged in a persistent effort

     to convert these balances into gold as part of a conscious policy of

     elevating Paris to the stature of a firstrank financial center. 17

           The British authorities recognized their heightened interdependence

     with foreign nations. In particular, the Bank of England found it

     impossible to neglect the reaction of foreign central banks to a

     prospective change in Bank Rate. Were the Bank of England to disregard

     foreign reactions when setting its discount rate, it would "render itself

     liable to be flooded with, or depleted of, gold, as the case may be." As

     high an official as the Deputy Governor of the Bank of England admitted

     that "such leadership as we possessed has certainly been affected by the

     position which American has gained."8

           While policymakers clearly recognized their heightened

     interdependence, the implications of this recognition remain somewhat

     unclear. One literature attempts to document the stimulus this recognition

     of interdependence provided for cooperative action. For example, Clarke

     (1967) describes instances where central banks extended to one another

     routine clearing services, shared privileged information, and arranged

     international stabilization loans. Another literature emphasizes the

     inability of policymakers to coordinate their actions despite this



11
recognition of interdependence. Thus, Viner (1932, p. 28) and Gayer (1937,

p. 29) describe London, Paris and New York as having worked at "cross—

purposes." Yet it is not easy to extract from their analyses a sense of

how working at cross—purposes affected the operation of the monetary

system. In part this is due to the tendency of these authors to argue by

analogy rather than specifying the economic model they have in mind. Nevin

(19, p. 12) is typical of this mode when, likening the international

monetary system to an automobile, he characterizes Britain and the United

States as "two quite excellent drivers. .perpetually fighting to gain

control of the vehicle," A system influenced by the actions of two

financial centers, like a car with two drivers, will function only if those

centers are capable of cooperating and acting consistently. But, he goes

on, "in the real world, this seldom happens, and the existence of more than

one centre with powers of control leads to the existence of more than one

policy." What we would like to know is whether the presence of two

chauffeurs causes the car to be driven too fast, too slow, or too

erratically, and what the implications of the chauffeurs' behavior is for

the welfare of the passengers.

      Arguments by analogy, however appealing, provide no answer to these

questions. The historian's instinct is to turn to the documents far

guidance. The economist's is to construct a model. We consider these

approaches in turn.


II. The Genoa Conference of 1922 and the Role for Cooperation

      When the Genoa Economic and Financial Conference convened in April

1922, European exchange and trade relations were in disarray. Physical

devastation in the main theaters of the war created persistent excess

demands for foodstuffs and raw materials, particularly in Central and.
     Eastern Europe. Capital goods imports were needed to replace plant and

     equipment destroyed in the course of the war. Yet the nations of

     Continental Europe possessed limited resources out of which to finance the

     required imports, Industrial and agricultural production remained well
                       10
     below 1913 levels, '   The United States curtailed and quickly

     eliminated official lending to its European allies, insisted an prompt

     repayment of its war loans, and constrained Europe's capacity to earn

     foreign exchange by sharply raising tariff rates. Europe therefore

     turned to deficit spending to finance economic reconstruction.     Some

     such as the French proceeded on the premise that Reparations payments would

     eventually permit any new debt to be retired and prewar monetary

     arrangements to be restored. Others such as the Germans were preoccupied

     almost entirely by the immediate problem of reconstruction. By the summer

     of 1920 the mark had already begun its descent; the franc, in contrast,

     fluctuated uneasily in response to new information about prospects for

     Reparations.

           In Western Europe and the United States, the Armistice had been

     followed by a sudden and dramatic boom. Consumers finally were permitted

     to vent demands that had been pent up during the war, and producers took

     the opportunity to replenish their stocks. In Britain the pressure of

     demand led to an inflation of prices unprecedented in peacetime.

     Employment expanded rapidly, and wages rose in response. In light of these

     inflationary pressures, the Bank of England raised its discount rate in

     November 1919 and April 1920. Almost simultaneously, industrial production

     turned down, and unemployment among trade union members rose from 1.4 to

     16.7 percent within a year. Wholesale prices fell by nearly 50 percent

     between the spring of 1920 and the beginning of 1922.   In France wholesale




13
     prices turned down in May, falling by 41 percent within a year, while the

     index of industrial production fell by eight percent between 1920 and 1921.

     In the United States fluctuations in industrial production, while not as

     pronounced as in Britain, followed basically the same pattern, while

     wholesale prices fell by 46 percent in the 10 months following their May

     1920 peak.21

          As in the 1970s, financial instability impeded efforts to liberalize

     international trade. Since the major belligerants had all imposed trade

     controls in the course of the war, they had in place the administrative

     machinery needed to administer import licensing and quota schemes. While

     some such as Britain rapidly moved to dismantle wartime controls, others

     such as France, which initially emulated the British example, turned back

     to tariff protection once their currencies began to depreciate. Trade with

     central Europe was further depressed by the slow recovery of these

     economies. Together with the embargo on Russian trade, the prospects for

     an export—led recovery appeared dim.

           The Reparations question cast a shadow over attempts at monetary

     reconstruction and impeded efforts to arrange cooperative solutions to

     Europe's financial problems. The provisions of the Treaty of Versailles

     designed to provide a mechanism by which realistic Reparations claims

     might be negotiated were disabled by the refusal of the U.S. Congress to

     ratify the Treaty. The Treaty itself deferred final determination of the

     amount of Reparations but required an initial payment of 200,000 million
                                                               '7,)

     gold marks, the first installment falling due in May 1921.' When the
     Reparations Commission, staffed not by financial experts but by politicians

     taking instructions from their governments, finally determined the value of

     Reparations in April 1921, the amount was fixed at $32 billion, three times

     the sum recommended by the economic experts at Versailles and a much larger



14
      amount than the Germans anticipated.      In principle, the transfer might be

      made by payment in gold, payment in services, or payment in commodities.

      Yet the Reichsbank's gold reserve barely amounted to one semi—annual

     Reparations payment. German guest workers would scarcely be welcomed in

     neighboring countries already experiencing high unemployment. Thus,

     Germany had no alternative but   to    attempt to finance its transfer through

     an    export surplus. The value of    the transfer Germany might have

     accomplished   given the impact of a surplus on her terms of trade has been
     debated ever since.2 The only certainty from the point of view of
     financial market participants was that the magnitude and timing of
     Reparations payments would remain uncertain, with unknown implications for
     the   public finances of the major creditor countries.

             This was the background against which the Genoa Conference of 1922

     was convened. Genoa was only one in a series of international monetary and

     financial conferences held in the 1920s, and negotiations there were not

     unrelated to previous meetings at Brussels in 1920 and at Cannes in January

     1922w For example, the participants in the Brussels Conference had issued

     declarations which resembled in general terms the resolutions subsequently

     adopted   at Genoa. However, only at Genoa were the particulars of these
     proposals specified and methods for implementing them through the

     international coordination of policies given explicit consideration.

            The countries with greatest influence over the proceedings at Genoa

     were the United States, France and Britain. The three nations approached

     the Conference with very different objectives. Despite other differences

     the Americans and the British shared a common interest in rebuilding the

     international economy. The leaders of both nations agreed that recovery

     required the revitalization of foreign trade, for which reconstruction of




15
the gold standard was a necessary prerequisite. Beyond these general

goals, however, the two sets of policymakers had little in common. The

British were willing to go considerably further than the Americans to

promote the expansion of trade. They hoped that diplomatic and commercial

relations with the Soviet government could be established and that

Reparatior;s could be reduced. To facilitate the renegotiation of

Reparations, they suggested that the United States forgive at least a

portion of its war debt claims. With this groundwork laid, they hoped that

the creditor countries would be encouraged to extend loans to the European

debtors, promoting economic recovery on the Continent and stimulating

nternationai   trade.
      While restoring sterlings      prewar parity was seen as   an essential

element of monetary reconstruction, the British were wary of the economic
costs that the deflation associated with restoration might entail. From

their perspective the preferred solution was inflation abroad rather than

deflation at home ——    in   particular, inflation in the United States. The

British contemplated various schemes to encourage the Americans to inflate,

ranging from subtle diplomatic pressure to a far—fetched plan to

immediately pay in gold a large share of Britain's war debt in order to

drastically expand the American monetary base.24 This last scheme was

dismissed due to the likelihood of American sterilization and its impact on

the Bank of Englands reserve position.       It would be preferable for

monetary expansion to be initiated abroad and backed as necessary by

reserves of foreign exchange. That a significant portion of foreign

exchange reserves would be held in the form of sterling undoubtedly figured

in British calculations.'

     Although the Americans shared Britain's interest in promoting the

expansion of world trade, from their vantage point the problem was less
     pressing. They were willing to participate in discussions of international

     economic policy only as part of a general settlement. While Herbert Hoover

     and his Secretary of State, Charles E. Hughes, expressed an interest in

     convening in what the President termed a "real honest—to—God economic

     conference" designed to reestablish fixed exchange rates, international

     convertiblity and free international movements of commodities and gold,

     they evinced little enthusiasm for meetings like those at Genoa which

     seemed likely to concentrate on stop—gap measures to be adopted in lieu of

     balanced budgets or Reparations settlements, and whose success appeared to
                                                       7A
     hinge on American concessions regarding war debts. In the end,
     Hughes agreed only to send to the Conference as an unofficial observer the

     American Ambassador to Rome, Richard Washburn Child.

           In contrast to the Americans, the French sought to define the agenda

     for Genoa as narrowly as possible. The French opposed British proposals for

     universal adoption of nondiscrimination in trade and the most—favored—

     nation clause, so they sought to discourage discussion of a general

     convention on trade policy. In contrast they pressed for discussion of

     sanctions against the Soviet Government on the question of prewar

     debts.07   This dispute intensified after January 1922, when Briands

     relatively moderate government was replaced by a more nationalistic

     administration headed by Poincaré, who commenced almost immediately to

     spar over these issues and Reparations with the equally combative Lloyd

     George. Poincaré was skeptical about the usefulness of multilateral

     negotiations and agreed to participate in the conference only on British

     assurances that Frances position on Reparations, the terms of the Treaty

     of Versailles, and the Russian Imperial Gbvernment's debt to France would
                       'B
     not be questioned.4




17
            The monetary proposals discussed at Genoa originated with the British

delegation. In drafting their proposals the British could draw on the

First Interim Report of the Cunliffe Committee and on the considerable

talents of their monetary specialists, notably Ralph 6. Hawtrey, since 1919
                                                         29
Director of Financial Enquiries at H.t1.     Treasury.        number of

Britain's Genoa proposals resembled the Cunliffe Committee's

recommendations! including the argument that a credible commitment to

financial stability required a return to goid.0 Resurrecting the gold

standard, it was stated, required balancing government budgets insulating

central banks from pressure to extend credit to government agencies, and

consolidating national debts. Little was novel in these ideas. More novel

were the measures first proposed by the Cunliffe Committee and incorporated

into the British proposals to economize on the demand for monetary gold:

these included eliminating internal circulation of gold coin, concentrating

gold reserves at the central bank, and permitting domestic residents to

acquire coin and bullion for export only from the authorities. By limiting

the use of gold to international settlements, the Cunliffe Committee and

the British delegates at Genoa sought to minimize competing demands for

reserves.

            The British draft was circulated among foreign authorities in

February 1922, and in March experts from Belgium, France, Italy and Japan

met with British representatives in London to undertake revisions. These

proposals were adopted with only slight modification by the Financial

Committee at the Genoa Conference in April and by the Conference itself in
       31
May.

            The Genoa resolutions contained a number of provisions designed to

ease the transition to gold. These included the recommendation, ultimately

adopted, that governments with significantly depreciated currencies
     consider stabilizing at a lower rate of exchange. While accepting the

     argument that prewar parities provided the ideal basis for stabilization,

     the experts suggested that countries which had experienced sustained

     inflation might be well advised to avoid the output costs associated with

     restoring the prewar level of prices. Moreover, they observed that

     governments would be seriously burdened by the increased real value of

     internal debt which would result from a substantial reduction in

     prices.32 Policymakers were therefore encouraged to stabilize at rates

     not far distant from those currently prevailing. Significantly for the

     operation of the interwar gold standard no sanctions were included to

     discourage governments from engaging in competitive depreciation.

           The Genoa resolutions also contained proposals to economize on the

     use of gold. The measures proposed by the Cunliffe Committee were altered

     to meet what the British experts regarded as mounting deflationary

     pressures. Resolution 9 on currency adopted by the Financial Commission

     urged governments to establish a mechanism to minimize the need for gold by

      maintaining reserves in the form of foreign balances, such as the gold

     exchange standard, or an international clearing system.

          It was in this connection that the issue of policy coordination was

     raised. Monetary authorities were encouraged to coordinate their demands

     for gold and to avoid the wide fluctuations in internal prices that would

     otherwise result from the 'simultaneous and competitive efforts of a number

     of countries to secure metallic reserves. 33
              V

                                                    Thus, central banks were

     for the first time explicitly urged to desist from the competitive struggle

     for gold. These proposals for international cooperation were predicated

     upon the establishment of central banks where they did not exist and on

     their insulation from political influence or control. Thus, at Genoa




19
countries with relatively stable currencies were therefore urged to adopt

institutional arrangements similar to those imposed by the League of

Nations upon countries undergoing hyperinflation.

      The only resolution on international policy coordination acceptable

to all the participating countries was one couched in general terms. While

consultation and collaboration were encouraged, no formal mechanism for

their practice was specified.   Instead, the Eank of England was requested

to call an early meeting of central bankers to prepare a convention to

implement these measures. An accompanying resolution warned that the

success of any such plan was contingent upon the participation of the

United States. In the words of the Financial Commission, no scheme for

stabilizing prices can be fully effective without coordination of policy

between Europe and the United States, whose cooperation therefore should be
           34
invited.

      There is no question that the economic costs of noncooperative

behavior were clearly understood in 1922. Permitting central banks to

engage in a competitive struggle for gold was seen as threatening to

transmit deflationary pressures to the world economy and delaying recovery

from the War. Multilateral negotiations were seen as the most effective

technique for achieving agreement on an acceptable international

distribution of reserves. Vet it was far from apparent how agreement on

this matter might be reconciled with national autonomy on the question of

the level at which to stabilize exchange rates, or how these noble

sentiments might be institutionalized. But if the participants in the

6enoa Conference lacked a coherent view of how policy coordination might be

practiced, they agreed on the principle of responding cooperatively to

international financial problems.

      Ultimately, even this modest attempt to provide a framework for
     cooperation proved to be overly ambitious. To the surprise of the

     participants, the next    step in the process, namely the proposed meeting of
     central banks, was never held. The Bank of England took the initiative of

     discussing the proposed meeting with the Federal Reserve, whose

     participation was endorsed by    the   U.S.   State Department. Once the Bank of
     England's Committee of Treasury approved the tentative invitation drafted

     by Norman and Benjamin Strong, a meeting seemed imminent. However,

     efforts to convene the meeting met with political obstacles, and the

     prospective conference was soon reduced to a mere bargaining chip to be

     used n disputes over these other concerns. The French ruled out their

     participation unless Reparations were again excluded from the agenda. The

     Americans objected that meaningful progress could not be made unless the

     Reparations question was reopened.       ifl the autumn of 1922 Britain sent a

     delegation to Washington to discuss funding the British war debt, and the

     Bank of England's involvement in these negotiations again postponed the

     meeting of central bankers. France's occupation of the Ruhr in 1923 cast

     doubt on Germany participation, and the financial difficulties of ustria

     and Hungary was the occasion for further delay. By the summer of 1923,

     enthusiasm    for a general convention of central banks had dissipated. This
     was not to mark the end of financial collaboration, but subsequent
     exchanges between central banks took place primarily on a bilateral
              3o
     basis.

              With the failure of the Genoa Conference to yield even a general

     framework for international policy coordination, many of the dangers cited

     by the financial experts quickly came to pass. There were no sanctions to

     discourage governments from stabilizing at parities which yielded a system

     of misaligned exchange rates. There was no mechanism for reconciling the




21
competing objectives of national monetary authorities nor to prevent

central banks from engaging in what was characterized as a competitive

scramble for gold. The implications of noncooperative behavior within the

framework of the interwar gold standard would become evident soon enough.


III. Leadershi_p and Cooperation Under the Interwar Gold Standard

     A.   Motivation
          Establishing   a basis for cooperation among central banks was

clearly one of the principal goals of the policymakers who attempted to lay

the foundation for the gold standard's resurrection. Yet the gold standard

is typically portrayed as a self—equilibrating mechanism under which

external balance is restored to deficit and surplus countries alike through

the smooth operation of an anonymously functioning international adjustment

mechanism. The very concept of conflicting objectives, much less

strategies such as leadership and cooperation, are wholly incompatible with

familiar attempts to model the gold standard's operation. These familiar

models are simply incapable of addressing the questions at hand.

      The purpose of this section is therefore to develop an alternative

model of the gold standard with which the issues of leadership and

cooperation can be addressed. No attempt is made to capture the operation

of the international gold standard in all its complexity, for this is not

the model's purpose. Its purpose is rather to provide a simple

macroeconomic framework which highlights the channels through which the

actions of one country's central bank impinge upon the internal and

external position of another and the incentives that these repercussion

effects provide the second country to respond to the actions of the first.

It strips away complications in order to lay bare the dynamics of strategic

interaction and to explore the implications of long—standing arguments
     about the benefits of leadership and cooperation during the interwar

     period.

           The model is based on the notion that the interwar gold standard can

                     international struggle for gold. 37
     be viewed as an I.                                        Simply put,

     central banks in our model desire incompatibly large shares of the worlds

     gold reserves. This provides the basis for conflicting objectives and for

     strategic interaction.

           Despite its simplicity, the model generates several useful insights.

     As in any strategic game in which the players hold conflicting objectives,

     noncooperative behavior has economic costs compared with cooperative
                  38
     solutions.        In our model, central banks incapable of coordinating

     their policies set their discount rates at undesirably high levels, putting

     downward pressure on the level of prices and depressing incomes at home and

     abroad. For example, this is the result at the Nash solution to this

     noncooperative game. While central bank policy was but one factor at work

     in the world economy in the 1920s, this result is suggestive when applied

     to a period marked by historically high discount rates, conflicts among

     central banks, and steady deflation culminating in a Great Depression.

           The Stackelberg leader—follower solution to the two—country model

     provides a halfway point between the Nash and cooperative equilibria.

     Compared to the Nash solution, the leader—follower solution is less

     deflationary and yields higher incomes both at home and abroad. Barring

     cooperation, the exercise of leadership clearly is in the interest of both

     players; the question is whether either player will choose to exercise it.

     In fact, there is an incentive for both players to resist the leadership

     role. It is a standard (arid perfectly intuitive) property of models of

     symmetrical countries that both players prefer to adopt the same strategy.

     We show below that the same holds true in a model of asymmetric countries,



23
     where one central bank has exceptional power to influence the direction of

     international capital flows.

             In structure the model has much in common with previous analyses of

     policy coordination (see for e>:ample Hamada, 1976 and 1979).    It


     incorporates the assumption that each central bank has more targets than

     instruments, forcing it to confront the tradeoff between its objectives.

     This is the assumption of instrument scarcity in whose absence problems of

     strategy vanish. In addition, it incorporates the assumption that each

     domestic target variable is affected by the actions of the foreign central

     bank.    This is the assueption of interdependence.
             There e>ists scope for strategic interaction in a model of the gold

     standard only if central banks can e>ercise discretion. We will assume

     that central barks are able to engage in discretionary initiatives to alter

     the   composition of   the monetary base through open market operations or

     changes in fiduciary circulation and to affect the size of the money

     multiplier through changes in discount rates. While the idea that changes

     in central bank discount rates affect the relationship between the gold

     reserve and the money supply is a departure from textbook treatments of the

     gold standard, it captures the fact that the authorities were capable in

     the short run of either reinforcing the impact of incipient gold flows on

     domestic financial markets or neutralizing them through sterilization.       In


     fact, under the gold standard there were important sources of slack in the

     connection between gold reserves and broadly defined monetary aggregates.

     Central banks could hold gold in excess of that required to back notes in

     circulation, enabling them to intervene in financial markets with purchases

     of bonds and bills and to alter the monetary base without any accompanying

     change in reserves. Only the need to maintain confidence in the




24
     convertibility of the currency placed limits on their discretionary

     actions. Similarly, commercial banks, even if free of statutory reserve

     requirements, had an incentive to hold precautionary reserves to guard

     against unanticipated withdrawals. The size of such precautionary reserves

     was determined in part by the cost of feasible alternatives, including

     discounting (in the British case, via discount houses) at the central bank.

     Under the British banking system, there was a conventional ratio between a

     banks cash and its liabilities which was basically the same whether those

     liabilities were demand or time deposits. Nonetheless, the authorities

     could influence this ratio and hence affect broadly defined monetary

     aggregates throuh changes in the deposit multiplier.9 This was even

     more true of the countries of the Continent, where there was typically no

     conventional or legal relation between reserve assets and deposits.

           Each central bank in our model minimizes a quadratic loss function

     defined over gold reserves and domestic prices. Mthough the historical

     record suggests that central bankers followed rules of thumb when setting

     discount rates, we adopt the assumption of optimizing behavior as a

     simplifying device. The assumption that each bank has an optimal gold

     reserve is motivated by the observation that, while a central bank could

     feel more confident of its ability to defend the convertibility of the

     currency with a larger gold reserve on hand, it was less profitable to hold

     barren metal than interest—bearing financial assets.40

           The idea that central banks maintained a target level for prices is

     another simplifying assumption. Occasionally it is argued that central

     banks were concerned ultimately with the domestic currency price of gold

     and that they desired only to prevent such fluctuations in prices and

     economic activity as might threaten convertibility. By this

     interpretation, the price level is properly viewed not as an independent



25
goal of policy but as an intermediate target whose achievement was helpful

for attaining the ultimate objective: maintaining cori.'ertibility. et

central banks were under pressure throughout the interwar years to respond

actively to internal conditions. The British case provides an illustration

of the pressures brought to bear. British central bankers were publicly

cautious when relating their policy to the state of the domestic economy.

According to Montagu Norman, the Bank of Englands interwar Governor, the

ill effects of a high Bank Rate on domestic industry and trade were greatly

exaggerated and "more psychological than real.'41 Of course, by 1930,

when this statement was made, the Bank had been subjected to Treasury

criticism for more than half a decade; in 1924, a more relaxed time, Norman

had expressed concern for the impact of monetary deflation on the state of

the economy.4 The caution that characterized the Bank's public

pronouncements by the end of the decade can be seen as a response to the

criticism to which it was subjected. Keynes' articles on monetary policy

are the best—known examples of the genre.4    Surely, however, the Hank

of England was more profoundly affected by criticism emanating from H.t'l.

Treasury. The principal goals of Treasury policy in the 'twenties were to

retire outstanding debt and to reduce the burden of debt service charges

through conversion of the five percent government loans of 1917 at low

interest rates. Debt service had risen from 11 percent of central

government spending in 1913 to 24 percent in 1920 and more than 40 percent

by the end of the decade.44 Hence between 1925 and 1929 the Treasury

consistently objected to Bank of England initiatives which raised the price

and reduced the availability of credit. These objections were often

communicated to the Bank directly. For example:

        "The Sovernor of the Bank called at the Treasury on the 2nd
        December [1925] about 7:15 pm, and informed me that there
             was every probability that the Bank Rate would be increased
             ...I reported this to the Chancellor on the following morn-
             ing and he at once telephoned to the Governor that if the
             rate were raised, he would have to inform the House that it
             had been done without his being consulted and against his
             wishes. It was not fair to the Exchequer that action should
             be taken which affected all its affairs without an opportu-
             nity being given to him to consider it. He expressed an
             earnest request that action should be derred at any rate
             for a week, to enable this to be done.

           Whatever the central bankers' beliefs about the effects of monetary

     policy, it is difficult to dispute that such pressures would have

     encouraged them to act as if they were concerned about the state of

     industry and trade. In fact, Bank of England reaction functions for the

     period 1925—31 indicate some sensitivity of discount rate policy to the

     state of the domestic economy.46 In what follows, the target of a

     stable price level can be thought of as shorthand for stable prices1 output

     and employment and, depending on the reader's interpretation of the

     historical literature, different weights can be attached to internal and

     external targets without greatly affecting the results.

             B.   Specification
           Consider   a world of two identical countries, home and foreign.4'

     We log—linearize all relationships and use lower case letters to denote the

     logs of the variables represented by the corresponding upper case letters,

     except for interest rates which are always measured in levels. Each

     country has a model supply ti, which can be thought of as an Ml or M2

     measure. This aggregate is the product of the monetary base and the money

     multiplier V. The base is made up of domestic credit and the central

     bank's gold reserves. The domestic credit component of the base can be

     positive or negative, depending on whether central banks hold excess gold

     reserves or there is a fiduciary issue outstanding. However, to simplify

     the model we abstract entirely from the domestic credit component of the




27
             48
     base.

              We assume that a rise in the discount rate, by increasing the cost of

     rediscounting at the central bank, induces the consolidated banking sector

     to hold a larger ratio of precautionary reserves to liabilities. Hence the

     money multiplier depends negatively on the central bank discount rate.

     Using asterisks to indicate foreign variables, we have:

                  m = — yr + hg
                                                                          (1)
                          —   vr*   + (l—h)g

     where v is the elasticity of the money supply with respect to the discount

     rate r.      g denotes the log of the world stock of monetary gold, of which

     shares h and (1—h) are held by the domestic and foreign countries. The

     demand for real balances is a function of output V and the market interest

     rate i:

                  m — p =           — Xi
                                                                          (2)
                      —
                          p*   =          — Xi*

     where p and p* denote logs of domestic and foreign prices respectively.

     Only mathematical complexity is added by assuming that nominal balances are

     deflated by a consumer price index comprised of domestic and foreign prices.

              Aggregate supply in each country is an increasing function of

     producer prices:
                                                               Vs
                  S. — S 4         — vP                              '.
                   V — YP'                                     Y,           /
                                                                                 (3)
                      =   y*(p*)      =   y*p*
     where for convenience we assume constant elasticities of supply (y and

         and standardize the normal level of output to unity. These functions

     can be thought of as the short—run supply curves of an aggregation of

     profit—maximizing firms confronting predetermined wages or material costs.

     Rather than introducing costs explicitly, we simply note that the classical

     full employment model                (y =   y*   =   0)        and the seynesian income—



28
e;penditure model y              y                c can be treated as special cases. The

short—run focus of the model should be borne in mind in the discussion that

follows.

      Aggregate demand depends positively on the relative price of imports

and negatively on the interest                          rate.   The exchange rate is normalized to

unity and suppressed.

           d =    (p*   —
                            p)       —       Bi
                                                                  (4)
           d* =    —p*      —
                                 p.)
                                             —    Bi*
We close the model with the open interest parity condition on the

assumption that nonmonetary assets denominated in the two currencies are

perfect substitutes and capital is perfectly mobile.


           i      i*                                                      (5)



      The omission of gold production, wealth effects arid dynamics of

adjustment, to mention but a few complications, is obvious. Many of these

complications could be appended to the model.                           However, our intent here is

not to build a complete model but to present a simple analytical framework

containing the essential ingredients for the study of a particular

hi stan cml episode.

      We now posit an objective function for each country of the form:

                        -   ->2          +   w(h    -                              (6)

where t4 is the weight attached to gold reserves relative to prices, output

and employment.49 We assume h > 1/2 to capture the idea that the two

countries prefer incompatibly large shares of the (log of the> worlds

stock of monetary reserves——in other words, that the gold standard can be

characterized as a competitive struggle fr gold.                                It will be convenient to

normalize p to zero.
           To derive a semi—reduced form expression for h, we set each countrys

     money supply equal to its money demand and take the difference of these two

     rel at ions.

                    h =     1/(2g ) Eg + v(r                 —r*) + (1 +                   )   (p —   p*)]         (7)


           Setting aggregate supply (3) equal to aggregate demand (4) and

     substituting each countrys money supply and money demand equations [(I)

     and (2)3 into its goods market clearing condition yields a semi—reduced

     form for p:

                    p       5?tv/2(r +           r*)   —
                                                           g /2]                                      (B)


     where:

                        =           _i                        —1                   0
                            y +      X/B(l+            )



         It is evident that this model provides the minimal ingredients for a

     study of interdependence. The first element we require for an analysis of

     interdependence is that each central bank faces a tradeoff between its

     target variables. From (7) and (8):

                                                                       •/
                                                       r
                                —
                                —        I                   —
                                                             —
                    -
                                                                       2
     and similarly for the foreign country. A rise in the domestic discount

     rate increases the domestic money multiplier, putting downward pressure on

     the price level, and by reducing domestic money supply relative to domestic

     money demand attracts gold from the foreign country.

          The second element we require is that the target variables in the home

     country are affected by the actions of the foreign central bank. Again

     from (7) and (8):


                -*
                            =
                                    2        0                     =
                                                                           2
                                                                               <       0                    (10)
                                                                                                              -



     An increase in the foreign discount rate reduces the foreign money

     multiplier and the foreign money supply, attracting gold from the home

     country and depressing the world price level. Analogous results hold far




30
     the foreign country.

            It is worth noting we have here a case of positive international

     transmission. Initiating    an expansionary      policy in one country leads to

     expansion in the other. This result contrasts with the assumption often

     made about iriternatiorcal transmission between the wars: that policy was

     ubeggar_thy_nelghbarl in the sense that expansion in one country caused

     contraction    in the other. The contrast is due to the way we model the
     international monetary regime: in this model of the 1920s        with fixed

     exchange   rates international transmission is positive, while in a
     coaparable model of the 1930s with flexible rates, transmission might well
     be negative.
            The choices confronting central   banks    can be illustrated with two
     familiar diagrams. From (9, we know that, given r*, the domestic central
     bank   can vary r to attain different combinations of h and p.       In Figure
     1, the frontier of   feasible   combinations is   labelled   AA. The optimal
     setting   for r is one which achieves a h—p combination tangentto an

     indifference curve at the point labelled F.

            Consider now a rise in r*. This shifts the AA frontier inward to

     A''. The home country's central bank, faced with a smaller world money

     supply, is forced to accept lower prices, smaller gold reserves, or a

     combination of the two, s drawn, it moves to a point such as U tangent to

     a less desirable indifference curve where both prices and reserves have

     fallen.

            The same exercises can be conducted for the foreign central bank. The

     analysis becomes interesting once we combine the two banks' problems and

     consider their interaction. This can be done by transposing the

     indifference curves to r—r* space as in Figure 2.        We read off from Figure

     I the home country's rankings of different combinations of the two discount


31
h



A



A'




     Figure 1
rates. Thus, point E in Figure 2 at the center of the home country's solid

indifference curves corresponds to point E in Figure 1. The fact that the

foreign central banks indifference curves lie to the northwest of the home

central banks indf+erence curves reflects the assumption that the two

central banks   ideally      wish to hold incompatibly large shares of the world's

gold stock. This is accomplished when each bank's discount rate is high

relative to that of its rival.

     The downward sloping pp locus depicts combinations of r and r* for

which a price level p obtains. Along parallel lines below and to the

i+t of pp, prices arE highEr, while above and to the right, prices are

lower. With symmetry, the two central banks share a common rank ordering

over prices and the pp line has a slope of —45 degrees.

     The F and F* curves in Figure 2 are the reaction functions of the two

central banks. The F curve, representing loss—minimizing discount rates

for the hose central bank          given the foreign discount rate, is the locus of
points where the tangent to the home indifference curve is horizontal.

Similarly, the F* curve is the locus of points where the tangent to a

foreign indifference curve is vertical. The reaction functions may be

positively sloped, as in Figure 2, or negatively sloped. The slopes can be

derived by substituting the semi—reduced forms for h and p into the

ob)ective function, differentiating with respect to each discount rate and

setting the solutions to zero:

                        =    (4+
          Sr    fF*1)
                                                                         UI)

          irtF0
          Zr
                             ___
                               —

Both reaction functions will be positively sloped when the weight attached

to gold reserves w      is   large relative to that placed on prices. Then each
                          F




p



                     'I
                I    I
               /1/
               / /
                              r
         p

    Figure 2
central bank responds to a foreign discount rate increase by raising its

owr rate, attempting to stem the lass of gold reserves at the cost of still

lower prices. Conversely, both reaction functions will be negatively

sloped when the weight put on gold reserves is relatively small.   In this

case, each country responds to a discount rate increase abroad by lowering

its discount rate, attempting to reduce the fall in prices at the cost of

still lower gold reserves. So long as stability is maintained (as can be

shown to obtain under symmetry and under other cases considered below), the

analysis is essentially the same.

     The discussion to fallow will concentrate on the configuration

depicted in Figure 2.   The case of upward—sloping reaction functions, in

which each country is inclined to respond to a change in the foreign

discount rate in the same direction, appears to be the historically

relevant case for the 1920s.

     C. Solutions

     We can now determine the equilibrium values of r and r* under different

solution concepts. 1fter discussing the outcome under different

assumptions, we will ask the question of which solution is likely to

obtain.

     First, we consider the model's Nash solution at the intersection of

the reaction functions. Note that in the symmetrical model the two

discount rates are identical at the Nash solution, so the level of prices

and reserves will be the same in each country. In particular, since p =

at the Nash solution, we can cancel the second additive term in equation

(9) when solving for its characteristics. Differentiating the objective

function with respect to each discount rate under the assumption that the

other discount rate is invariant, setting each solution to zero and
     equating them yields:

               rr[-g+2(h2)J                                              (13)

     where   the N subscript denotes the Nash solution.
            Second, we consider the cooperative solution. Under symmetry, each

     country holds exactly half the world's monetary gold, and prices are again

     identical in the two countries. The best they can then do       is    to   set   their

     discount   rate equal to one another at the level consistent with p = 0.
     Setting    (9) equal to zero yields:
                        *       1—
                 r=r        =   —g                        (14)

     where the C    subscript denotes the cooperative solution. From (13> and

     (14)
             r4 > r so long as       h   > 1/2.

            Under symmetry, the Nash and cooperative solutions yield identical

     distributions of gold. However, under the assumption of Nash behavior, the

     dc-sire of rival banks to possess incompatibly large shares of the world's

     gold    stock causes both banks to elevate their   discount rates above the

     level consistent with price level p. Each is       subject ot the

     misapprehension that a marginal increase in its discount rate will secure
     it larger gold reserves at the cost of a relatively small decline in
     prices.     In fact,   each discount rate increase elicits an increase in        the

     foreign    discount rate, yielding the initiating bank no additional gold

     reserves but resulting in still lower prices. Thus, the strategic

     interaction of central banks imparts a deflationary bias to the world

     economy, given only the assumption that h       > 1/2.

            Finally, we consider the case where the home country acts as

     Stackelberg leader and the foreign country follows. Substituting the

     foreign country's reaction function into the home country's objective

     function and minimizing the loss yields the solution depicted at point H in

     Figure 2, where a home indifference curve is tangent to the foreign



34
     reaction function. The home countrys central bank recognizes that if it

     lowers its discount rate the foreign central bank will respond in kind.

     Hence, it is aware that the loss of gold reserves brought about by its

     thscount rate reduction will be partially offset by the reduction in the

     foreign discount rate, and that the response of the foreign central bank

     will yield further benefits by reinforcing the tendency of lower discount

     rates to raise the world money supply and price level. The leader—follower

     strategy yields a lower domestic discount rate than the Nash solution,

     resulting in a higher level of utility for the domestic country, whose loss

     of gold is more than offset by higher prices, output and employment. The

     foreign central bank benefits on both counts, since prices are higher and

     it   now obtains a larger share of the world s gold stock.
                                                                  50


            In this model, the strategic interaction of central banks imparts a

     deflationary bias to the world economy, assuming only that at the optimum

     they desire incompatibly large shares of the wcrlds gold stock.

     Leadership has advantages over other noncooperative strategies: a country

     which tates its foreign rival's reaction into account can initiate a

     reduction in discount rates, raising prices and stimulating activity at

     home and abroad. Cooperation has further advantages over leadership:

     through cooperation both discount rates can be lowered and the deflationary

     bias in monetary policy can be eliminated.

            D. Sustainable Strategies

            To this point we have not addressed the question of which solution is

     likely to obtain. In this section we first consider this question using

     the symmetrical model of previous sections which is intended to represent

     the strategic interaction of two or more comparable financial centers

     during the interwar years. We then extend the analysis to a simple




35
     asymmetrical case intended to capture aspects of the prewar situation.

             ssuming that cooperative strategies are not feasible, is the Nash

     solution or the Stackelberg leader—follower solution likely to obtain? We

     have noted that both countries benefit with movement from the Nash solution

     to the leader—follower solution. It is clear also that with upward—sloping

     reaction functions the follower reaps the greater gains: while both

     countries    benefit from higher   prices, only the follower benefits from a

     larger gold reserve. In Figure 2, the gains from discount rate reductions

     are evenly distributed among countries as they move down the 45 degree line

     toward the origin. Since the leader—follower solution is on the followers

     side of that line, the leader reaps the smaller benefits. 1s Cooper (1954)

     suggests, the fact that the follower reaps the larger benefits encourages

     both parties to engage in a game of TMchicken," each attempting to force the

     other    to accept the role of leader. There may be e>tended periods when the
     Nash solution is observed as this game of "chicken' is being played out.
     Clearly this is one way to interpret statements to the effect that the
     interwar monetary system was characterized by the absence of leadership.
             We might attempt to capture the change in structure of international
     financial markets between the end of the 19th century and the interwar
     period by   adding to the   model an asymmetry in the ability of   discount   rates
     to   influence international capital flows. ssume that the discount rate of

     the domestic central bank (which might be thought of as the Bank of

     England) has a larger impact than the foreign discount rate on the domestic

     money supply (i.e., that v* = ev where 0 < 8< 1).       In all other

     respects, including objective functions, the two countries remain the same.

     Since from (9) and (10) dh/dr. = —v. /2, the domestic discount rate has a
                              1   1     1

     larger impact than the foreign discount rate on the international

     distribution of gold.



38
          Strikingly, introducing this asymmetry into the model does not alter

     the fact that, in the case of positively—sloped reaction functions, each

     country prefers its foreign counterpart to play the Stackelberg leader.

     The intuition is straightforward. For simplicity of exposition, consider

     the case where v is unchanged from sub—sections B and C above but v* is now

     smaller. Since v* = 8v,we can rewrite equation (1) for the foreign country



                  =   -v8r*   + (1—big                               (1)

     and leave the rest of the model unchanged.       In this case, the model and its

     solutions are the same, except we can think of the foreign central bank as

     setting and the domestic central bank as reacting to er* rather than r*.

     At each solution, the domestic discount rate is the same as in the

     symmetrical case, while the foreign discount rate is simply 8 times its

     value in the symmetric model.       In r—8r* space, the various solutions could

     be depicted by the symmetrical diagram of Figure 2.       In r—r* space, the

     slope of each reaction function would have to be multiplied by 1/8. All of

     the conclusions from the symmetric model concerning the gains to

     Stackelberg leaders and followers continue to hold.

          The simple asymmetrical model suggests, therefore, that to the extent

     that the Bank of England had more power than its foreign counterparts over

     the direction of gold flows, this would not have encouraged it to exercise

     leadership in the Stackelberg sense.      If asymmetries in economic structure

     are to provide an explanation for the Bank of England's leadership role,

     they must be more subtle than the simple asymmetry considered here.


     IV. The Tripartite Monetary Agreement of 1936 and the Role for Cooperation

          The devaluation of sterling in 1931 marked the end of the truly

     international gold standard of the interwar years. The Bank of England had


'I
     succeeded in holding sterling between the gold points during the period

     1925—1930 only under considerable duress. The onset of the Great

     Depression then placed a downward       pressure on prices, pushed the government
     budget into deficit and by the summer of 1931 raised unemployment rates to

     20   percent of the insured labor force. Following financial crises in
     Austria    and Germany and     with the Labour and National Government's inability
     to take    convincing steps either    to balance the budget or to initiate

     economic recovery, defense of the sterling parity was abandoned in

     September. Against the dollar and the currencies of other countries that

     continued      to   peg to gold, the pound depreciated by 25 percent, from $4.86

     to $3.75 at the end of the first week of floating.

            More than two dozen countries allowed their currencies to depreciate

     with sterling, among them most of the Empire, Scandinavia, and Eastern
               51
     Europe.         Germany i-or its part adopted draconian exchange controls and

     moved increasingly toward a system of bilateral clearing arrangements with

     its Eastern European trading partners.

            The United States broke with gold in 1933. In March Roosevelt

     restricted foreign exchange dealings and gold and currency movements, and

     in April he issued an executive order requiring individuals to deliver

     their gold coin, bullion and certificates to Federal Reserve Banks. At

     this point, the dollar began to float. By setting a series of

     progressively higher dollar prices for gold, the Administration engineered

     a significant devaluation. The dollar was finally stabilized in January

     1934 at $35 an ounce, 59 percent of its former gold content. The only

     major currencies that remained freely convertible were those of the Gold

     Bloc countries: France, Belgium, Holland, Italy, Poland and Switzerland.

     These countries were willing to go to great lengths to defend




38
their established parities.

        Thus, the international monetary system of the mid—1930s was a hybrid of

different regimes.      Britain   was engaged in a managed float administered by

the Exchange Equali:ation ccount (EE). The United States in January 1934

pegged the dollar to gold at the new $35 price but extended convertibility

only to countries on the gold standard. France, under the provisions of the

monetary law of 1928, was     fully on the   gold   standard and obligated to buy
and    sell gold without limit    at the prevailing prices

        s late as the summer of 1936 the official goal of French policy was
to    defend and maintain the franc Poincaré. Despite the depth of the
Depression, the Bank of France continued to respond to gold losses by
raising its discount rate. Belgiums devaluation in 1935 served to signal
the   extent of   the francs overvaluation, and confidence was further
undermined by political developments abroad, including Italy's invasion of

Ethiopia, Germanys occupation of the Rhineland, and the outbreak of the

Spanish Civil War. With the formation of Leon Slum's Popular Front

Government an pril 1936, pressure on the franc intensified. Slum was

pledged to stimulate domestic activity while at the same time maintaining

the gold standard parity.. Market participants were aware of the

incompatibility of these objectives. Slums proposals had included public

works and public employment, a reduction in the length of the work week,

paid holidays, universal collective bargaining, and public control of heavy

industry and finance. French labor initiated sit—down strikes soon after

the election to induce speedy implementation of these measures, and the

Bank of Frances gold reserves plummeted as a result of capital outflows.

The Bank responded by raising its discount rate to 6 per cent, three times

the Bank of England's rate. Discrete consideration began to be given to

the possibility of devaluation.
          As devaluation of the franc came to be seen as probable, French

     policymakers considered how to capitalize on the situation arid foreign

     policymakers how to minimize the damage. Yet the French position was not

     without difficulties. One French objective was to devalue by a margin

     adequate to secure a competitive advantage——in other words, devaluation on

     the 1920s model.   At   the   same time, they were constrained by the

     necessity of not arousing the indignation of the electorate or their

     trading partners. Since the Popular Front had come to       power   committed to
     the gold standard, it was desirable that devaluation occur as part of a
     multilateral system of exchange rate adjustments which laid the basis for a

     general return to gold. Moreover, given the spectre of 1923 and 1926, the

     French were concerned that a substantial devaluation might cast doubt on

     the credibility of any fixed parity and set off a vicious spiral of

     depreciation. To allay speculation the French therefore proposed that

     realignment be followed by the establishment of new, more realistic gold

     standard parities by the Bank of England, Bank of France and Federal

     Reserve.

          In addition to the domestic political situation, the Popular Front had

     reason to worry about foreign retaliation. Earlier in the decade, France

     had imposed new commercial restrictions in response to foreign devaluation,

     leaving her little diplomatic defense against the adoption of comparable

     measures by the U.S. and U.K. Equally worrisome was the danger of

     competitive devaluation. There was no internal code of conduct governing

     the management of exchange rates. The British EEA could intervene with

     sales of sterling to push the pound down along with the franc, and if 1933

     was any indication the 1merican response might be a further devaluation of

     the dollar. Hence from the French perspective it was essential before




40
     proceeding with devaluation to secure an agreement on acceptable margins of

     adjustment.

          For the British and Americans, the danger attached to a French

     devaluation was that it was beggar-thy—neighbar policy. To the extent that

     London and Washington viewed one another as inclined to retaliate against a

     French. devaluation, each feared that its own competitive position would be

     seriously eroded. Moreover, competitive devaluation would only e>acerbate

     exchange—rate instability and uncertainty! with a depressing impact on

     trade. For the British! the spectre of a French devaluation raised the

     further possibility that London's complete control over the foreign

     e>change value of sterling would be compromised by French intervention

     directed at other targets.

          The U.S. and ILK engaged in sporadic negotiations in the spring of

     1935, but to little effect since the Americans were primarily concerned to

     avoid another round of competitive devaluation while the British were

     primarily concerned to retain their freedom of action. Following the

     triumph of the Popular Front in 1936, channels of communication between the

     governments were reopened. The U.S. continued to press for multilateral

     negotiations over   acceptable margins of adjustment, while the U.K. was
     willing to go no further than to express its hope that the dollar—pound

     rate could be held steady so long as devaluation of the franc was

     moderate. Blum and his ministers couched any discussion of

     devaluation in terms of a fundamental restructuring of the international

     monetary order.     In early September the French proposed an agreement among

     th three governments which would specify new bands for the franc, dollar

     and pound, commit the three governments to collaborative efforts to

     maintain those rates, bind them not to devalue except by mutual agreement

     of under exceptional and unforeseen circumstances, and compel them to


41
                                                                  54
     return to gold convertibility once stability was restored.

          This ambitious French proposal was coolly received n London and

     Washington. The Americans were unwilling to commit to an eventual return

     to gold or to stabilizing the dollar within a fixed band. Treasury

     Secretary Morgenthau favored only a mechanism for collaboration among the

     e>change equalization funds of the three countries and working agreements

     about the management   of rates. The   British opposed even more strongly any

     scheme which threatened to limit their freedom of action.5 British

     officials hoped only that Blum and his Minister of Finance Vincent Aural

     would devalue the franc in a convincing yet moderate manner, by a margin

     large enough to induce foreign capital inflows and permit stabilization but

     snaIl enough to leave unaffected relations between London and

     Wahi ngton.

          The French response to these objections was to drop their proposal for

     fixed bands but to continue advocating an eventual return to gold.

     However, the Americans and British continued to object to any mention of

     the gold standard. By the middle of September the French had begun to

     recognize that the only agreement which might prove acceptable to bath
                                                                       58
     London and Washington was one couched in very general terms.           Anal s

     next proposal   was for a single   declaration by the three governments

     pledging to avoid unilateral changes n exchange rates and unnecessary trade

     restrictions. 50'
                         The Treasuries and central banks of the three

     countries were to agree to cooperate in managing the exchange markets

     either through bilateral consultations or multilateral negotiations. This

     proved an acceptable formula. However, to hasten their appearance,

     Morgenthau suggested substituting for a document signed by the three

     governments the simultaneous issuing of separate statements once reference




42
     to the particularly contentious issues had been removed.

           With all reference to the gold standard and fixed parities

     eliminated, the Tripartite Declarations, much like the resolutions adopted

     at Genoa in 1922, amounted basically to three simultaneous statements of

     willingness to engage in consultations among Treasuries arid central

     banks.6° No formal mechanism for actually coordinating policies was

     specified in the documents. Nevertheless, these declarations were seen as

     essential to insure that the new level for the French franc would be

     defensible. Otherwise, competitive devaluations would be anticipated by

     the market and create articipatior.s of a further devaluation of the franc.

     In return for extending this expression of cooperation so desired by the

     French, the Americans and British hoped that they might be able to

     influence Frances choice of parity and prevent an excessive devaluation.

           Immediately upon the French devaluation of slightly more than 25

     percent arid release of the declarations, continuous cooperation among the

     exchange equalization funds and central banks of the three countries

     commenced. Belgium embraced the principles of the agreement one day later,

     and the Dutch and Swiss governments joined within a month. The agreement

     was hailed by the press. As the New York Times put it, '4 streak of

     sunlight had broken through the dark clouds of nationalism; International

     cooperation was still possible.H

          In contrast to the aftermath of the Genoa Conference, specific

     arrangements for day—to—day collaboration followed within a month. Under

     the provisions of the Gold Agreement Act of October 1936, exchange rates

     were agreed to daily arid the three exchange funds cooperated in market

     intervention, deciding on a common currency to be bought or sold and

     settling accounts daily in gold.6 In this respect, the contrast with

     1922 was striking. Part of the explanation for the successful



43
     implementation of the Tripartite greement lies in the fact that by 1936

     the major political obstacles to collaboration——notably Reparations and war

     debts——had largely receded from view. t least as important! however, was

     explicit recognition that the range of issues subject to collaboration

     would be circumscribed and that nothing in the agreement threatened to

     undermine each governments independence to formulate domestic policy.

           The Tripartite Declarations had warned that although 'in their policy

     toward international monetary relations (governments] must take into full

     account the requirements of internal prosperity, the constant object of

     their policy is to maintain the greatest pc'ssible equilibrium in the system

     of international exchange and avoid to the utmost extent the creation of

     any disturbance by domestic monetary action.'6 From this statement it

     might appear that priority was attached to international policy

     coordination.   In fact, however, internal balance was explicitly recognized

     as the paramount goal of policy, and the maintenance of international

     stability was basically a useful ancillary target. s Beyen (1949, p. 112)

     suggests, policy coordination was seen not as a positive objective of

     policy but as a negative promise not to indulge in initiatives that might

     be overly disruptive to the international monetary system.

           The international monetary order that emerged from the Tripartite

     Agreement placed great emphasis on consultation, but beyond efforts to

     coordinate day—ta—day management of the markets placed few restraints on

     independent action.   It provided no mechanism for the formal coordination

     of monetary or fiscal policies. Nothing in either agreement bound the

     participating countries to set their exchange rates at current levels.

     However, under the new arrangement the dollar began to emerge as the link

     between gold and other currencies, a position it was to hold for more than




44
two decades following the Second World War. The U.S. was by no means bound

to, stabilize its currency at $35 to an ounce of gold, a price which could

be changed on 24 hours notice. But with the passage of time the

Administration grew increasingly attached to this rate. With the dollar

fixed but adjustable in terms of gold and other currencies adjustable at

the    beginning of each day in terms     of the dollar the system resembled a

hybrid    of Bretton Woods in    terms of   the relation between gold and the
dollar> and a   crawling    peg (in   terms of the   relationship between the dollar
and other currencies>.

         By the end of 1936, many of the recommendations put forward at Genoa

in 1922 had been implemented butt ironically, at the expense of exchange

rate stability. Consultation among governments arid          central   banks, so

strongly recommended at Genoa, had been institutionalized under the

provisions of the Gold Agreement Act of October. Consultation e>tended

however only to day—to—day management of exchange markets, national

governments retaining complete discretion to set their external rates.

The dollar—sterling rate was effectively pegged within a narrow band from

the French devaluation in 1936 until the second half of 1939, but the

French engaged in several substantial devaluations in the second half of

1937   and again in 1938.    The gold economy measures urged at Genoa appeared
in the form of restrictions on the internal circulation of gold coin and
bullion and measures to     limit international      flows to transactions between
central   banks and stabilization funds. With the emergence of currency

areas centered upon New York, London and, to a lesser extent, Paris, the

reserve currency arrangement proposed at Genoa increasingly became a

reality. Indeed, to the extent that the dollar was the currency most

tightly linked to gold, it began to exhibit features of the unique role as

an international reserve currency it was to take on after World War II.
     The role   for policy coordination lay      in lending a semblance of order to the

     currency markets, insuring that retention of a link for gold was consistent

     with an adequate level of reserves, and discouraging beggar—thy—neighbor

     pOliCy.    The role for exchange rate    flexibility was to provide governments

     with independence of action. We will never know how long this system would

     have succeeded in reconciling these objectives.

     V.   Loncluslon

            The interwar period witnessed experiments with every modern

     international monetary arrangement: clean floating in the first half of

     the twenties arid a gold exchange standard in the second, managed floating

     in the early 1930s, and after 1936 the reintroduction of a link with gold

     arid a form of adjustable peg. Whether the regime was based loosely on a

     system of rules, as in the case of the gold standard, or placed few limits

     on the discretion of the authorities, as in the case of floating exchange

     rates, policymakers harbored no illusions that the international monetary

     arrangement   alleviated   the problem of   interdependence.   In each instance

     they sought to insure exchange—rate and balance—of—payments stability by

     establishing a framework conducive to international policy coordination.

               desire for policy coordination is by itself insufficient to insure

     successful collaboration. The aftermath of the Genoa Conference, when

     political obstacles impeded efforts to arrange a convention of central

     banks, illustrates the pitfalls to successful implementation. Ultimately,

     governments turned to noncooperative strategies within the framework of the

     gold—exchange standard. The competitive struggle for gold and the

     deflationary pressures that resulted indicated clearly the advantages of

     cooperation. Therefore, when Frances devaluation in 1936 erased the last

     vestiges of the interwar gold standard, policymakers once more attempted to




46
     establish a framework for coordinated action. On this occasion, not only

     was the political situation opportune, but in contrast to earlier efforts

     the negotiators carefully circumscribed the range of issues subject to

     collaboration and placed relatively few restrictions on each governrnent's

     freedom of action. Hence the successful conclusions of the Tripartite

     Agreement and the Gold Agreement Act.

           What emerges clEarly from this analysis of the interwar period is the

     tension which pervades all efforts to coordinate economic policies——a

     tension which is certainly evident also in the 1980s. Then as now the

     problem for monetary coordination was how to reconcile the need for freedom

     of action with the desire for order in foreign exchange markets and with

     the   recognition that national policies have international repercussions.
     Then as now the institutional response   was   a hybrid international monetary
     system combining arrangements for exchange market management with autonomy
     of national policy, and placing a premium on international policy
     coordination without providing a mechanism for bringing it about.




47
      F U 01 NOT ES




      1. For example, according to Beyen (1949, p. 28), "Under a fully automatic
     standard," by which he means the prewar gold standard, "the need for
     consultation between central banks was, of course, limited." He tells a
     story which illustrates central bankers' attitudes toward policy
     coordination and consultation. It seems to have been the tradition at the
     Netherlands Bank for the President and the Directors to personally count
     the bank notes withdrawn from circulation at a meeting held directly after
     lunch. One day in 1912 or 1913 two Directors of the Reichsbank paid a
     visit to msterdam, and the President of the Bank had the novel idea of
     takinq them to lunch. The conversation was "highly interesting," and the
     President arrived at the bank note meeting fifteen minutes late with what
     he thought was an adequate excuse. The oldest of the Directors was
     unappeased and commented, "Your work is here, not in coffeehouses.

     2. Of course, parallel movements in discount rates could be consistent   with
     the rules of the game f all of the ccuntres considered are either   qaining
     or losing gold to some other country not included in the discount rate
     comparison. See the discussions in Bloomfield (1959), Horgenstern (1959)
     and Triffin (1964).

     3. For the period of the classical gold standard (1850—1914), Blaomfield
     (1959) calculates that central banks complied with the rules of the game
     only 34 per cent of the time. Even the Bank of England, thought to be
     invested with special responsibility for managing the system, adhered to
     the rules only 47 per cent of the time.

     4. For example, see the discussions of Bank of England — Bank of France loans
     in Clapham (1944), volume 2, pp. 325—392 and Sayers (1936), Ch. 5.

     5. The trans—Atlantic telephone was still used sparingly between the Wars.
     The 1936 interchange between Morganthau and Cochran reported by Clarke
     (1977) provides an idea of why.

     6. Moggridge (1972), Ch. 3. Thus, for example, in November 1921 the three
     Scandinavian central banks informed the Bank of England that, however
     desirous they were of returning to gold, they felt unable to commit to a
     parity against gold and the dollar unless the U.K. did so first. The
     Americans were aware of the problem; since Montagu Norman immediately sent
     a copy of the confidential Scandinavian memorandum to Benjamin Strong,
     Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  It is not surprising,
     then, that New York saw Britain's return to gold as a Joint operation.
     Clay (1957), pp. 141—142.

     7. A comprehensive analysis would consider also the World Economic Conference
     held in London in 1933. See Traynor (1949).

     8. United Nations (1949), p. 2. International comparisons are provided by
     Edelstein (1981).

     9. On the composition of international reserves before 1914, see Lindert (1969).




48
     10. A typical statement of this conventional wisdom can be found in Cleveland
     (1976), p. 17. As Keynes nostalgically described the prewar system from
     his vantage point in 1930

               "In the latter half of the 19th century, the influence of London on
               credit conditions throughout the world was so predominant that the Bank
               of England could almost have claimed to be the conductor of the
               international orchestra. By modifying the terms on which she was
               prepared to lend.., she could to a large extent determine the credit
               conditions prevailing elsewhere." Keynes (1930), p. 274.

     11. Macmillan Committee evidence of Sir Ernest Harvey, Question 7515, 2 July
     1930, reprinted in Sayers (1976) volume 3. p. 205.

     12. Committee on Finance and Industry (1931), p. 125.

     13. See especially Triffin 1964) and the sympathetic discussion in Ford (1962).

     14. It has proven difficult to extract from the historical record convincing
     evidence n support of this theory. Attempts to plot the U.K. s terms of
     trade against levels or first differences in Bank Rate have generally
     proven inconclusive. See Moggridge (1972), pp. 12—13; Kenen (1960), p. 80;
     Lirdert (1969), p. 44. Moreover, a number of observers of the London money
     market (Moggridge, 1972; Brown, 1940) have argued that the volume of
     commercial bills discounted to finance inventory carrying costs was
     insensitive to interest rate movements. Hence we make no attempt to
     incorporate this potential asymmetry into the model developed below.

     15. Costigniola (1977), p. 1914 and passim; see also Parrini (1969).

     16.       Trade statistics can be found in Loveday (1931), p. 153.
                                                                   Current account
     estimates are by the Bank of England from Sayers (1976), vol. 3, pp. 312—
     -1A   -
     17. Bouvier (1981), pp. 5—6.

     18. Keynes (1931), p. 211; Macmillan Committee evidence of Sir Ernest Harvey.
     Question 7515, 2 July 1930, reprinted in Sayers (1976), volume 3, p. 203.

     19. League of Nations (1931), p. 17; Svennilson (1954), pp. 233—248.

     20. Moulton and Pasvolsky (1932), p. 431.

     21. For monthly statistics, see International Conference of Economic Services
     (1934).

     22. For details, see Bergmann (1927).

     23. The classic references are of course Keynes (1931) and Ohlin (1929).
     Recent discussions include Maier (1978) and Silverman (1982),

     24. Public Record Office (PRO) 1180/5, 11Export of Odd to America,u by R. 6.
     Hawtrey, 5 March 1923.

     25. Certain accounts attribute great foresight to the British, suggesting that



49
their enthusiasm for the goldexchange standard was part of a conscious
strategy of relaxing Britain's balance of payments constraint, rejuvenating
the City of London, and enhancing the Bank of England's control over
international markets. See Costigniola (1977), p. 917.

26. Costigniola (1977), p. 916, Traynor (1949), p. 72.

27. Archives of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Mm. A. Etr.)
882/112, "Reunion Interministrielle au suiet de L'Equitable Traitement du
Commerce," 28 January 1922.

28. See the interchange of memoranda between the French and British governments
jr United Kingdom (1922).

29. PRO T160/5, "The 8enoa Currency Resolutions," by R. 6. Hawtrey, 4 February
1922. See also Hawtrey (1923).

30. See First Interim Report of Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchanges
After the War (1918).

31. The various drafts can be found in United Kingdom (1924), p. 59—63. The
resolution of the Financial Commission and the Experts' Report appear in
Mills (1923>.

32. To quote the Report of the Committee of Experts, "The question of
devaluation is one which must be decided upon by each country according to
its view of its own special requirements. We think it important however to
draw attention to some of the considerations which will necessarily weigh
with any country in coming to a decision on this question. There is a
prevalent belief that a return to pre—war gold parity is necessary or
desirable for its own sake. There are undoubtedly advantages to be
obtained by such a return, but we desire to point out that for countries
whore currency has fallen very far below the pre—war parity, a return to it
must involve social and economic dislocation attendant upon continuing
readjustment of money—wages and prices, and a continual increase in the
burden of internal debt. Regard being had to the very large debts which
have been incurred since the Armistice by many of the countries concerned,
we are inclined to think that a return to the old gold parity involves too
heavy a strain upon production. We repeat that the decision must be left
in each case to the country concerned..." Mills (1923), p. 369. The French
were less enthusiastic than the British about endorsing the option of
devaluation, perhaps due to the franc's weakness and the impact of such a
position on confidence. They supported devaluation only for cases where it
was    demonstrably "impossible" to return to the prewar parity. PUn. Fin.
Etr.    B 82—16/121, Conference Financière, 11 April 1922.

33. Resolution 9, reprinted in Mills (1923), p. 369.

34. Ibid, Resolution 10.

35.    Clay (1957), p. 158
36. There were notable exceptions to this rule, such as the meeting held on
Long Island in 1927 among representatives of four major central banks. See
Eichengreen (1984).
     37. th phrase comes from the interchange between Keynes and Norman before the
     Macmillan Committee. See Question 3490, reprinted in Sayers (1978>, volume
     3, p. 185. This idea was then adopted in much of the subsequent literature.
     For e>ample, Cassel (1936, p. 13) remarks Husually, however, the
     central banks themselves are responsible for the injurous increase in the
     demand for gold insofar as they compete with one another in their endeavors
     to strengthen their reserve.'

     38. This ranking necessarily holds only when all the players contribute to the
     cooperative solution. Thus, for example, cooperation between governments
     can be welfare reducing in the absence of cooperation between a government
     and the priate sector. Rogoff (1983) provides an example of such an
     outcome.

     39. British conventions regarding reserve ratios are discussed by Beyen (1949),
     pp. 62—63.   See also Balogh (1947).   Cairncross and Eichengreen (1983)
     provide evidence for Britain on the links between the discount rate and the
     money multiplier. See especially Table A3.1.

     40. The Bank of England and the Bank of France remained privately held
     institutions influenced still by the desire to pay customary dividends to
     shareholders. While the extant to which the profit motive and public
     service figured in the authorities calculations remains difficult to
     discern, incorporating the profit motive into models of central bank
     behavior is a step in the direction of realism.

     41. See Nortnans Macmillan Committee evidence: Committee on Finance and
     Industry (1931), Questions 3328—3517, 26 tlarch 1930, reprinted in Sayers
     (197, volume 3, pp. 12—253.

     42. For example, see Normans statements to the Chamberlain—Bradbury Committee
     in the summer of 1924, cited in Moggridge (1969), Ch. 2.

     43. Formal statements of Keynes' view of the relationship of monetary policy to
     the state of trade appear in Keynes (1930>, while his efforts at
     pamphieteering are collected in Keynes (1931). Keynes' most accessible
     account of the channels of transmission came in his private evidence to the
     Macmillan Committee. See Keynes (1981).

     44. See Eichengreen and Giavaz:i (1984).

     45. PRO 1176/13, Leith—Ross Memorandum, 3 December 1925.

     46. See Eichengreen, Watson and Grossman (1985>.

     47. Extending the model to more than two countries adds generality but alters
     none of the conclusions presented below. See Eichengreen (1984), Appendix
     B, where a simple three—country model is analyzed. Note also that some
     implications of relaxing the assumption of identical countries are explored
     bel ow.


     48. The model is readily adapted to the analysis of open market operations, and
     many of the same conclusions follow. Again, see Eichengreen (1984>. An
     advantage of adding the domestic credit component of the monetary base to



51
     the model is that it would permit domestic assets denominated in one
     countrys currency to be held as international reserves by the other.
     Again, this adds realism to the model but alters none of the conclusions
     presented below.

     49. This formulation, which places the stock of reserves in the authorities
     objective function, is in contrast to most previous specifications of
     policy coordination problems, which typically assume that the authorities
     have a target balance of payments surplus (i.e, a target for the flow
     change in reserves). As Niehans (1968) points out, the specification here
     would appear to make more sense in a utility—maximi:ing framework.

     50. In the case of negatively sloped reaction functions, the details and
     implications differ. The domestic central bank realizes that a rise in its
     discount rate will elicit a reduction in the foreign discount rate, since
     the foreign country attaches great weight to the stability of prices. The
     home country's gain from increased reserves more than offsets any loss due
     to lower prices. In contrast, the foreign country is worse off and
     unwilling to play the follower. Since both countries prefer to lead, the
     configuration will be unstable.

     51. Hence the movement of the effective exchange rate was somewhat less
     pronounced; see Redmond (1980).

     52. Opposition on the Left to the option of devaluation was based on a
     recognition that devaluation would only work by reducing real wages, a
     result which was viewed as unacceptable. Sauvy (1984), volume 1, p. 246.

     53. On the reopening of negotiations, see Sauvy (1984), vol. 1, p. 270. On the
     different national objectives, see Clarke (1977), p. 25.

     54. Clarke (1977), p. 34.

     55. This is precisely the way they put it to the French. Archives of the
     French Ministry of Finance (Mm. Fin.) 832325, Letter from the Chancellor
     of the Exchequer, 14 September 1936. Another British concern, sometimes
     now heard in connection with the European Monetary System, was that the
     establishment of fixed bands for exchange rates would strengthen the
     position of speculators by increasing the likelihood of adjustments in one
     direction, and thereby increase rather than diminish speculative pressures.
     See Clarke (1977), p. 36.

     56. Drummond (1979), p. 9.

     57. Mm. Fin. 832325, uprojet des note aux gouvernements Americain et
     Britannique," 8 September 1936.

     58. PRO 1177/31 "Sir Warren Fisher for Mr. Morgenthau," 14 September 1936, in
     Telegraphic Correspondence Respecting the Devaluation of the Franc.
     Printed for the Foreign Office, September 1936.

     59. uSecretary of State to Chancellor of the Exchequer," 20 September 1936, in
     ibid.

     60. For the text of the three declarations, see Bank for International



52
     Settlements (1937).

     61. 'Restoring Monetary Order,11 New York Times, 4 October 1936.

     62. The exchange funds informed one another each morning of the currency in
     which they proposed to deal. If the other parties agreed to the currency
     and the rates, a gold price was specified at which each central bank would
     exchange foreign currency for gold at the close of the business day. This
     price was subject to change at the beginning of the next trading day. See
     PRO 1177/33, "Cypher Telegram to Mr. Mallet (Washington)," 7 October 1936.

     63. See Bank for International Settlements (1937).




53
                                        Refer erices

          Balogh, Thomas (1947) Studies in Financial Organization, Cambridge:
     National Institute of Economic and Social Research.

          Bank for International Settlements (1937), The Tripartite Agreement of
     pember 25, 1938 and Subsequent Monetary Arrangements, Basel: BIS.

             Bergmann, Carl (1927), The History of Reparations, Boston: Houghton
     Miff un.

             Beyen. J.W. (1949), Money in a Maelstrom, London: Macmillan.

          Bloomfield, Arthur (1959), Monetary Policy Under the International
     Gold Standard, 1880—1914, New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

          Bouvier, Jean (1981), "A Propos de la Strategie DEncaisse (or et
     devises) de La Banque de France de 1928 a l932, University of Paris—I,
     unpublished.

          Brown, W.A. (1940), The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted, New
     York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

          Cairncross, Alec and Barry Eichengreen (1983), Sterling in Decline:
     The Devaluations of 1931, 1949 and 1987, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

          Clapham, J.A. (1941), The Bank of England, Cambridge, Cambridge
     University Press.

          Clarke, S.V.O. (1987), Central Bank Cooperation, 1924—1931, New York:
     Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

                      (1973), "The Reconstruction of the international Monetary
     System: The Attempts of 1922 and 1933," j_nceton Studies in International
     Finance No. 33.

          ___________ (1977), "Exchange—Rate Stabilization in the Mid—1930s:
     Negotiating the Tripartite Agreement," Princeton Studies in International
     Finance No. 41.

             Clay, Henry (1957), Lord Norman, London: Macmillan.

          Cleveland, Harold van B. (1976), "The International Monetary System in
     the Interwar Period," in Benjamin Rowland (Ed.), Balance of Power or
     Hegemony: The Interwar Monetary System, New York: New York University
     Press.

          Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchanges After the War (1918),
     First Interim Report, Cd. 9182, London: HMSO,

             Committee on Finance and Industry (1931), Report, Cmd. 3897, London:
     HMSO.




54
          Cooper, Richard N. (1984>, "Economic Interdependence and the
     Coordination of Economic Policies," Harvard Institute of Economic Research
     Discussion Paper, forthcoming in Peter B. Kenen (ed.), Handbook of
     International Economics, Amsterdam: North Holland.

          Costigniola, Frank (1977), "Anglo—American Financial Rivalry in the
     1920s," Journal of Economic History 37, pp. 911—934.

          Eichengreen, Barry (1981), "Sterling and the Tariff, 1929—32,"
     Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 48.

          ____________ (1984>, "Central Bank Cooperation Under the Interwar Gold
     Standard," Explorations in Economic History 21, 64—87.

          E:chengreen, Barry and Francesco Giavazzi (1984), "Inflation,
     Consolidation or Capital Levy? European Debt Management in the 1920s,"
     Harvard University and University of Venice, unpublished.

          Eichc-ngreen, Barry, Mark W. Watson and Richard Grossman (1985>, "Bank
     Rate Policy Under the Iriterwar Gold Standard: A Dynamic Probit Model,"
     (for thccmir,g)

          Ford, Alec (1962), The Gold Standard: Britain and Argentina, Oxford:
     Clarendon Press.

          Gayer, A.D. (1937), Monetary Policy and Economic Stabilization,
     London: Black.

          Hamada, K. (1976), "A Strategic Analysis of Monetary Interdependence,"
     Journal of Political Economy 84, pp. 677—700.

          ____________ (1979), "Macroeconomic Coordination and Strategy Under
     Alternative Exchange Rates," in Rudiger Dornbusch and Jacob A. Frankel
     (Eds.) International Economic Policy: Theory and Evidence, Baltimore:
     Johns Hopkins University Press.

          Hawtrey, Ralph 6. (1923>, Monetary Reconstruction, London: Longmans,
     Green.

          International Conference of Economic Services (1934), International
     Abstract of Economic Statistics, The Hague:  ICES.

          Kenen, Peter B. (1960), British Monetary Policy and the Balance of
     Payments, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

           Keynes, John Maynard (1930), A Treatise on Money, London: Macmillan.

                        (1931), Essays in Persuasion, London: Macmillan.

          ____________ (1981), Activities. 1929—1931: Rethinking Employment and
     Unemployment Policies, in Donald Moggridge (Ed.), The Collected Writings of
     John Maynard Keynes, Vol. XX, Cambridge: Macmillan and Cambridge
     University Press for the Royal Economic Society.

          League of Nations (1931), Course and Phases of the World Economic



55
Depression, Geneva: League of Nations.

     Lindert, Peter 11969), "IKey Currencies and Gold, 1900—1913," Princeton
Studies In International Finance No. 24.

     Loveday, A. (1931), Britain and World Trade, London: Longmans, Green.

     Maier, Charles (1976), Recasting Bourgeois Europe, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.

     Mills, J. Saxon (1922), The Genoa Conference, New York: Dutton.

    Mogridge, Donald E. (1969), The Return to Golds 1925, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

     Moggridge, Donald E. (1972), British Monetary Policy1 1924—1931,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

     Morgenstern, Oskar (1959), International Financial Transactions and
Business Cycles, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

     Moulton, H.&. and Leo Pasvolsky (1932), War Debts and World
Prosperity, Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

     Nevin, Edward (1955), The Mechanism of Cheap Money, Cardiff:
University of Wales Press.

     Niehans, Jurg (1968), "Monetary and Fiscal Policies in Open Economies
Under Fixed Exchange Rates: An Optimizing Approach," Journal of Political
Economy 76, pp. 893—920.

     Ohlin, Berth (1929), "The Reparation Problem: A Discussion,"
Economic Journal 39, pp.i72—178.

     Parrini, Carl P. (1969), Heir to Empire: United States Economic
Diplomacy, 1916—1923, Pittsburgh:       Press.

     Redmond, John (1980), "An Indicator of the Effective Exchange Rate of
the Pound in the 1930s," Economic History Review, pp. 83—91.

     Rogoff, K. (1983), "Productive and Counterproductive Monetary
Policies," International Finance Discussion Paper 223 (Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System), December.

     Sauvy, Alfred (1984), Histoire Economigue de Ia France entre les Deux
Guerres, Paris: Economica (second edition>.

     Sayers, Richard S   (1936), Bank of England Operations, 1890—1914,
London, P.S. King.

     Sayers, Richard S. (1976), The Bank of England 1891—1944, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

     Silverman, Dan P. (1982), Reconstructing Europe After the Great War,
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
     Sverinilson, 1. (1954), Growth and Stagnation in the European Economy,
Geneva: United Nations.

     Traynor, Dean E. (1949), International Monetary and Financial
Conferences in the Interwar Period! Washington, D.C.: Catholic University
of america Press.

     Triffin, Robert (1984), "The Myth and Realities of the So—Called Gold
Standard," in The Evolution of the International Monetary System:
Historical Reappraisal and Future Perspectives, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

     United Kinadom (1922). Correspondence between His Mjesty's Government
and the French Government Respectig_the Genoa Conference, Cad. 1742,
London: HMSO.

     ____________ (1924), Papers Relating to International Economic
Confereace Genoa April—May 1922, Cad. 1667, London: HHSO.

     United Nations (1949), International Capital Movements During the
Inter—War Period! New York: United Nations.

     Viner, Jacob (1932), "International Aspects of the Gold Standard," in
Quincy Wright (Ed.), Gold and Monetary Stabilization, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
