                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            LOCAL INDUSTRIAL CONDITIONS AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP:
           HOW MUCH OF THE SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION CAN WE EXPLAIN?

                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                          William R. Kerr

                                        Working Paper 14407
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14407


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Comments are appreciated and can be sent to eglaeser@harvard.edu and wkerr@hbs.edu. We are grateful
to Jim Davis, Mercedes Delgado, Glenn Ellison, Thomas Hellmann, Ramana Nanda, Scott Stern, and
two referees for advice on this research project. Kristina Tobio provided excellent research assistance.
This research is supported by Harvard Business School, the Kaufman Foundation, the National Science
Foundation, and the Innovation Policy and the Economy Group. The research in this paper was conducted
while the authors were Special Sworn Status researchers of the US Census Bureau at the Boston Census
Research Data Center (BRDC). Support for this research from NSF grant (ITR-0427889) is gratefully
acknowledged. Research results and conclusions expressed are our own and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the Census Bureau or NSF. This paper has been screened to insure that no confidential
data are revealed. This paper was first circulated in November 2007. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Edward L. Glaeser and William R. Kerr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Local Industrial Conditions and Entrepreneurship: How Much of the Spatial Distribution Can
We Explain?
Edward L. Glaeser and William R. Kerr
NBER Working Paper No. 14407
October 2008
JEL No. J2,L0,L1,L2,L6,O3,R2

                                           ABSTRACT

Why are some places more entrepreneurial than others? We use Census Bureau data to study local
determinants of manufacturing startups across cities and industries. Demographics have limited
explanatory power. Overall levels of local customers and suppliers are only modestly important, but
new entrants seem particularly drawn to areas with many smaller suppliers, as suggested by Chinitz
(1961). Abundant workers in relevant occupations also strongly predict entry. These forces plus city
and industry fixed effects explain between sixty and eighty percent of manufacturing entry. We use
spatial distributions of natural cost advantages to address partially endogeneity concerns.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

William R. Kerr
Rock Center 212
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
wkerr@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

Some places, like Silicon Valley, seem almost magically entrepreneurial with a new startup on
every street corner. Other areas, like declining cities of the Rust Belt, appear equally starved
of whatever local attributes make entrepreneurship more likely. This paper adds to the growing
entrepreneurship literature by detailing local conditions that correlate with high entry rates of
new manufacturing …rms using the Census Bureau’s Longitudinal Business Database (LBD).

    The LBD, which is described at length in Section 2, contains annual information on all US
private-sector establishments between 1976 and 1999. We are able to distinguish plants that
are part of larger …rms versus those that stand alone. The new entry of stand-alone plants
gives us our measure of entrepreneurship by city-industry. Section 2 paints a broad overview of
…rm entry patterns in the US economy, and manufacturing speci…cally, from 1977 onwards. We
document extremely high levels of entry in US manufacturing as noted in previous work (e.g.,
Dunne et al. 1989a,b, Davis et al. 1996, Dumais et al. 2002).

   Section 3 discusses our theories and explanatory variables for local entry conditions. Per-
haps the simplest theory, emphasized by Glaeser (2007) among others, is that cities are more
entrepreneurial if they have people whose demographics incline them towards entrepreneurship.
We measure these demographics with age and education levels of cities. Another simple theory
emphasizes innate cost advantages of particular regions for certain industries, such as coastal
access for export industries or cheap electricity for aluminum production.

    In addition to demographics and natural advantages, incumbent industrial structures of each
city shape the availability and ‡ow of goods, people, and ideas to new ventures. We test three
theories that descend from agglomeration economies described by Marshall (1920). We look at
whether entrepreneurship clusters around industries that are suppliers or customers, industries
that employ similar types of labor, or industries that share ideas. These metrics are calculated
at the city-industry level by uniting the distribution of incumbent …rm types within each city
with measures of the interdependencies among industries (e.g., Ellison et al. 2007). We also
examine the Chinitz (1961) hypothesis more speci…cally. Chinitz argued that the presence of
small, independent suppliers was particularly crucial for understanding why New York was so
much more entrepreneurial than Pittsburgh. We test the Chinitz hypothesis by looking at
whether new entry is more common when suppliers are smaller in size.

    Section 4 comparatively assesses the explanatory power and importance of local conditions
for entrepreneurship. We …rst test the ability of city-level characteristics to predict new man-
ufacturing startups. We …nd limited evidence supporting the importance of demographics. In
contrast to self-employment metrics (e.g., Glaeser 2007), manufacturing startups are not more


                                               1
common in places with older or better-educated citizens. This makes sense given the scale and
investment required, as well as the use of self employment by some older workers as a transition
to retirement. Entry is, however, higher in cities with more workers between 20 and 40 years
old. We also …nd little evidence for a “culture” of entrepreneurship. On the other hand, the
Chinitz measure of small suppliers has very strong predictive power.

    We then turn to our main regressions that include both city and industry …xed e¤ects. The
Chinitz measure is again the most important factor in these conditional estimations. Small sup-
pliers predict new entrants, while general proximity to suppliers or customers is less important.
We also …nd that the presence of industries that use the same type of labor is robustly impor-
tant. This explanatory power for entrepreneurship holds when controlling for contemporaneous
facility expansions by existing …rms in the city-industry (e.g., Kerr and Nanda 2007). Looking
across the entry size distribution, we …nd that Chinitz factors are most important for smaller
entrants, while larger entrants more equally weight general input conditions. Technology and
idea sharing also appear most important for smaller startups. Labor mix theories, on the other
hand, receive equal emphasis throughout entrant size categories.

    While the correlation between local industrial conditions and entry is impressive, it is cer-
tainly possible that …rms and industries cluster in cities in anticipation of large amounts of
entry. To address partially these endogeneity concerns, we turn to sixteen local characteristics
that a¤ord certain regions natural cost advantages for manufacturing industries (e.g., coastal ac-
cess, timberland, energy prices, mean wages). Following Ellison and Glaeser (1999), predicted
city-industry employment shares are developed by interacting these local cost advantages with
factor intensities of industries in a non-linear least squares framework. This predicted spatial
distribution of employment also predicts entrepreneurship well, highlighting the importance of
basic cost considerations and natural advantages for explaining entry patterns. We then use
these cost measures to predict Marshallian agglomeration economies by city-industry. We again
…nd substantial evidence for the labor pooling and output markets rationales, while results for
inputs and technology spillovers are not robust across speci…cations.

    We conclude in Section 5. Many academics, policy makers, and business leaders stress
the importance of local conditions for explaining spatial di¤erences in entrepreneurship and
economic development (e.g., Saxenian 1994, Acs and Armington 2006, Acs et al. 2008). This
paper characterizes these entry relationships more precisely within the manufacturing sector. As
manufacturing is a decreasing share of US employment, future research needs to explore other
industrial sectors, too. Moreover, while our variables can explain between sixty and eighty
percent of the spatial structure of manufacturing entrepreneurship, much of this comes from
existing industry agglomeration and cost advantages. This suggests that there is still much
more to learn about this mechanism for entrepreneurship in manufacturing as well. We hope
that our empirical framework aids future inquiries in this vein.

                                                2
2     Manufacturing Entrepreneurship

This section and the next outline the data and metrics employed in this study. We begin by
discussing di¤erent techniques for measuring entrepreneurship. The strength and character of
local entrepreneurship rates are then calculated from the LBD using new …rm births. Drawing
on Kerr and Nanda (2007), we describe the LBD’s structure and broad entry patterns that exist
in multiple US industrial sectors. We then focus our attention on more detailed city-industry
characteristics of manufacturing entrants that are considered in our empirical analyses. We
discuss in Section 3 the metrics that we use to explain entrepreneurial patterns.


2.1     Measuring Entrepreneurship

Despite the extensive e¤ort devoted to characterizing entrepreneurship, there is little consensus
about the most appropriate metric. One approach associates entrepreneurship with the number
of people leading independent enterprises. From this perspective, self-employment rates (e.g.,
Evans and Jovanovic 1989, Blanch‡ower and Oswald 1998) and average …rm size (e.g., Glaeser
2007) are plausible measures. However, self employment weights small-scale, independent oper-
ators very heavily vis-a-vis high-growth entrepreneurship. This can be seen in self-employment
rankings that list West Palm Beach, FL, as America’s most entrepreneurial city but place San
Jose, CA, near the bottom.1 Average …rm size su¤ers less from this particular problem, but this
metric captures little of the dynamic aspects of entrepreneurship and may re‡ect competition
as much as entrepreneurship itself.

    Understandably, many researchers are instead drawn to metrics that are more tightly con-
nected to the dynamic nature of entrepreneurship. One approach focuses on startups within
a single industry so that …ner characterizations and case studies can be made (e.g., Saxenian
1994, Feldman 2003). An alternative looks at new product introductions (e.g., Audretsch and
Feldman 1996), venture capital placement, or the founding of new …rms (e.g., Kerr and Nanda
2007, Rosenthal and Strange 2007). These dynamic measures of entrepreneurship are less avail-
able than self-employment rates, but they do seem closer to the spirit of entrepreneurship these
studies are seeking to capture. Our paper follows in this latter tradition.

   We measure entrepreneurship as the formation of new manufacturing …rms — quantifying
both the count of new …rms and the employment within them during their …rst year of operation.
We focus on new establishments that are independent from existing …rms. Our decision to
   1
     This pattern is also evident in country rankings. For example, Southern European countries (e.g., Portugal,
Greece) rank very high on European self-employment scales but tend to have very small venture capital markets.
On the other hand, Scandinavian countries rank low on self-employment indices but have been among the most
successful European countries in attracting venture capital investments (e.g., Bozkaya and Kerr 2007).


                                                       3
exclude establishments that are connected with existing …rms is not without consequence. After
all, entrepreneurial activity does take place within …rms. Our sense, however, is that the entry
of new …rms is a better representation of entrepreneurship than facility expansions by existing
manufacturing companies, which we will sometimes employ as a control. Data restrictions also
limit us to …rm births with payroll, which excludes hobby entrepreneurship, and we do not
capture the share of output generated by new births.2

    Our entry metric has a 0.36 and 0.66 correlation with the 2000 self-employment rates at
the city and state levels, respectively. Correlation with average …rm size is higher at -0.59 to
-0.80. That is, smaller …rm size is correlated with greater entry rates. Glaeser (2007) provides
statistics on these alternative metrics and an analysis of their city-level determinants.


2.2     LBD and US Entry Patterns

The LBD provides annual observations for every private-sector establishment with payroll from
1976 to 1999. Approximately four million establishments and 70 million employees are included
each year. The Census Bureau data are an unparalleled laboratory for studying entrepreneurship
rates and the life cycles of US …rms. Sourced from US tax records and Census Bureau surveys,
the micro-records document the universe of establishments and …rms rather than a strati…ed
random sample or published aggregate tabulations. In addition, the LBD lists physical locations
of establishments rather than locations of incorporation, circumventing issues related to higher
legal incorporations in states like Delaware.

    The comprehensive nature of the LBD facilitates complete characterizations of entrepre-
neurial activity by cities and industries, types of …rms, and establishment entry sizes. Each
establishment is given a unique, time-invariant identi…er that can be longitudinally tracked.
This allows us to identify the year of entry for new startups or the opening of new plants by
existing …rms. We de…ne entry as the …rst year that an establishment has positive employment.
We only consider the …rst entry for cases where an establishment temporarily ceases operations
(e.g., seasonal …rms, major plant retoolings) and later re-enters the LBD. Second, the LBD
assigns a …rm identi…er to each establishment that facilitates a linkage to other establishments
in LBD. This …rm hierarchy allows us to separate new startups from facility expansions by
existing multi-unit …rms.

   Table 1 characterizes entry patterns in the manufacturing, services, retail trade, wholesale
trade, mining, transportation, and construction sectors from 1977 to 1999. Manufacturing
   2
     Our focus on manufacturing is also due to data constraints. While entry can be measured for other sectors
by city, the Marshallian factors cannot be constructed. We hope that future research develops data and metrics
appropriate for analyzing large-scale entry in other sectors.


                                                      4
accounts for just under 10% of the total entry; manufacturing, services, wholesale trade, and
retail trade jointly account for 75%. Over 80% of the 400k new establishments opened in each
year are new …rm formations versus facility expansions.3

    Figure 1a plots relative entry counts of both entrant types over time, with entry counts in
1977 to 1981 normalized to 100% for each group. While startups constitute the vast majority
of new establishments, this time plot demonstrates that the relative increase in startup activity
has consistently lagged that of expansion establishments since the early 1980s. There is only a
10% increase in the raw number of startup entrants over the twenty-year period, despite a 20%
overall growth in LBD employment. Measured in terms of rates, Davis et al. (2006) document
a substantial reduction in business entry and exit from the late 1970s to the late 1990s using the
LBD. Figure 1b further displays the long-term sector decline for manufacturing. These metrics
suggest that the US has become less entrepreneurial over the past three decades.

    While startups account for the majority of new establishments, existing …rms open new es-
tablishments at much larger sizes. New establishments of existing …rms start on average with
four times the employment of startups. Figure 2a documents the distribution of establishment
entry sizes for these two types. Over three-quarters of new startups begin with …ve or fewer em-
ployees, versus fewer than half for expansion establishments of existing …rms. The distribution
di¤erentials are even more pronounced in the capital-intensive manufacturing sector in Figure
2b.

    The broad entry rates are fairly evenly spread across US regions, although this uniformity
masks the agglomeration that frequently exists at the industry level. Well-known examples
include the concentration of the automotive industry in Detroit, tobacco in Virginia and North
Carolina, and high-tech entrepreneurship within regions like Silicon Valley and Boston’s Route
128. Aggregate spatial distributions of startups versus facility expansions are relatively similar
in Table 1.

   Figure 3a depicts spatial di¤erences in the fraction of manufacturing employment in entering
…rms. States are grouped by quintiles, and the darker shading indicates higher average entry
shares. In line with strong population expansion and economic growth, western states and
Florida are ranked at the upper end of the entry spectrum. Southern states are grouped around
the middle, while manufacturing entrepreneurship rates are lowest among the Rust Belt states.
These patterns also hold in Figure 3b’s depiction of the fraction of manufacturing …rms that are
new entrants.
   3
     Jarmin and Miranda (2002) describe the construction of the LBD. Sectors not included in the LBD are
agriculture, forestry and …shing, public administration, and private households. We also exclude the US postal
service, restaurants and food stores, hospitals, education services, and social services. These exclusions lower
the relative share of services entrants. Kerr and Nanda (2007) separately characterize entry in …nancial services.
Incomplete LBD records require dropping 25 state-year …les: 1978 (12 states), 1983 (4), 1984 (4), 1985 (1), 1986
(1), 1989 (1), and 1993 (2).

                                                        5
2.3     City-Industry Manufacturing Sample

Table 2 presents more detailed descriptive statistics for our manufacturing sample. We focus
on 33,550 city-industry pairs that are formed by crossing 275 Primary Metropolitan Statistical
Areas (PMSAs) with 122 SIC3 industries within manufacturing.4;5 Rural areas are excluded,
and we refer to PMSAs as cities in this paper for expositional ease. Table 2 presents the mean
annual entry counts and entry employments of new …rms by city-industry over the 1977-1999
period. Entry distributions are, of course, highly skewed. 32% of city-industry pairs do not
have a single startup birth during the period, and about 60% of city-industry pairs have less than
one entering employee on average per annum. The highest average startup entry employment is
Electronic Components and Accessories (367) in San Jose, CA, while the highest entering …rm
count is Commercial Printing (275) in Los Angeles, CA.6

    Table 2 also documents the industry employment share by city. These employments are
used in Section 3 to estimate local industrial conditions. The most concentrated employment in
our sample is Photographic Equipment and Supplies (386) in Rochester, NY, at over 50%. The
excluded Fur Goods (237) industry is even more concentrated. We discuss below the endogeneity
of using entry rates and industry employment calculated over the same 23-year horizon.


3       Determinants of Entrepreneurship

We now describe our measures of the determinants of entrepreneurship, beginning with the more
exogenous determinants of demographics and natural advantages. We then turn to the agglom-
eration hypotheses of Marshall (1920) and Chinitz (1961). We conclude with entrepreneurial
culture. Table 2 continues to document descriptive statistics.

    4
      On the geography dimension, we map counties in the LBD to 317 PMSAs. We exclude 42 small PMSAs
that are not separately identi…ed in the 1990 Census of Population (required for explanatory variables). Results
below are robust to instead considering Consolidated MSAs. CMSAs are subdivided into PMSAs for very large
metropolitan areas (e.g., Chicago has six PMSAs within its CMSA). A PMSA is de…ned as a large urbanized
county or a cluster of counties that demonstrate strong internal economic and social links in addition to close
ties with the central core of the larger area.
    5
      On the industry dimension, Tobacco (210s), Fur (237), and Search and Navigation Equipment (381) are
excluded due to major industry reclassi…cations at the plant level that are di¢ cult to interpret. The remainder
of Apparel (230s), a portion of Printing and Publishing (277-279), and Secondary Non-Ferrous Metals (334) are
also excluded due to poor data for constructing the Marshallian factors.
    6
      Dunne et al. (1989a,b), McGuckin and Peck (1992), Davis et al. (1996), and Autor et al. (2007) provide
additional details on entry patterns in the manufacturing sector. Dumais et al. (2002) and Ellison et al.
(2007) provide further studies of the agglomeration and coagglomeration of startup and existing …rm expansions,
respectively.




                                                       6
3.1     Demographics

Demographics may in‡uence the number of startups because certain types of people are more
likely to be entrepreneurs. Higher self-employment rates, for example, are found in cities with
older and better-educated populations. Demographics may also in‡uence entry rates because
certain types of workers are more likely to be desirable employees for young ventures. Both
hypotheses would predict a link between demographics and entrepreneurial activity. Both
hypotheses have been advanced by observers who argue that human capital policies that create
and attract smart, entrepreneurial people are the key to local economic success. We develop
from the 1990 Census of Populations simple statistics on the age distribution and education of
the city’s workforce to test these factors.7


3.2     Natural Cost Advantages

A second hypothesis holds that some regions simply possess better natural environments for
certain industries, and that entrepreneurship follows these natural cost advantages. Desert
areas are inadequate hosts to the logging industry, coastal access is important for ship building or
transporting very heavy products, and areas with cheap electricity attract aluminum producers.
These cost advantages may lead to higher entry rates as well.

    To model these advantages, we develop a predicted spatial distribution for each manufactur-
ing industry based upon local cost advantages and industry traits. This work follows Ellison
and Glaeser (1999), who model sixteen state-level characteristics that a¤ord natural advantages
in terms of natural resources, transportation costs, and labor inputs. Combining these cost dif-
ferences with each industry’s intensity of factor use, Ellison and Glaeser (1999) estimate a spatial
distribution of manufacturing activity that would be expected due to cost di¤erences alone plus
population distributions. They …nd that 20% of observed state-industry manufacturing activity
can be explained through these mostly exogenous local factors.8

    We extend this natural advantages estimation approach to the city-industry level, closely
following the non-linear least squares approach of Ellison and Glaeser (1999). Where feasible
and appropriate, we re…ne the earlier cost advantages to the city-level: coastal access, average
   7
     The available evidence suggests that only a modest portion of entrepreneurs move to new cities in search of
better local conditions. Michelacci and Silva (2007) …nd that Italian and US entrepreneurs are more likely to
work in the region of their birth than employed workers. In a Danish sample collected by Dahl and Sorenson
(2007), over 70% of new …rms are founded in commuting regions where entrepreneurs were previously living. See
also Figueiredo et al. (2002), Buenstorf and Klepper (2007), and Marx et al. (2007).
   8
     Ellison and Glaeser (1999) suggest that this 20% share likely under-estimates the true portion of spatial
agglomeration that can be explained through mostly …xed characteristics. Our explanatory power is higher than
Ellison and Glaeser (1999) mostly due to our focus on three-digit rather than four-digit industries. Kim (1999)
estimates natural regional advantages over a 100-year period.


                                                       7
manufacturing wages, education levels, population densities, and income shares. Other char-
acteristics remain at the state level (e.g., farmland, timberland, various energy prices). The
maximum predicted city-industry shares, de…ned as N at%ci , are for consumer-focused industries
in New York City at just over 10%. The weakest predicted share is for Blast Furnace and Basic
Steel Products (331) into Anchorage, AK. The partial correlation of actual and predicted city-
industry distributions is 0.42, a pseudo …rst stage between natural cost advantages and actual
agglomeration.


3.3     Agglomeration Theories

New York City’s port and Pittsburgh’s coal mines would have attracted entrepreneurs regardless
of the other …rms located in those cities. In many cases, however, entrepreneurs are drawn by
the existing industrial structure of a city. Entrepreneurs may cluster near potential customers
or potential suppliers. New startups may draw ideas from neighboring …rms. The composition
and availability of early hires may be constrained by local labor pools. We now turn to these
agglomeration economies of Marshall (1920).9


3.3.1    Customer and Supplier Strength

The simplest agglomeration economy is that proximity to customers and suppliers reduces trans-
portation costs and thereby increases productivity. The savings bene…t of reduced shipping costs
to distant consumers is the core agglomerative force of the new economic geography (e.g., Fujita
et al. 1999). Where customers and suppliers are geographically separate, …rms must trade-o¤
distances. When production involves a large reduction in weight, it makes sense to produce close
to raw materials similar to Chicago’s stockyards. When transporting …nished products is quite
di¢ cult, it makes sense to produce downstream near the point of consumption. The di¢ culties
of transporting re…ned sugar from the tropics in the nineteenth century led to sugar re…nement
in New York City, far from source plantations. In addition to shipment costs, Porter (1990)
emphasizes that proximity to customers and suppliers can enhance innovation by increasing
knowledge ‡ows about which products are working and what new products are desired.

   To test the importance of this mechanism, we measure the extent to which cities are rife
with potential customers and suppliers for a new entrepreneur. We begin with the 1987 Bench-
mark Input-Output Accounts published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We de-
…ne Inputi k as the share of industry i’s inputs that come from industry k, and Outputi!k
    9
      Several papers assess the relative importance of these determinants for industrial agglomeration, including
Audretsch and Feldman (1996), Ellison and Glaeser (1997), Rosenthal and Strange (2001), Henderson (2003), and
Ellison et al. (2007). These assessments are harder empirically than our current exercise due to the endogeneity
of linkages that form between clustered …rms. We take these linkages to be exogenous to startups in this paper.

                                                       8
as the share of industry i’s outputs that go to industry k. These measures run from zero
(no input or output purchasing relationship exists) to one (full dependency on the paired in-
dustry). These shares are calculated relative to all input-output ‡ows, including those to
non-manufacturing industries or to …nal consumers. Customer and supplier ‡ows are not sym-
metrical (Inputi k 6= Inputk!i ). Moreover, di¤erences in industry size and the importance of
‡ows to or from non-manufacturing industries and …nal consumers result in asymmetries between
pairwise customer and supplier dependencies (Inputi k 6= Outputk!i ).10

    Ellison et al. (2007) document large asymmetries that exist in these material ‡ows. Ap-
proximately 70% of pairwise industrial combinations have an input-output dependency less than
0.01%. The strongest relative customer dependency is Leather Tanning and Finishing’s (311)
purchases from Meat Products (201) at 0.39 (i.e., 39% of 311’s inputs come from 201). The
highest absolute customer dependency (with a relative share of 23%) is Misc. Plastics Products’
(308) purchases from Plastic Materials and Synthetics (282). The strongest relative output
or supplier dependency is Public Building and Related Furniture’s sales to Motor Vehicles and
Equipment (371) at 82%. The highest absolute supplier dependency (with a relative share of
32%) is Plastic Materials and Synthetics’(282) sales to Misc. Plastics Products (308).

   To summarize local conditions across industries within a city, we aggregate across all potential
input suppliers. For a focal industry i in city c, we de…ne the raw input opportunity as
                                                   X                      Ekc
                                   Inputci =                 Inputi   k       ;                               (1)
                                                 k=1;:::;I
                                                                          Ec

where I indexes industries. This measure simply aggregates absolute deviations between the
proportions of industrial inputs required by industry i and city c’s actual industrial composition
during the sample period. The measure is orthogonal to city size, which we separately consider,
and a negative value is taken so that the metric ranges between negative two (i.e., no inputs
available in the local market) and zero (i.e., all inputs are available in the local market in precise
proportions). The construction of Inputci assumes that …rms have limited ability to substitute
across material inputs in their production processes.

       To capture the relative strength of output relationships, we also de…ne
                                "                         # "                         #     1
                                   X                  Ekc      X                  Ekc
                   Outputci =               Outputi!k                   Output !k               :             (2)
                                  k=1;:::;I
                                                      Ek
                                                              k=1;:::;I
                                                                                  Ek

The …rst bracketed term multiplies the national share of industry i’s output sales that go to in-
dustry k with the fraction of industry k’s employment in city c. By summing across industries,
  10
    The "Use of Commodities by Industries" table provides commodity-level make and use ‡ows for very detailed
industries at the national level, which we aggregate to the SIC3 framework. While some commodities can partly
be produced by other industries than the one associated with these commodities, we ignore this distinction and
interpret the estimates as measuring how much of an industry’s production is used as an input to other industries.

                                                         9
we measure the concentration of industrial sales opportunities for industry i in the focal market
c. To maintain independence of market size, we normalize this measure through the second
bracketed term in (2) that measures total potential industrial sales into the focal city. This
measure takes on values between zero and one, with higher values suggesting greater selling op-
portunities. Unlike our input measure, Outputci pools across industries that normally purchase
goods from industry i. By measuring the aggregate strength of industrial sales opportunities
in city c, the metric assumes that selling to one large industrial market is the same as selling
smaller amounts to multiple industries.

    Table 2 documents descriptive statistics for Inputci and Outputci . The best measured
local supplier environments are for Hats, Caps, and Millinery’s (235) entry into the Carolinas
and Communications Equipment’s (366) entry into San Jose, CA. The weakest input settings
are associated with Petroleum Re…ning (291), Pulp Mills (261), and Carpets and Rugs (227)
in multiple locales. The best measured local sales environments are for Motor Vehicles and
Equipment’s (371) entry into Detroit, MI; a number of city-industry pairs are judged to o¤er
poor industrial sales opportunities for …rms.

    Inputci and Outputci condense large and diverse industrial structures for cities into manage-
able statistics of local industrial conditions. The metrics do have limitations, though. First,
we do not capture potential customer or supplier interactions that exist beyond the local city,
but perhaps within the state for example. Second, the metrics do not consider …nal consumers.
In unconditional estimates, we separately model city populations. The metrics also su¤er from
endogeneity. There will surely be more input suppliers for industry i in a given city if that city
attracts a steady ‡ow of new entrants willing to buy the input suppliers’products.

    Chinitz (1961) also emphasized the role of input suppliers in his account of entrepreneurial
di¤erences between New York City and Pittsburgh. New ventures have many needs that must
be met by the local economy, in contrast with larger incumbents that may source internally
or at greater distances. Chinitz particularly stressed the interactions of startups with small,
independent suppliers. Greater competition and smaller sizes for suppliers help new ventures
source specialized inputs and avoid hold-up problems. Chinitz argued that the large, integrated
steel …rms of Pittsburgh depressed external supplier development; moreover, existing suppliers
had limited interest in providing inputs to small businesses. By contrast, New York City’s much
smaller …rms, organized around the more decentralized garment industry that then dominated
the city, were better suppliers to new …rms. Jacobs (1970) also argued this perspective.

   We test the Chinitz hypothesis — as distinct from the high-quality, general-input conditions
of Marshall (1920) captured in (1) — through a metric that essentially calculates the average




                                               10
…rm size in city c in industries that typically supply a given industry i,
                            X F irmskc Ekc                      X F irmskc
             Chinitzci =                    Inputi     k   =                Inputi   k;       (3)
                           k=1;:::;I
                                     Ekc Ec
                                                               k=1;:::;I
                                                                         Ec


where F irmskc is the count of …rms. Higher values of this index indicate greater numbers of
…rms are typically providing input needs of new entrants, weighted by the importance of the
inputs in question. The largest Chinitz measures are associated with Sawmills and Planing
Mills (242).


3.3.2   Labor Market Strength


Labor may be the most important input into any new …rm, and entrepreneurship is quite likely
to be driven by the availability of a suitable labor force (e.g., Combes and Duranton 2006,
Dahl and Klepper 2007). To some extent, basic demographics of an area (e.g., mean years of
schooling) are informative about the suitability of the local labor force. But, these aggregate
traits can also be quite blunt. Many industries require specialized occupations, and the share of
college graduates in a city tells us little about the presence of such specialized workers. Zucker
et al. (1998) describe the exceptional embodiment of human capital in specialized workers in
the emergence of the US biotech industry.

   The agglomeration of specialized workers and …rms can occur through several channels.
Marshall (1920) described how an agglomeration of workers and …rms shields workers from …rm-
speci…c shocks. Workers can be more productive and better insured by moving from …rms that
are hit with negative shocks to better opportunities (e.g., Diamond and Simon 1990, Krugman
1991, Overman and Puga 2007). Larger labor pools further promote more e¢ cient matches (e.g.,
Helsley and Strange 1990), and multiple …rms protect workers against ex post appropriation of
investments in human capital (e.g., Rotemberg and Saloner 2000). All of these mechanisms
suggest that …rms that employ similar types of workers will tend to locate near one another and
that startups will bene…t from thick local markets for their speci…c labor needs, either through
heightened availability or lower wages.

    We quantify the suitability of local labor markets by city-industry through an interaction
of the incumbent manufacturing industrial structure of each city with the occupational labor
requirements of each industry. Our data come from the 1987 National Industry-Occupation
Employment Matrix (NIOEM) published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The NIOEM
provides industry-level employments in 277 occupations at the national level. We convert the
occupational employment counts into occupational percentages for each industry and map BLS
industries to the SIC3 framework.


                                                11
    Even within manufacturing, industries display substantial heterogeneity in their occupational
needs. Ellison et al. (2007) calculate a vector correlation of occupational percentages between
pairwise industries. Their metric averages 0.47 across the pairs of manufacturing industries, with
a range of -0.05 to 1.00. The least correlated industry pair is Logging (241) and Aircrafts and
Parts (372) at -0.05. The most correlated industry pair from separate BLS industry groupings
is Motor Vehicles and Equipment (371) and Motorcycles, Bicycles, and Parts (375) at 0.98.11

    This occupational lens allows us to summarize across industries the quality of a city’s labor
pool for a new …rm in each industry. For a focal industry i in city c, we de…ne raw labor
suitability as                                                      !
                                        X            X Ekc
                         Laborci =             Lio               Lko ;                        (4)
                                      o=1;::;O      k=1;:::;I
                                                              Ec

where O indexes occupations. Lio captures the percentage of industry i’s employment in occu-
pation o taken from the NIOEM. The fraction Ekc =Ec measures the share of city c’s incumbent
manufacturing employment in industry k. The internal summation across industries thus inter-
acts the relative composition of SIC3 manufacturing industries in the city with the extent each
industry employs the occupation o in question. This estimated percentage reliance among city
c’s incumbent manufacturing …rms is then di¤erenced from the needs of industry i. Absolute
values of these disparities are summed across 277 occupations to form a metric of the aggregate
labor pool suitability. As a …nal step, this aggregate is multiplied by negative one so that higher
values correspond to more suitable labor environments for industry i’s startups in city c.12

    This metric thus emphasizes the pooled nature of local labor markets. It assumes that it does
not matter which manufacturing industries employ local workers, so long as the occupational
distribution is suitable for an industry. The metric is by construction orthogonal to city size.
The best measured local labor environments are Ship and Boat Building and Repairing’s (373)
entry into Bremerton, WA, and Motor Vehicles and Equipment’s (371) entry into Flint, MI. By
contrast, the worst labor pool is for Logging’s (241) entry into Flint, MI.

   Several limitations of this metric should be noted. First, worker quality is not measured for
the local area (nor wage costs). Empirical speci…cations control for overall di¤erences across
  11
      Some BLS industries map to two or more SIC3 industries. This multiplicity is not important for the
estimations below. Each SIC3 industry is assumed to possess the same occupational composition of employment
as that of the BLS industry to which it belongs.
   12
      Several examples of (4) can better explain its features. First, if all of city c’s manufacturing employment is
within industry i itself, the labor quality will be given a perfect measure of zero for startups in that industry.
A perfect market, however, is not exclusive to all …rms being in the industry i. Consider an industry i that
employs equally two occupations a and b. A perfect correlation could also descend from city c having two other
incumbent industries that also employ a and b in equal proportions. Or, if the incumbent industries are of equal
size, one industry may employ a exclusively and the other b exclusively. On the other hand, if all of industry i’s
needs are for a speci…c occupation that is not employed by any existing industry within city c, (4) will take its
lowest possible value of negative two.



                                                        12
cities in general labor quality but not for unique city-industry quality di¤erences. Second, non-
manufacturing industries are not included in the calculation, although some occupations span
into other sectors. Endogeneity also remains a clear concern.


3.3.3    Technology Spillovers Strength

Startups are also inevitably about new ideas, and the ability of some areas to foster new ideas
is one potential reason why they become centers of entrepreneurship. Innovations are rarely
created out of wholecloth, but rather come out of intellectual building blocks: new ideas are
combinations of old ideas. A third agglomeration economy is the presence of suppliers of ideas,
where spatial industrial concentrations fuel entrepreneurship by supporting the transfer of old
ideas and the creation of new ones. Marshall (1920) is again the source of this theory, when he
emphasized that in industrial clusters "the mysteries of the trade become no mystery, but are,
as it were, in the air."

    An abundant literature discusses these ideas. Saxenian (1994) illustrates how the ‡ow
of ideas helped to create the entrepreneurial cluster of Silicon Valley. Arzaghi and Henderson
(2008) document the importance of networking for ad agencies in Manhattan. Glaeser and Kahn
(2001) argue that the urbanization of high human-capital industries, like …nance, is evidence for
the role that density plays in the transfer of ideas, and studies of patent citations highlight the
importance of local proximity for scienti…c exchanges (e.g., Ja¤e et al. 1993, Thompson and
Fox-Kean 2005, Thompson 2006). Carlino et al. (2007) …nd that higher urban employment
density is correlated with greater patenting per capita within cities, and Rosenthal and Strange
(2003) note that intellectual spillovers are strongest at the very local levels of proximity. This
concept has further found voice in endogenous growth theory (e.g., Romer 1986, 1990).

    To test the importance of local knowledge ‡ows for manufacturing startups, we develop a
metric of technology sourcing through patent citations taken from the NBER Patent Database
(e.g., Hall et al. 2001). Patent citation patterns can be informative about technology di¤usion
and knowledge exchanges (e.g., Griliches 1990, Ja¤e et al. 2000). We …rst catalogue the extent
to which technologies associated with industry i cite technologies associated with industry k,
with citation counts being normalized by total citations for each industry.13 We then calculate
T echci for these technology ‡ows that mirrors Inputci described above. The weakest technology
locale is Industrial Inorganic Chemicals (281) in Bremerton, WA. The best measured technology
environments are for Ship and Boat Building and Repairing (373) in New London, CT, and
Norfolk, VA.
  13
    We consider over four million citations where both the citing and cited patents are …led within the US after
1975. These citations are then collapsed into a citation matrix using over 400 USPTO technology categories.
A probabilistic concordance between the USPTO classi…cation scheme and SIC3 industries is then applied to
characterize technology exchanges across industries (e.g., Johnson 1999, Silverman 1999, Kerr 2008a).

                                                      13
    Of our three local conditions, intellectual spillovers are the most di¢ cult to quantify and to
assess empirically. First, our metric focuses only on technology spillovers. Other intellectual or
information spillovers may exist between industries that are not captured by our design, although
technology sourcing is a very important form of knowledge sharing in manufacturing. Second,
technology ‡ows are not mutually exclusive to the …rst two Marshallian determinants (e.g.,
Porter 1990). Technologies embodied in products and machinery can be transferred directly
through input-output exchanges. Likewise, industries that share similar labor may also be
industries among which there are greater possibilities for intellectual spillovers. Our empirical
exercises attempt to isolate technology spillovers by jointly testing T echci with these other two
factors, but it is important to note that intellectual spillovers do occur within these channels,
too. Endogeneity also remains a concern, as incumbents may locate near startups in hopes of
gathering new ideas.14

    The literature on intellectual spillovers is divided on whether the development of new in-
novations is most aided by having a large concentration of one’s own industry or by industrial
diversity. The view stressing industrial concentration is most often associated with Marshall,
Arrow, and Romer (MAR). The MAR model emphasizes the bene…ts of concentrated indus-
trial centers, particularly citing the gains in increasing returns and learning-by-doing that occur
within industries. The second view, often associated with Jacobs (1970), argues that major
innovations come when the ideas of one industry are brought into a new industrial sector. This
perspective stresses that a wealth of industrial diversity is needed to create the cross-fertilization
that leads to new ideas and entrepreneurial success. Duranton and Puga (2001) formalize the-
oretical foundations for this model.

    Recent empirical research has sought to uncover whether industrial specialization or diversity
better foster regional development (e.g., Glaeser et al. 1992, Henderson et al. 1995, Feldman
and Audretsch 1999). Our accounting for existing city-industry employment mostly captures
the MAR model. We also develop a Her…ndahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) of employment shares
in manufacturing industries for city c to capture the diversity perspective. The greatest and
weakest manufacturing diversities are found in Philadelphia, PA, and Bremerton, WA, respec-
tively. Unlike our other metrics, we do not adjust the HHI metric to have positive coe¢ cients
corresponding to support for the Jacobs hypothesis.

   In between these two extremes, new empirical research is quantifying the role of related
industries in industrial clusters (e.g., Ellison et al. 2007, Kolko 2007, Delgado et al. 2008). This
  14
     Scherer (1984) develops a technology ‡ow matrix that estimates the extent to which R&D activity in one
industry ‡ows out to bene…t another industry. This technology transfer occurs either through a supplier-
customer relationship between these two industries or through the likelihood that patented inventions obtained
in one industry will …nd applications in the other industry. Patent-based metrics have the advantage of covering
the 1975-1999 period, but inventor-to-inventor communication patterns represent a subset of the technology ‡ows
encompassed by Scherer (1984). Metrics constructed through the Scherer matrix deliver mostly similar results
to those present below.

                                                      14
is precisely what we hope to uncover with our Marshallian and Chinitz connections. We do not
designate related industries, however, but instead model how the industrial composition of the
city interacts with new startups through the more fundamental channels of goods, people, and
ideas.


3.4    Entrepreneurial Culture

A …nal hypothesis is that some areas simply develop a culture of entrepreneurship (e.g., Hof-
stede 2001). Many observers believe that entrepreneurial hotbeds feed upon themselves, with
above-average entry levels encouraging further entry. Saxenian (1994) describes how early en-
trepreneurs fostered future entrepreneurship in Silicon Valley. Free from the constraints of
older industrial structures, these early entrepreneurs developed ‡at organizational structures,
emphasized equity participation by employees, and participated in greater formal and informal
cooperation across young startups. These features lead to an industrial structure characterized
by vertical disintegration, modular product development, and greater labor mobility across …rms
(e.g., Fallick et al. 2006). It became the norm, rather than the exception, that employees would
strike out on their own, with failure much more respectable than not having tried. Moreover,
these attitudes and practices transferred beyond early semiconductor …rms to future industries,
both related and unrelated.

    This sense of entrepreneurial culture is not limited to the exceptional case of Silicon Valley.
While outlining his small supplier argument, Chinitz (1961) also noted an "aura of second class
citizenship" that surrounds small business owners in cities dominated by big …rms. Lamoreaux
et al. (2004) describe the strong entrepreneurial culture of Cleveland at the start of the twentieth
century, when many startup …rms launched the industries of the 2nd Industrial Revolution (e.g.,
electric light and power, automobiles, chemicals). Florida (2005) emphasizes di¤erences across
cities in bohemian cultures and tolerance in the promotion of his creative class. Davidsson
(1995) connects di¤erences in entrepreneurial beliefs and new …rm formation rates across Swedish
regions.

    One interpretation of an entrepreneurship culture is that there are agglomeration economies
in entrepreneurship. A robust entrepreneurial sector may lead to the development of broader
social structures and institutions that support additional entry. For example, angel …nanciers,
specialized educational institutions, and small business lawyers might congregate in areas that
start with some initial concentration of entrepreneurship. This clustering may have non-linear
externalities similar to the urban capital markets arguments put forward by Helsley and Strange
(1991). Further, an agglomeration of entrepreneurs might increase the social returns to taking
risks and reduce the stigma associated with entrepreneurial failure. The reduced stigma of failure


                                                15
is frequently pointed to when discussing di¤erences in entrepreneurial culture across countries
(e.g., Landier 2006).

    Our approach to assessing this theory is to follow Glaeser (2007) and test whether entre-
preneurship in one industry is associated with being located near other industries that are,
throughout the US, more entrepreneurial. We examine whether electronics producers are
more entrepreneurial when they are located near entrepreneurship-prone industries versus big,
vertically-integrated businesses. In other words, is the entrepreneurship of industry i higher in
city c if other industries in city c are usually entrepreneurial? The culture metric is
                                            X Ekc Entry%U S
                                                              k
                                Culturec =                        ;                               (5)
                                           k=1;:::;I
                                                     Ec Entry%U S

where Entry%Uk S is entering US establishments divided by existing establishments for industry
k. Higher values of this index indicate that the industry structure surrounding new entrants
is characterized by higher expected entry levels based upon US averages. The greatest and
weakest cultural measures are for Bremerton, WA, and Charleston, WV, respectively.

   There are important limitations with this estimation approach. First, we miss many nuances
associated with entrepreneurial culture noted above. We also abstract from ethnic propensities
towards starting new enterprises and their uneven spatial distribution (e.g., Fairlie 1999, Kerr
2008b, Wadhwa et al. 2007). Third, the industrial mix of a city may be more exogenous than
entrepreneurship levels in those industries in the city, but it is also not entirely exogenous. Places
with exogenous characteristics that make entrepreneurship easier should presumably attract
more entrepreneurial industries. As such, we interpret these results as, at best, suggestive of
the role that entrepreneurial culture might play.


4     Empirical Estimations

We now present our empirical estimations of the impact of local conditions on entrepreneurial
rates. We …rst study city-level traits and then turn to conditional estimations that include city
and industry …xed e¤ects. We close with estimations that study the entry size distribution and
natural cost advantages.




                                                 16
4.1    Unconditional City-Industry Estimations

We begin by characterizing city-level traits and entrepreneurship for city c and industry i,

           ln(Entryci ) =     i   +   P   ln(P opc ) +    E   ln(Empci ) +   c Xc

                            +     Cul Culturec    +      J Jacobsc   +   C Chinitzci                        (6)
                            +     L Laborci   +   I Inputci     +    O Outputci   +   T T echci   + "ci ;

where i is a vector of industry …xed e¤ects that control for …xed di¤erences in industry sizes,
entrepreneurship rates, competition, and so on. We further control for city populations and
the employment in the city-industry. Xc is a vector of city-level demographics. Variables are
transformed to have unit standard deviation to aid interpretation.

   The dependent variable Entryci is the log measure of mean entry employment by city-industry
over 1977 to 1999. We recode less than one entering employee on average as one entering
employee for these estimations. This maintains a consistent sample size, and we do not believe
that the distinction between zero and one employee at the city-industry level is economically
meaningful. Regardless, these cells can be excluded without impacting our results.

    We weight estimations by an interaction of the mean industry size within city c with the
mean size of industry i across cities. This is e¤ectively an interaction of city and industry
sizes for urban manufacturing employments. We place more faith in weighted estimations than
unweighted estimations since many city-industry observations experience very limited entry. We
recognize, however, that weighted estimations may accentuate endogeneity concerns. We thus
employ our interaction rather than observed city-industry size. The interaction minimizes the
endogeneity spillover for very agglomerated industries, especially in conditional estimations with
city and industry …xed e¤ects.

   The appendix reports alternative estimations that drop the weights or substitute log entry
counts as dependent variables. The emphasized results are mostly robust to these variants, and
we indicate below where noticeable di¤erences exist. These di¤erences are typically about the
overall elasticities evident in the data, rather than the ordering of explanatory factors.

    Table 3 presents our basic results. The …rst column includes just city populations, city-
industry employments, and industry …xed e¤ects. Not surprisingly, both measures of existing
agglomeration have strong explanatory power for entrepreneurship rates. Coe¢ cients are inter-
preted in standard deviations, suggesting for example that a one standard-deviation increase in
city size is associated with a half standard-deviation increase in entrepreneurial employment.

   The adjusted R-Squared value for this estimation is quite high at 0.80. This explanatory
power is primarily due to the existing agglomeration of city-industry employment, which by

                                                      17
itself yields an R-Squared value of 0.66. By contrast, including just industry or city …xed e¤ects
yields R-Squared values of 0.29 and 0.47, respectively. This outcome stresses the importance of
existing patterns of industrial activity for explaining the spatial distribution of entrepreneurship.
As our interests focus on explaining entrepreneurship, versus overall agglomeration, we continue
to control for this level. Natural advantages estimations below further relate this predictive
power of existing agglomerations to local cost advantages.

   The second column incorporates city characteristics: demographics, cultural and diversity
measures, and the Chinitz small supplier metric. Somewhat surprisingly, demographics play
a very limited role in explaining manufacturing entry patterns. Cities that have a higher
population share of young workers, aged 20 to 40 years, tend to have greater manufacturing
entry rates (the omitted category is 40 to 60 years in age). We are not able to distinguish
whether this gain is due to a greater supply of founders or more suitable workers. Whereas
older people are strongly associated with self-employment rates (e.g., Glaeser 2007), they are
not associated with new manufacturing startups. This can be partially reconciled through the
reduced emphasis of consumption entrepreneurship in manufacturing (e.g., Hurst and Lusardi
2004, Nanda 2008).15

    A more educated workforce is found to have a negative, but not particularly robust, partial
correlation with entry. Unreported estimations that include just the covariates in Column 1 and
the bachelors education share …nd a positive and statistically signi…cant partial correlation for
education. Moreover, unweighted regressions do not yield a clear relationship between education
levels and entry. We conclude that a robust relationship for education does not exist with our
manufacturing entry measure. Future work will hopefully clarify whether this is a particular
feature of the manufacturing sector.

    In contrast to demographics, the Chinitz measure …nds very strong support in these estima-
tions. The coe¢ cient is 0.4 in weighted regressions and 0.1 in unweighted speci…cations, both
being statistically signi…cant and economically important. The Chinitz explanatory power is
substantially greater than the culture or industrial diversity metrics. Similar to education, the
culture measure is positive and statistically signi…cant when only conditioning on city population
and city-industry employment. To some degree, the Chinitz measure may also embody what
observers refer to as entrepreneurial culture. The local Her…ndahl index metric …nds greater
specialization supports higher levels of manufacturing entry, even conditional on city-industry
employment controls.

    Column 3 presents our …rst evidence on Marshallian agglomeration forces. Each of the
factors …nds some support in the estimations, but the local labor market mix is found to be
  15
    Doms et al. (2008) …nd local skill levels correlate with higher rates of self employment and better startup
performance in the US. Bonte et al. (2008) document an inverted-U shape between regional age structures and
entrepreneurship rates in Germany.

                                                      18
the most important factor. The full speci…cation (6) is reported in Column 4. Most city-level
characteristics remain similar to their individual estimations, and the technology spillover metric
remains strong. On the other hand, labor and input suitability measures diminish. In fact,
the explanatory power of the Chinitz measure is strong enough to crowd out the general inputs
variable of the Marshallian factors completely. We further discuss the Chinitz result below after
viewing conditional estimations.

    One surprising result from Table 3 was the limited explanatory power of city demographics
for manufacturing entrepreneurship. A second surprising feature is the limited explanatory
power that additional city traits and Marshallian factors bring. The adjusted R-squared barely
increases across the columns to 0.81. In unweighted estimations, the adjusted R-squared hovers
around 0.62. This explanatory level also holds in upcoming estimations that control for city
…xed e¤ects.


4.2    Conditional City-Industry Estimations

Our primary empirical approach looks at variation within cities rather than across them. We test
which local industrial attributes are attractive for entrepreneurship. We now turn to estimations
that replace the vector of city-level covariates in (6) with a vector of city …xed e¤ects c ,

           ln(Entryci ) =     i   +   c   +   E   ln(Empci ) +      C Chinitzci                           (7)
                             +    L Laborci   +     I Inputci   +    O Outputci   +   T T echci   + "ci

This …xed e¤ect estimation removes di¤erences across cities that are common for all industries,
for example due to New York’s larger city size. Speci…cations thus employ within variation:
how much of the unexplained city-industry variation in entrepreneurship can we explain through
local conditions that are especially suitable for particular industries?

    Table 4 presents the basic results. The …rst regression continues to show that new startups
are drawn to existing agglomerations. The combination of initial employment, city …xed e¤ects,
and industry …xed e¤ects can together explain 82 percent of the variation in manufacturing en-
try patterns. In the second regression, we include our three basic agglomeration measures from
Marshall (1920). The labor metric continues to be quite strong. A one standard-deviation
increase in this variable is associated with a quarter standard-deviation increase in the employ-
ment found in new …rms. The presence of input suppliers is also important, but industrial
customers appear less signi…cant. Workers and suppliers seem to drive location decisions of
manufacturing startups, not buyers.

   The third regression incorporates the Chinitz measure of small suppliers and again …nds a
very strong impact on entrepreneurship. A one standard-deviation increase in the presence of

                                                       19
small suppliers correlates with a 0.4 standard-deviation increase in entry levels. As in Table 3,
the general inputs metric declines substantially after the Chinitz variable is introduced. The
Chinitz variable is also quite important when looking at entry counts. The Chinitz measure is
statistically signi…cant in unweighted estimations, but its elasticity declines to around 0.1 and
is less di¤erentiated from the Marshallian factors.

    While noting the explanatory power of the Chinitz hypothesis, we are cautious about the
exceptional strength of this outcome. First, we are quite suspicious about the endogeneity of
this measure. The average …rm size of supplying industries is surely endogenous to the level
of entrepreneurship in the industries they supply. Smaller suppliers may well re‡ect a smaller,
more entrepreneurial customer base. A second concern comes from using …rm size to construct
the Chinitz metric. To the extent that average …rm size re‡ects local entrepreneurship well, the
Chinitz metric may be capturing more a correlation within cities in entrepreneurship levels of
related industries rather than a speci…c supplier relationship.

    Encouragingly, the strength of our Chinitz metric parallels two recent …ndings for the US.
Using Dun and Bradstreet Marketplace data, Rosenthal and Strange (2007) note a robust cor-
relation of small establishments in a local area predicting greater entry rates. This correlation
holds when looking at di¤erences within metropolitan areas and across multiple industrial sec-
tors. Using Census Bureau data, Drucker and Feser (2007) also …nd that productivity levels of
small plants are reduced when regional industrial concentration increases, although the speci…c
agglomeration channels remain unclear. Further investigation of this topic is an important area
for future research.

    Column 4 incorporates the technology spillovers metric, again showing general support for
Marshall’s theories. Labor market pools …nds the strongest relative support among the Marshal-
lian factors in weighted estimations, but technology spillovers has greater strength in unweighted
speci…cations and when looking at entry counts. Both of these factors are generally found to
be more important than local sales conditions.

    Column 5’s estimation includes the log employment in facility expansions by existing …rms to
test whether these local conditions are more important for entrepreneurship speci…cally versus
economic growth more generally. We focus on new facility expansions, versus within-plant
employment adjustments, to model discontinuous events that resemble new …rm entry (e.g., Kerr
and Nanda 2007). Facility expansions are a particularly e¤ective control against unmodeled
city policies to promote an industry’s growth when such policies are neutral towards startups
versus existing …rms.

   Not surprisingly, high contemporaneous rates of facility expansions predict greater entry by
new …rms. Most of the other explanatory factors, however, are una¤ected by this additional

                                               20
control. Unreported speci…cations further incorporate facility expansions in broader SIC2 in-
dustry groups. Results are quite similar to those reported, although elasticities for labor pooling
sometimes decline. This impact for labor is not too surprising given the substantial occupational
sharing across industries within SIC2 groups.


4.3    Entry Size Distribution

Table 5 next disaggregates overall entry measures into establishment sizes in the year of entry.
The entry of a two-person establishment is presumably a di¤erent phenomena than the entry of
a new …rm with hundreds of employees. We care more about larger entrants in certain contexts,
for example when worrying about the determinants of robust local labor demand. On the other
hand, the entry of small establishments may be a purer re‡ection of entrepreneurship and hence
more intrinsically interesting. More generally, empirical evidence exists that small and large
establishments agglomerate di¤erently (e.g., Holmes and Stevens 2002, Duranton and Overman
2008), and it is useful to extend this description to entering …rms.

     A second rationale exists for examining the entry size distribution. Better local conditions
may foster a larger entry size for entrepreneurs due to factors like less uncertainty about local
growth potential and faster assembly of key resources. As discussed in Kerr and Nanda (2007),
however, metrics of average entry size confound this intensive margin adjustment with changes
in the extensive margin of greater entry rates. Better local conditions may simultaneously foster
greater entry by many small …rms that leads to an overall decline in average entry size. We feel
it is more prudent to look at the distribution measure.

    Table 5 …nds interesting e¤ects. Existing agglomerations are very important for large en-
trants, but much less so for small entrants. Weighted estimations tend to …nd a negative
elasticity, while unweighted estimations …nd a small, positive elasticity. Regardless, the di¤er-
ence in the …rst row between the smallest-size category and larger-size categories is economically
and statistically important. This parallels earlier work on the spatial concentration of the
establishment size distribution.

    Turning to industrial variables, labor and output variables typically …nd consistent support
throughout the distribution. On the other hand, interesting di¤erences again emerge between
the Chinitz and Marshallian inputs measure. The importance of the Chinitz measure declines
with entry size, while the importance of general Marshallian conditions strengthens with larger
entrants. The Chinitz measure retains an overall higher elasticity throughout Table 5, but
in unweighted estimations Marshallian input factors become relatively stronger. Finally, the
strength of local technology environments is robustly found to be more important for smaller
entrants.


                                                21
4.4    Natural Advantages Estimations

The previous regressions treat city-industry characteristics as exogenous regressors, but surely
industrial distributions are themselves endogenous to local entrepreneurship. Reverse causality
may play a role if existing …rms choose to locate in entrepreneurial hotbeds to interact with
startups. It is likewise possible that an unmodeled factor — for example, special industrial
policies to encourage the local formation of an industry — are responsible for both startup
success and industrial structures present. Both scenarios would bias, usually upward, the
parameter estimates and explanatory power. Tables 3 through 5 are best interpreted as partial
correlations, showing the connection between new entrants and existing local characteristics.

    These endogeneity concerns are perhaps ampli…ed by our calculation of entry rates and
industrial structures over the same time horizon in Sections 2 and 3. In these situations, it
is tempting to rely on time lags to make causal claims — for example, taking incumbent …rms
in year t 1 to predict new entry in year t. The challenge to this approach, however, is the
high persistence in city-industry structures. For example, we …nd similar outcomes when using
pre-1987 industrial structures and entry rates from 1988 onwards. But, we also note that the
correlation of city-industry employments from 1976 to 1999 is over 0.8. This persistence limits
the potential of time-series approaches for assigning causal directions unless special cases are
identi…ed. Even when such "natural experiments" exist, which we discuss further below, they
will certainly not be applicable across the whole manufacturing sector.

    Instead, we now employ spatial variations in natural cost advantages in an attempt to bound
endogeneity issues through reduced-form estimations. Natural spatial distributions of industries,
arising from exogenous cost factors outlined in Section 3, provide more robust identi…cation than
using actual manufacturing spatial shares. This applies to both own-industry employments and
Marshallian linkages across industries. Moreover, grounding our reduced-form estimates in costs
di¤erences is very intuitive for manufacturing.

    The validity of this approach depends upon the estimation technique. The natural advan-
tages that we model are not strictly exogenous — even coastal access is endogenous over long
horizons as waterways shaped city locations for many centuries. While lacking random assign-
ment of city locations, residual variations from conditional estimations are more promising. City
…xed e¤ects control for main e¤ects of local natural advantages common across industries, while
industry …xed e¤ects control for main e¤ects of industrial technologies and factor uses. Our
estimations thus only exploit the residual variation for predicting industrial composition within
manufacturing.

    We use these residual variations for reduced-form estimators rather than as instruments due
to two limitations. First, our cost factors are both mostly pre-determined to the 1976-1999 sam-

                                               22
ple frame and (at least partially) determined by forces outside of manufacturing. Nevertheless,
very persistent agglomerations, like the long history of automobile manufacturing in Detroit,
may still shape costs factors and industry intensities that we observe. Second, necessary exclu-
sion restrictions could be violated even if cost factors are strictly exogenous. For example, local
industrial policies may build upon local natural advantages.

   While not perfect, reduced-form exercises nonetheless build con…dence in results found earlier
by removing the most worrisome endogeneity. Rather than directly modelling Detroit’s auto-
mobile manufacturing employment in 1980 to predict subsequent entry, we are instead using
Detroit’s long-run cost factors and how well or poorly they align with the automobile industry’s
needs nationally. The reduced-form estimations mirror (7),

         ln(Entryci ) =        i   +   c   +   NA   ln(N at%ci Empi )                                                (8)
                                          N at                 N at               N at              N at
                             +     L Laborci        +   I Inputci     +   O Outputci     +   T T echci     + "ci :

We …rst replace actual city-industry employments with estimated employments from natural
spatial distributions and industry sizes. In the case of the existing industry structure, this
regression can be interpreted as measuring whether innate cost factors drive entrepreneurship.
The predicted log of employment in the city-industry is itself an index of how much local factors
favor this particular industry.

    In the …rst column of Table 6, we …nd that a one standard-deviation increase in predicted
city-industry employment increases entry by a full standard deviation. This large coe¢ cient
implies that the same cost factors that drive employment levels are also strongly correlated
with actual entrepreneurship. Of course, we cannot separate the extent to which this e¤ect
re‡ects the direct impact of lower costs for encouraging entry versus the clustering of startups
around initial employments. The adjusted R-Squared value is again quite substantial at 0.77.
Regressions that include just predicted employments …nd an R-Squared of 0.57, compared to
0.66 for actual employments.

   In the second column, we incorporate our three measures of Marshallian agglomeration
economies. We continue to use national measures of industry interdependencies, but we substi-
tute predicted city-industry distributions for actual city-industry distributions when calculating
Marshallian advantages of a local area. As an example, ship building clearly has a natural
advantage to be near the coast. But, this attraction further impacts other industries that em-
ploy similar workers to ship building, even if these industries do not derive direct bene…t for
being near the ocean. The coast may also attract suppliers and customers of this industry.
Our constructed metrics connect local cost conditions to entrepreneurship through both direct
industry advantages and indirect Marshallian interactions.16
  16
     Actual and predicted Marshallian factors have a 0.86 correlation for labor, 0.78 for inputs, 0.56 for outputs,
and 0.47 for technology.

                                                            23
    Column 2 …nds general support for Marshallian factors relating to labor pooling and input-
output exchanges. One standard-deviation increases in these indirect linkages descending from
natural advantages associate with 0.3 to 0.4 standard-deviation increases in local entry. The
output and labor interactions are also robust to many speci…cation variants. Measured elas-
ticities for these two forces decline in unweighted estimations or entry count speci…cations, but
they remain economically and statistically important. The inputs measure, however, is not very
robust. Speci…cation variations often yield a negative coe¢ cient that can be statistically signif-
icant. Our view is therefore that the natural advantages approach supports the labor pooling
and output hypotheses, but it does not support the inputs hypothesis.

    Unfortunately, we cannot use the natural advantages approach to con…rm the importance
of the Chinitz hypothesis. We are unable to predict which suppliers will have big or small
…rms in particular cities through our current techniques. This is disappointing given the high
potential for endogeneity and omitted variables problems with the Chinitz measure. It is also
disappointing given the empirical weakness of the general inputs measure. We hope future
research will overcome this limitation given the exceptionally strong predictive power of the
Chinitz metric in least squares regressions.

    The third regression further adds the technology ‡ows metric. A strong negative association
is found, but like inputs, this elasticity is not robust to speci…cation variants. Unweighted
speci…cations, for example, …nd positive associations that Marshallian theory anticipates. For-
tunately, coe¢ cients for the other Marshallian factors are robust to including the technology
measure. In general, it is very challenging to separate technology and knowledge spillovers
from other Marshallian forces. Many technology exchanges within manufacturing closely mirror
input-output exchanges or labor similarity. Future research may be able to identify sectors
where this overlap is less severe.

    Finally, it is noteworthy that our cost advantages approach is stronger for Marshallian factors
that operate by pooling across local industries (e.g., labor sharing, output markets) rather than
through satisfying a vector of speci…c needs (e.g., inputs, technology). Exogenous spatial
distributions descending from cost advantages will better capture aggregate e¤ects, allowing
for above and below expected placements by individual industries in a city, than exact local
industrial compositions. Our relative weakness for inputs and technology rationales is likely
more due to our blunt metric for vector concepts rather than due to true degrees of economic
importance. We hope that future agglomeration theory will outline better pooling versus vector
concepts and how best to model them empirically with local cost advantages.




                                                24
4.5    Thoughts for Future Work on Causality

Where do we go from here? Establishing causal relationships between local industrial conditions
and entrepreneurship is di¢ cult, but we see several promising paths for future inquiry. First,
powerful datasets are emerging with exceptionally detailed …rm and employee information. This
richness promises more precise assessments than our city-industry approach a¤ords. For exam-
ple, very detailed breakdowns of plants’material inputs and their sources can better inform the
Chinitz hypothesis. Bernard et al. (2008) document extensive product switching by US manu-
facturing plants, which is a start for tests regarding more general Marshallian input-output rela-
tionships. Likewise, linked employer-employee data can characterize the employee-by-employee
growth of startups. This mobility data will better assess the overall importance of labor pooling
arguments and separate among the various mechanisms noted in Section 3.

    The advantages of additional data richness are not con…ned to more accurate least squares
assessments. In the context of speci…c cities and industries, exogenous shocks to local industrial
conditions can be identi…ed. These shocks may descend from corporate restructurings, shifts
in local competition, military base closings, and so on. The very rich data becoming available
will allow researchers to trace the propagation of speci…c shocks from directly-a¤ected …rms to
others through Marshallian channels. For example, import penetration in an industry following
trade reforms can have important Marshallian linkages to related …rms and industries, even if the
imports do not have a direct competitive e¤ect. Greenstone et al. (2007) provide an attractive
example through the entry of "million dollar" plants.

   A second promising path is to exploit more spatial and temporal variation. We have taken
the city to be the relevant unit for economic interactions, but that is clearly a crude approach.
Di¤erent factors of production have di¤erent spatial horizons and markets. Labor pooling is
perhaps best modelled through commuting regions given the costs of worker relocation. Input-
output linkages extend over longer horizons, with some concave cost relationship likely, except
perhaps for the Chinitz arguments. Knowledge transfers may be very localized (e.g., Wall
Street) or invariant to distance (e.g., global, high-tech entrepreneurial ties from the US to Israel
and Asia). Recent research seeks to more precisely characterize these distances (e.g., Rosenthal
and Strange 2003, Ellison et al. 2007).

    The agglomeration literature has bene…tted from the recent development of continuous geo-
graphic measures like Duranton and Overman (2005). We hope that future work will consider
local industrial conditions and entry over continuous spatial horizons. The bene…ts of such
an analysis will again extend beyond least squares estimates. The relevant boundaries for
Marshallian forces have likely shifted with declines in communications and transportation costs,
immigration and mobility changes among the population, and so on. These changes may pro-

                                                25
vide more causal assessments of how entry follows from Marshallian forces, with the spatial
econometrics extending well beyond using lagged local conditions to predict new entry.


5     Conclusions

This paper tested a number of hypotheses about determinants of local entrepreneurship rates in
manufacturing. We found a very limited role for city demographics or a culture of entrepreneur-
ship in explaining patterns of entry across cities. Likewise, industrial diversity did not promote
entry except through the Marshallian channels modelled. The clustering of related industries
matter, but not diversity for its own sake. These weak results are not in any sense de…nitive,
as both our metrics are imperfect and our sample is limited to manufacturing. Yet, the results
should caution against excessive enthusiasm about these particular explanations for explaining
variations in local entrepreneurship levels.

    On the other hand, we do …nd that local costs and other natural advantages variables are very
important for new startups. The same natural advantages that predict employment distributions
across cities and industries also predict entrepreneurship distributions well. We also used these
natural advantage variables to provide us with more exogenous variation in the industrial mix
of the city as we tested three main agglomeration theories.

    New startups are particularly related to the presence of other industries that hire the same
sort of workers. This result holds across all sizes of startups and is independent of weighting
strategies. This result also holds in estimations that employ predicted spatial distributions
resulting from natural advantages. The broad stability of this …nding suggests that people and
their human capital are probably the crucial ingredient for most new entrepreneurs.

    The evidence on input supplier and customer linkages is somewhat weaker. In general,
inputs appear to matter more than customers, and both matter less than the composition of the
local labor force. One exception to this …nding is that our results strongly support the Chinitz
view that small suppliers are critical to entrepreneurship. While this outcome is provocative, we
remain cautious about the exceptional strength of this …nding. The endogeneity of the Chinitz
measure is particularly troubling, since small suppliers are themselves likely to re‡ect a lot of
local entrepreneurship. Our natural advantages approach cannot help with this particular issue,
but we hope that future research will uncover other identi…cation strategies for this outcome.
There is also a clear need to assess the role of supplier heterogeneity for explaining entry in other
sectors.

   Overall, these results suggest that local variables do help us to understand the heterogeneity
that exists in rates of manufacturing entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship is itself an important

                                                 26
topic, and we believe that further work in this area can yield high returns. This research should
balance comparative analytics, as in this study, with empirical evaluations of speci…c policy
reforms or natural shocks that impact speci…c local conditions. We hope that our metrics and
techniques will aid other researchers in investigations of the manufacturing sector and beyond.




                                               27
References
 [1] Acs, Zoltan, and Catherine Armington, Entrepreneurship, Geography and American Eco-
     nomic Growth (New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006).
 [2] Acs, Zoltan, Edward Glaeser, Robert Litan, Lee Fleming, Stephan Goetz, William Kerr,
     Steven Klepper, Stuart Rosenthal, Olav Sorenson, and William Strange, "Entrepreneurship
     and Urban Success: Toward a Policy Consensus", Kau¤man Foundation Report (2008).
 [3] Arzaghi, Mohammad, and J. Vernon Henderson, "Networking o¤ Madison Avenue", forth-
     coming in Review of Economic Studies (2008).
 [4] Audretsch, David, and Maryann Feldman, "R&D Spillovers and the Geography of Innova-
     tion and Production", American Economic Review 86 (1996), 630-640.
 [5] Autor, David, William Kerr, and Adriana Kugler, "Does Employment Protection Reduce
     Productivity? Evidence from U.S. States", Economic Journal 117:521 (2007), 189-217.
 [6] Bernard, Andrew, Stephen Redding, and Peter Schott, "Multi-Product Firms and Product
     Switching", Working Paper (2008).
 [7] Blanch‡ower, David, and Andrew Oswald, "What Makes an Entrepreneur?", Journal of
     Labor Economics 16:1 (1998), 26-60.
 [8] Bönte, Werner, Oliver Falck, and Stephan Heblich, "The Impact of Regional Age Structure
     on Entrepreneurship", Working Paper (2008).
 [9] Bozkaya, Ant, and William Kerr, "Labor Regulations and European Industrial Specializa-
     tion: Evidence from Private Equity Investments", Harvard Business School Working Paper
     (2007).
[10] Buenstorf, Guido, and Steven Klepper, "Why Does Entry Cluster Geographically? Evidence
     from the US Tire Industry", Working Paper (2007).
[11] Carlino, Gerald, Satyajit Chatterjee, and Robert Hunt, "Urban Density and the Rate of
     Invention", Journal of Urban Economics 61 (2007), 389-419.
[12] Chinitz, Benjamin, "Contrasts in Agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh", American
     Economic Review 51:2 (1961), 279-289.
[13] Combes, Pierre-Philippe, and Gilles Duranton, "Labour Pooling, Labour Poaching, and
     Spatial Clustering", Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (2006), 1-28.
[14] Dahl, Michael, and Steven Klepper, "Who Do New Firms Hire?", Working Paper (2007).
[15] Dahl, Michael, and Olav Sorenson, "Home Sweet Home: Social Capital and Location
     Choice", Working Paper (2007).
[16] Davidsson, Per, "Culture, Structure and Regional Levels of Entrepreneurship", Entrepre-
     neurship & Regional Development 7:1 (1995), 41-62.
[17] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, "Volatility and Dis-
     persion in Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded Versus Privately Held Firms", NBER
     Working Paper 12354 (2006).


                                            28
[18] Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction (Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).
[19] Delgado, Mercedes, Michael Porter, and Scott Stern, "Convergence, Clusters and Economic
     Performance", Working Paper (2008).
[20] Diamond, Charles, and Chris Simon, "Industrial Specialization and the Returns to Labor",
     Journal of Labor Economics 8 (1990), 175-201.
[21] Doms, Mark, Ethan Lewis, and Alicia Robb, "Local Labor Market Endowments, New
     Business Characteristics, and Performance", Working Paper (2008).
[22] Drucker, Joshua, and Edward Feser, "Regional Industrial Dominance, Agglomeration
     Economies, and Manufacturing Plant Productivity", CES Working Paper 07-31 (2007).
[23] Dumais, Guy, Glenn Ellison, and Edward Glaeser, "Geographic Concentration as a Dynamic
     Process", Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2002), 193-204.
[24] Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, "Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit
     in U.S. Manufacturing Industries", RAND Journal of Economics 19 (1989a), 495-515.
[25] Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, "Plant Turnover and Gross Em-
     ployment Flows in the U.S. Manufacturing Sector", Journal of Labor Economics 7 (1989b),
     48-71.
[26] Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, "Exploring the Detailed Location Patterns of UK
     Manufacturing Industries Using Microgeographic Data", Journal of Regional Science 48:1
     (2008), 313-343.
[27] Duranton, Gilles, and Henry Overman, "Testing for Localization Using Micro-Geographic
     Data", Review of Economic Studies 72 (2005), 1077-1106.
[28] Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga, "Nursery Cities: Urban Diversity, Process Innovation,
     and the Life Cycle of Products", American Economic Review 91:5 (2001), 1454-1477.
[29] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
     Industries: A Dartboard Approach", Journal of Political Economy 105 (1997), 889-927.
[30] Ellison, Glenn, and Edward Glaeser, "The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does
     Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?", American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
     ceedings 89 (1999), 311-316.
[31] Ellison, Glenn, Edward Glaeser, and William Kerr, "What Causes Industry Agglomeration?
     Evidence from Coagglomeration Patterns", NBER Working Paper 13068 (2007).
[32] Evans, David, and Boyan Jovanovic, "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
     Liquidity Constraints", Journal of Political Economy 97:4 (1989), 808-827.
[33] Fallick, Bruce, Charles Fleischman, and James Rebitzer, "Job-Hopping in Silicon Valley:
     Some Evidence Concerning the Microfoundations of a High-Technology Cluster", Review of
     Economics and Statistics 88:3 (2006), 472-481.
[34] Fairlie, Robert, "The Absence of the African-American Owned Businesses: An Analysis of
     the Dynamics of Self Employment", Journal of Labor Economics 17 (1999), 80-108.


                                             29
[35] Feldman, Maryann, "The Locational Dynamics of the US Biotech Industry: Knowledge
     Externalities and the Anchor Hypothesis", Industry and Innovation 10:3 (2003), 311-328.
[36] Feldman, Maryann, and David Audretsch, "Innovation in Cities: Science-based Diversity,
     Specialization and Localized Competition", European Economic Review 43 (1999), 409-429.
[37] Figueiredo, Octávio, Paulo Guimaraes, and Douglas Woodward, "Home-Field Advantage:
     Location Decisions of Portuguese Entrepreneurs", Journal of Urban Economics 52:2 (2002),
     341-361.
[38] Florida, Richard, Cities and the Creative Class (New York, NY: Routledge, 2005).
[39] Fujita, Masahisa, Paul Krugman, and Anthony Venables, The Spatial Economy: Cities,
     Regions and International Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999).
[40] Glaeser, Edward, "Entrepreneurship and the City", NBER Working Paper 13551 (2007).
[41] Glaeser, Edward, Hedi Kallal, Jose Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, "Growth in Cities",
     Journal of Political Economy 100 (1992), 1126-1152.
[42] Glaeser, Edward, and Matthew Kahn, "Decentralized Employment and the Transformation
     of the American City", NBER Working Paper 8117 (2001).
[43] Greenstone, Michael, Richard Hornbeck, and Enrico Moretti, "Identifying Agglomeration
     Spillovers: Evidence from Million Dollar Plants", NBER Working Paper 13833 (2007).
[44] Griliches, Zvi, "Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey", Journal of Economic
     Literature 28 (1990), 1661-1707.
[45] Hall, Bronwyn, Adam Ja¤e, and Manuel Trajtenberg, "The NBER Patent Citation Data
     File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools", NBER Working Paper 8498 (2001).
[46] Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, "Agglomeration Economies and Urban Capital Mar-
     kets", Journal of Urban Economics 29 (1991), 96-112.
[47] Helsley, Robert, and William Strange, "Matching and Agglomeration Economics in a System
     of Cities", Regional Science and Urban Economics 20 (1990), 189-212.
[48] Henderson, J. Vernon, "Marshall’s Scale Economies", Journal of Urban Economics 53
     (2003), 1-28.
[49] Henderson, J. Vernon, Ari Kuncoro, and Matt Turner, "Industrial Development in Cities",
     Journal of Political Economy 103:5 (1995), 1067-1090.
[50] Hofstede, Geert, Culture and Organizations (London, UK: Harper Collins, 2001).
[51] Holmes, Thomas, and John Stevens, "Geographic Concentration and Establishment Scale",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 84:4 (2002), 682–690.
[52] Hurst, Erik, and Annamaria Lusardi, "Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth, and En-
     trepreneurship", Journal of Political Economy 112:2 (2004), 319-347.
[53] Jacobs, Jane, The Economy of Cities (New York, NY: Vintage Books, 1970).



                                             30
[54] Ja¤e, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Michael Fogarty, "Knowledge Spillovers and Patent
     Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors", American Economic Review Papers and
     Proceedings 90 (2000), 215-218.
[55] Ja¤e, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg, and Rebecca Henderson, "Geographic Localization of
     Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations", The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
     nomics 108:3 (1993), 577-598.
[56] Jarmin, Ron, and Javier Miranda, "The Longitudinal Business Database", CES Working
     Paper (2002).
[57] Johnson, Daniel, "150 Years of American Invention: Methodology and a First Geographic
     Application", Wellesley College Economics Working Paper 99-01 (1999).
[58] Kerr, William, "Ethnic Scienti…c Communities and International Technology Di¤usion",
     Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (2008a), 518-537.
[59] Kerr, William, "The Agglomeration of US Ethnic Inventors", Harvard Business School
     Working Paper 09-003 (2008b).
[60] Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, "Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulation, Financ-
     ing Constraints, and Entrepreneurship", Harvard Business School Working Paper 07-033
     (2007).
[61] Kim, Sukkoo, "Regions, Resources, and Economic Geography: Sources of U.S. Regional
     Comparative Advantage, 1880-1987", Regional Science and Urban Economics 29:1 (1999),
     123-137.
[62] Kolko, Jed, "Agglomeration and Co-Agglomeration of Services Industries", Working Paper
     (2007).
[63] Krugman, Paul, Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
[64] Lamoreaux, Naomi, Margaret Levenstein, and Kenneth Sokolo¤, "Financing Invention Dur-
     ing the Second Industrial Revolution: Cleveland, Ohio, 1870-1920", NBER Working Paper
     10923 (2004).
[65] Landier, Augustin, "Entrepreneurship and the Stigma of Failure", Working Paper (2006).
[66] Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics (London, UK: MacMillan and Co., 1920).
[67] Marx, Matt, Deborah Strumsky, and Lee Fleming, "Noncompetes and Inventor Mobility:
     Specialists, Stars, and the Michigan Experiment", Harvard Business School Working Paper
     07-042 (2007).
[68] McGuckin, Robert, and Suzanne Peck, "Manufacturing Establishments Reclassi…ed into
     New Industries: The E¤ect of Survey Design Rules", CES Working Paper (1992).
[69] Michelacci, Claudio, and Olmo Silva, "Why So Many Local Entrepreneurs?", Review of
     Economics and Statistics 89:4 (2007), 615-633.
[70] Nanda, Ramana, "Cost of External Finance and Selection into Entrepreneurship", Harvard
     Business School Working Paper (2008).
[71] Overman, Henry, and Diego Puga, "Labor Pooling as a Source of Agglomeration: An
     Empirical Investigation", Working Paper (2007).

                                            31
[72] Porter, Michael, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (New York, NY: The Free Press,
     1990).
[73] Romer, Paul, "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth", Journal of Political Economy
     94:5 (1986), 1002-1037.
[74] Romer, Paul, "Endogenous Technological Change", Journal of Political Economy 98:5
     (1990), S71-S102.
[75] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "Geography, Industrial Organization, and Agglom-
     eration", Review of Economics and Statistics 85:2 (2003), 377-393.
[76] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "Small Establishments/Big E¤ects: Agglomera-
     tion, Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship", Working Paper (2007).
[77] Rosenthal, Stuart, and William Strange, "The Determinants of Agglomeration", Journal of
     Urban Economics 50 (2001), 191-229.
[78] Rotemberg, Julio, and Garth Saloner, "Competition and Human Capital Accumulation: A
     Theory of Interregional Specialization and Trade", Regional Science and Urban Economics
     30 (2000), 373-404.
[79] Saxenian, AnnaLee, Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and
     Route 128 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994).
[80] Scherer, Frederic M., "Using Linked Patent Data and R&D Data to Measure Technology
     Flows", in Griliches, Zvi (ed.) R & D, Patents and Productivity (Chicago, IL: The University
     of Chicago Press, 1984).
[81] Silverman, Brian, "Technological Resources and the Direction of Corporate Diversi…cation:
     Toward an Integration of the Resource-Based View and Transaction Cost Economics", Man-
     agement Science 45 (1999), 1109-1124.
[82] Thompson, Peter, "Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowledge Spillovers: Evidence
     from Inventor- and Examiner-Added Citations", Review of Economics and Statistics 88:2
     (2006), 383-388.
[83] Thompson, Peter, and Melanie Fox-Kean, "Patent Citations and the Geography of Knowl-
     edge Spillovers: A Reassessment", American Economic Review 95:1 (2005), 450-460.
[84] Wadhwa, Vivek, AnnaLee Saxenian, Ben Rissing, and Gary Gere¢ , "America’s New Immi-
     grant Entrepreneurs I", Working Paper (2007).
[85] Zucker, Lynne, Michael Darby, and Marilynn Brewer, "Intellectual Human Capital and the
     Birth of U.S. Biotechnology Enterprises", American Economic Review 88 (1998), 290-306.




                                               32
                                                  Fig. 1a: Relative Birth Counts
                                                            All Sectors, By Type of Entrant


                                     140%
Entry Counts Relative to 1977-1981




                                     130%

                                     120%

                                     110%

                                     100%

                                     90%

                                     80%
                                              1977-1981           1982-1986          1987-1991         1992-1996

                                        Startup Entry Ct.      MU Facility Expansion Ct.         Total LBD Empl.


                                                  Fig. 1b: Relative Birth Counts
                                                     Manufacturing Sector, By Type of Entrant


                                     120%
Entry Counts Relative to 1977-1981




                                     110%


                                     100%


                                     90%


                                     80%


                                     70%
                                              1977-1981           1982-1986          1987-1991         1992-1996

                                        Startup Entry Ct.      MU Facility Expansion Ct.         Mfg. LBD Empl.
                                      Fig. 2a: Distribution of Entry Sizes
                                                  All Sectors, By Type of Entrant

                               100%
Cumulative Share of Entrants




                               80%


                               60%


                               40%


                               20%


                                0%
                                      Over 100             21-100                  6-20                   1-5
                                             Number of Employees in the First Year of Operation
                                             Facility Expansions by Multi-Unit Firms       Startup Firms



                                      Fig. 2b: Distribution of Entry Sizes
                                            Manufacturing Sector, By Type of Entrant

                               100%
Cumulative Share of Entrants




                               80%


                               60%


                               40%


                               20%


                                0%
                                      Over 100             21-100                  6-20                   1-5
                                             Number of Employees in the First Year of Operation
                                             Facility Expansions by Multi-Unit Firms      Startup Firms
Fig. 3a: Spatial Distribution of Mfg. Entry
    States Ranked by Employment Share of Entering Firms
Fig. 3b: Spatial Distribution of Mfg. Entry
      States Ranked by Count Share of Entering Firms
                Table 1: LBD Descriptive Statistics on US Entry Rates
                                              All                Establishments               Facility
                                           Entering                  of New                 Expansions
                                        Establishments           Start-up Firms          of Existing Firms

Mean Annual Entry Counts                    407,783                  335,807                   71,976
Mean Annual Entry Empl.                   3,811,409                 2,081,801                1,729,608
Mean Annual Entry Size                        9.3                       6.2                     24.0
Entry Counts by Entry Size
  1-5 Employees                             70.3%                     75.9%                    44.4%
  6-20 Employees                            22.8%                     19.8%                    36.6%
  21-100 Employees                           5.8%                      3.8%                    14.9%
  101+ Employees                            1.1%                      0.4%                     4.1%
Entry Counts by Sector
  Manufacturing                               9%                        9%                       6%
  Services                                   28%                       29%                      22%
  Wholesale Trade                            12%                       11%                      17%
  Retail Trade                               25%                       22%                      42%
  Mining                                      1%                        1%                       1%
  Construction                               17%                       20%                       1%
  Transportation                              7%                        7%                      10%
Entry Counts by Region
  Northeast                                  19%                       20%                      17%
  South                                      36%                       35%                      37%
  Midwest                                    22%                       21%                      24%
  West Coast                                 24%                       24%                      22%
Notes: Descriptive statistics for entering establishments in the Longitudinal Business Database from 1977-
1998. Jarmin and Miranda (2002) describe the construction of the LBD. Sectors not included in the LBD are
agriculture, forestry and fishing, public administration, and private households. We also exclude the US postal
service, financial services, restaurants and food stores, hospitals, education services, and social services.
These exclusions lower the services share relative to other sectors. Incomplete LBD records require dropping
25 state-year files: 1978 (12 states), 1983 (4), 1984 (4), 1985 (1), 1986 (1), 1989 (1), and 1993 (2).
       Table 2: Local Industrial Conditions for Mfg. Entry
                                                           Mean            Standard
                                                                           Deviation

                       A. Actual LBD Industrial Conditions
Share of Industry in a City                                0.004              0.014
Total Mfg. Empl. in City-Industry                          353.7             1594.2
Startup Mfg. Empl. in City-Industry                          6.0              26.0
Total Mfg. Firms in City-Industry                            6.4              28.1
Startup Mfg. Firms in City-Industry                          0.5               2.3
Labor Market Strength                                      -0.825             0.202
Input / Supplier Strength                                  -1.185             0.136
Chinitz Index of Small Suppliers (x1000)                   0.173              0.212
Output / Customer Strength (x1000)                         2.735              6.509
Technology Strength - Patents                              -1.412             0.209
Cultural Measure of Pred. Entry Rate                       0.991              0.099
HHI Index of Mfg. Employment in City                       0.088              0.088
Share - Bachelors Education and Above                      0.199              0.065
Share - Age 19 and Younger                                 0.291              0.032
Share - Age 20 to 39                                       0.331              0.038
Share - Age 60 and Older                                   0.166              0.042

        B. Predicted Industrial Conditions using Natural Advantages
Share of Industry in a City                                0.004              0.006
Total Mfg. Empl. in City-Industry                          353.4              956.9
Labor Market Strength                                      -0.792             0.195
Input / Supplier Strength                                  -1.102             0.143
Output / Customer Strength (x1000)                         2.757              4.181
Technology Strength - Patents                              -1.026             0.195
Notes: All pairwise combinations of manufacturing SIC3 industries and cities are
included, except those listed in the text, for 33,550 observations. Metrics combine
LBD industrial structures within a city with industry traits to describe strength of local
industrial conditions. LBD employment and firm counts are annual means for 1977-
1999. Labor indices are calculated from the BLS National Industry-Occupation
Employment Matrix for 1987. Input-Output relationships are calculated from the
BEA Benchmark Input-Output Matrix for 1987. Technology Flows are calculated
from the NBER Patent Citation Database for 1975-1997. Demographics are
calculated from the 1990 Census of Populations MSA Sample. Variables are
transformed from these raw values to have unit standard deviation before estimations.
   Table 3: Unconditional Estimations of Mfg. Entrepreneurship Rates
                                      Base               City          Marshallian          Full
                                   Estimation           Traits          Factors          Estimation
                                        (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
                                      DV is Log Entry Empl. in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of City                           0.499             0.511             0.530             0.516
Population                           (0.013)           (0.013)           (0.014)           (0.013)
Log of Employment                     0.720             0.610             0.586             0.566
in City-Industry                     (0.020)           (0.017)           (0.018)           (0.017)

City Characteristics:
Share of Population                                     -0.067                              -0.084
with Bachelors Ed.                                     (0.017)                             (0.017)
Share of Population                                     0.021                               0.005
under 20 in Age                                        (0.018)                             (0.018)
Share of Population                                     0.146                               0.130
20-40 in Age                                           (0.028)                             (0.028)
Share of Population                                     0.006                               -0.014
over 60 in Age                                         (0.027)                             (0.027)
Cultural Metric of                                      -0.017                              -0.010
Predicted Entr. Rates                                  (0.012)                             (0.011)
HHI Index of Mfg.                                       0.025                               0.039
Employment in City                                     (0.009)                             (0.010)
Chinitz Measure of                                      0.401                               0.378
Small Suppliers                                        (0.020)                             (0.021)

Marshallian Factors:
Labor Market                                                              0.184             0.047
Strength Metric                                                          (0.027)           (0.025)
Inputs / Supplier                                                         0.044             -0.056
Strength Metric                                                          (0.025)           (0.025)
Outputs / Customer                                                        0.018             0.022
Strength Metric                                                          (0.014)           (0.012)
Technology Strength                                                       0.054             0.079
Metric                                                                   (0.016)           (0.016)

Adjusted R-Squared                     0.80              0.81              0.80              0.81
SIC3 Fixed Effects                      X                 X                 X                 X
Notes: Estimations consider log entry employments of new firms for city-industries taken from the
LBD. Entry employments are annual averages for city-industries over the 1977-1999 period. Zero
employment is recoded as a single employment for these estimations. The construction of the
independent regressors is described in the text. Estimations report robust standard errors and have
33,550 observations. Weighted regressions employ an interaction of average industry size across
cities with average size of industries within a city. Variables are transformed to have unit standard
deviation for interpretation.
             Table 4: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entrepreneurship Rates
                                    Existing            Add               Add              Add               Add
                                    Industry           Labor +           Chinitz        Technology         Facility
                                    Structure         I/O Flow           Metric           Flows           Expansions
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
                                               DV is Log Entry Empl. in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment                     0.663             0.514             0.478            0.471             0.349
in City-Industry                     (0.020)           (0.018)           (0.018)          (0.018)           (0.018)
Labor Market                                            0.240             0.128            0.097             0.083
Strength Metric                                        (0.028)           (0.025)          (0.027)           (0.027)
Inputs / Supplier                                       0.119             -0.023           -0.038            -0.076
Strength Metric                                        (0.028)           (0.029)          (0.028)           (0.028)
Chinitz Measure of                                                        0.386            0.382             0.321
Small Suppliers                                                          (0.026)          (0.026)           (0.025)
Outputs / Customer                                      0.017             0.036            0.031             0.020
Strength Metric                                        (0.014)           (0.012)          (0.012)           (0.012)
Technology Strength                                                                        0.077             0.052
Metric                                                                                    (0.021)           (0.021)
Log Facility Entry by                                                                                        0.182
Multi-Unit Firms                                                                                            (0.011)

Adjusted R-Squared                     0.82              0.83             0.83              0.83              0.85
City Fixed Effects                      X                 X                 X                 X                X
SIC3 Fixed Effects                      X                 X                 X                 X                X
Notes: Estimations consider log entry employments in new firms for city-industries taken from the LBD. Entry
employments are annual averages for city-industries over the 1977-1999 period. Zero employment is recoded as a
single employment for these estimations. The construction of the independent regressors is described in the text.
Estimations report robust standard errors and have 33,550 observations. Weighted regressions employ an interaction of
average industry size across cities with average size of industries within a city. Variables are transformed to have unit
standard deviation for interpretation.
                            Table 5: Entry Size Distribution Estimations
                                      Total                            Entering Employment Of
                                      Entry             1-5              6-20         21-100                101+
                                       (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)
                                               DV is Log Entry Empl. in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment                     0.471            -0.052            0.138            0.297             0.420
in City-Industry                     (0.018)          (0.029)           (0.022)          (0.025)           (0.038)
Labor Market                          0.097            0.205             0.165            0.136             0.163
Strength Metric                      (0.027)          (0.055)           (0.038)          (0.041)           (0.075)
Inputs / Supplier                     -0.038           -0.141            -0.089           -0.066            0.143
Strength Metric                      (0.028)          (0.058)           (0.039)          (0.046)           (0.070)
Chinitz Measure of                    0.382            0.805             0.643            0.583             0.510
Small Suppliers                      (0.026)          (0.059)           (0.043)          (0.043)           (0.056)
Outputs / Customer                    0.031            0.039             0.042            0.059             0.061
Strength Metric                      (0.012)          (0.024)           (0.020)          (0.018)           (0.033)
Technology Strength                   0.077            0.314             0.222            0.229             0.067
Metric                               (0.021)          (0.044)           (0.032)          (0.033)           (0.058)

Adjusted R-Squared                    0.83              0.82             0.84              0.77             0.55
City Fixed Effects                      X                X                 X                X                 X
SIC3 Fixed Effects                      X                X                 X                X                 X
Notes: See Table 4. Estimations disaggregate entry into an entry size distribution based upon initial employment in the
establishment.
         Table 6: Natural Cost Advantages Estimations
                                    Existing            Add              Add
                                    Industry           Labor +        Technology
                                    Structure         I/O Flow          Flows
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)
                                      DV is Log Entry Empl. in New Firms
                                               by City-Industry
Pred. Log of Empl.                    1.000             0.515             0.667
in City-Industry                     (0.130)           (0.124)           (0.140)
Pred. Labor Market                                      0.384             0.495
Strength Metric                                        (0.155)           (0.165)
Pred. Inputs / Supplier                                 0.273             0.309
Strength Metric                                        (0.135)           (0.135)
Pred. Outputs /                                         0.345             0.373
Customer Strength                                      (0.126)           (0.126)
Pred. Technology                                                          -0.312
Strength Metric                                                          (0.134)

Adjusted R-Squared                     0.77              0.77             0.77
City Fixed Effects                      X                 X                 X
SIC3 Fixed Effects                      X                 X                 X
Notes: See Table 4. Estimations replace actual industry distributions for calculating
explanatory variables with predicted industry distributions from natural cost
advantages.
              App. Table 1: Unconditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Employments
                              Unweighted Estimations                          Weighted Estimations
                         Base    City     Marsh.     Full            Base       City     Marsh.        Full
                         Est.   Traits    Factors    Est.            Est.      Traits    Factors       Est.
                          (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)
                                Dep. Variable is Log Entry Employment in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of City              0.304      0.306      0.306     0.301       0.499      0.511     0.530        0.516
Population              (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.013)    (0.013)   (0.014)      (0.013)
Log of Employment        0.448      0.431      0.404     0.401       0.720      0.610     0.586        0.566
in City-Industry        (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.020)    (0.017)   (0.018)      (0.017)

City Characteristics:
Share of Population                 0.012                0.010                  -0.067                 -0.084
with Bachelors Ed.                 (0.005)              (0.005)                (0.017)                (0.017)
Share of Population                 -0.002               -0.004                 0.021                  0.005
under 20 in Age                    (0.006)              (0.006)                (0.018)                (0.018)
Share of Population                 0.008                0.005                  0.146                  0.130
20-40 in Age                       (0.007)              (0.007)                (0.028)                (0.028)
Share of Population                 -0.007               -0.012                 0.006                  -0.014
over 60 in Age                     (0.008)              (0.009)                (0.027)                (0.027)
Cultural Metric of                  0.003                0.005                  -0.017                 -0.010
Predicted Entr. Rates              (0.004)              (0.004)                (0.012)                (0.011)
HHI Index of Mfg.                   0.009                0.021                  0.025                  0.039
Employment in City                 (0.003)              (0.004)                (0.009)                (0.010)
Chinitz Measure of                  0.101                0.092                  0.401                  0.378
Small Suppliers                    (0.007)              (0.007)                (0.020)                (0.021)

Marshallian Factors:
Labor Market                                   0.040     0.018                            0.184        0.047
Strength Metric                               (0.008)   (0.008)                          (0.027)      (0.025)
Inputs / Supplier                              0.032     0.005                            0.044        -0.056
Strength Metric                               (0.008)   (0.009)                          (0.025)      (0.025)
Outputs / Customer                             0.045     0.032                            0.018        0.022
Strength Metric                               (0.008)   (0.007)                          (0.014)      (0.012)
Technology Strength                            0.023     0.042                            0.054        0.079
Metric                                        (0.006)   (0.007)                          (0.016)      (0.016)

Adjusted R-Squared       0.62        0.63      0.62      0.63        0.80        0.81     0.80         0.81
SIC3 Fixed Effects        X           X         X         X            X          X         X           X
Notes: See Table 3.
                                    App. Table 2: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Employments
                                           Unweighted Estimations                                           Weighted Estimations
                        Existing        Add        Add          Add         Add         Existing       Add         Add           Add      Add
                        Industry       Labor +    Chinitz       Tech      Facility      Industry      Labor +     Chinitz       Tech    Facility
                        Structure     I/O Flow    Metric       Flows     Expansions     Structure    I/O Flow     Metric       Flows   Expansions
                           (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)
                                                    Dep. Variable is Log Entry Employment in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment        0.428         0.372       0.366       0.360        0.259         0.663        0.514       0.478      0.471      0.349
in City-Industry        (0.006)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)       (0.020)      (0.018)     (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.018)
Labor Market                           0.065       0.054       0.030        0.024                      0.240       0.128      0.097      0.083
Strength Metric                       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)                    (0.028)     (0.025)    (0.027)    (0.027)
Inputs / Supplier                      0.092       0.052       0.044        0.011                      0.119       -0.023     -0.038     -0.076
Strength Metric                       (0.009)     (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.009)                    (0.028)     (0.029)    (0.028)    (0.028)
Chinitz Measure of                                 0.080       0.080        0.072                                  0.386      0.382      0.321
Small Suppliers                                   (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.007)                                (0.026)    (0.026)    (0.025)
Outputs / Customer                     0.042       0.036       0.032        0.018                      0.017       0.036      0.031      0.020
Strength Metric                       (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007)      (0.007)                    (0.014)     (0.012)    (0.012)    (0.012)
Technology Strength                                            0.061        0.044                                             0.077      0.052
Metric                                                        (0.010)      (0.009)                                           (0.021)    (0.021)
Log Facility Entry by                                                       0.239                                                        0.182
Multi-Unit Firms                                                           (0.007)                                                      (0.011)

Adjusted R-Squared        0.65          0.66       0.66        0.66         0.69           0.82        0.83         0.83       0.83       0.85
City Fixed Effects         X             X          X            X           X              X           X            X          X          X
SIC3 Fixed Effects         X             X          X            X           X              X           X            X          X          X
Notes: See Table 4.
                      App. Table 3: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Employments by Entrant Size
                                     Unweighted Estimations                                          Weighted Estimations
                       Total              Entering Employment Of                   Total                 Entering Employment Of
                       Entry      1-5        6-20        21-100      101+          Entry         1-5        6-20        21-100     101+
                        (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)        (10)
                                             Dep. Variable is Log Entry Employment in New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment      0.360     0.059      0.139       0.239        0.259         0.471        -0.052      0.138      0.297       0.420
in City-Industry      (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.009)       (0.018)      (0.029)     (0.022)    (0.025)     (0.038)
Labor Market           0.030     0.021      0.026       0.026        0.043         0.097        0.205       0.165      0.136       0.163
Strength Metric       (0.009)   (0.010)    (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.013)       (0.027)      (0.055)     (0.038)    (0.041)     (0.075)
Inputs / Supplier      0.044     0.015      0.028       0.056        0.126         -0.038       -0.141      -0.089     -0.066      0.143
Strength Metric       (0.010)   (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.014)       (0.028)      (0.058)     (0.039)    (0.046)     (0.070)
Chinitz Measure of     0.080     0.114      0.114       0.082        0.021         0.382        0.805       0.643      0.583       0.510
Small Suppliers       (0.008)   (0.016)    (0.012)     (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.026)      (0.059)     (0.043)    (0.043)     (0.056)
Outputs / Customer     0.032     0.026      0.026       0.027        0.053         0.031        0.039       0.042      0.059       0.061
Strength Metric       (0.007)   (0.009)    (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.024)     (0.020)    (0.018)     (0.033)
Technology Strength    0.061     0.114      0.097       0.091        0.037         0.077        0.314       0.222      0.229       0.067
Metric                (0.010)   (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.012)      (0.015)       (0.021)      (0.044)     (0.032)    (0.033)     (0.058)

Adjusted R-Squared     0.66      0.53        0.60       0.52         0.29           0.83        0.82         0.84      0.77        0.55
City Fixed Effects      X         X           X           X           X              X           X            X         X           X
SIC3 Fixed Effects      X         X           X           X           X              X           X            X         X           X
Notes: See Table 5.
App. Table 4: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Employments through Natural Advantages
                                  Unweighted Estimations                           Weighted Estimations
                          Existing        Add             Add            Existing         Add            Add
                          Industry       Labor +         Tech            Industry        Labor +        Tech
                          Structure     I/O Flow         Flows           Structure      I/O Flow        Flows
                            (1)              (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)              (6)
                                    Dep. Variable is Log Entry Employment in New Firms by City-Industry
Pred. Log of Empl.         0.424           0.402          0.389            1.000          0.515            0.667
in City-Industry          (0.031)         (0.032)        (0.033)          (0.130)        (0.124)          (0.140)
Pred. Labor Market                         0.089          0.071                           0.384            0.495
Strength Metric                           (0.049)        (0.052)                         (0.155)          (0.165)
Pred. Inputs / Supplier                    -0.146         -0.144                          0.273            0.309
Strength Metric                           (0.050)        (0.050)                         (0.135)          (0.135)
Pred. Outputs /                            0.054          0.054                           0.345            0.373
Customer Strength                         (0.028)        (0.028)                         (0.126)          (0.126)
Pred. Technology                                          0.053                                            -0.312
Strength Metric                                          (0.044)                                          (0.134)

Adjusted R-Squared          0.57            0.58           0.58             0.77           0.77            0.77
City Fixed Effects           X               X              X                X              X               X
SIC3 Fixed Effects           X               X              X                X              X               X
Notes: See Table 6.
                 App. Table 5: Unconditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Counts
                              Unweighted Estimations                         Weighted Estimations
                         Base    City     Marsh.     Full            Base      City     Marsh.       Full
                         Est.   Traits    Factors    Est.            Est.     Traits    Factors      Est.
                          (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)
                                  Dep. Variable is Log Entry Count of New Firms by City-Industry
Log of City              0.318     0.323      0.333     0.326       0.998      1.038     1.100       1.068
Population              (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.009)   (0.009)     (0.039)    (0.039)   (0.040)     (0.040)
Log of Employment        0.130     0.110      0.090     0.085       0.474      0.226     0.180       0.120
in City-Industry        (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.006)   (0.006)     (0.047)    (0.037)   (0.038)     (0.035)

City Characteristics:
Share of Population                0.005                0.003                  -0.311                -0.355
with Bachelors Ed.                (0.005)              (0.005)                (0.053)               (0.052)
Share of Population                -0.017               -0.022                 0.028                 -0.020
under 20 in Age                   (0.007)              (0.007)                (0.042)               (0.043)
Share of Population                0.016                0.010                  0.503                 0.457
20-40 in Age                      (0.008)              (0.008)                (0.086)               (0.088)
Share of Population                -0.018               -0.026                 0.018                 -0.040
over 60 in Age                    (0.010)              (0.010)                (0.064)               (0.065)
Cultural Metric of                 0.001                0.002                  0.020                 0.030
Predicted Entr. Rates             (0.004)              (0.004)                (0.027)               (0.026)
HHI Index of Mfg.                  0.027                0.035                  0.127                 0.140
Employment in City                (0.004)              (0.004)                (0.024)               (0.026)
Chinitz Measure of                 0.125                0.116                  0.967                 0.905
Small Suppliers                   (0.014)              (0.014)                (0.059)               (0.060)

Marshallian Factors:
Labor Market                                  0.069     0.044                            0.566       0.224
Strength Metric                              (0.010)   (0.010)                          (0.072)     (0.064)
Inputs / Supplier                             0.014     -0.022                           0.025       -0.197
Strength Metric                              (0.010)   (0.011)                          (0.074)     (0.073)
Outputs / Customer                            0.057     0.041                            0.080       0.077
Strength Metric                              (0.012)   (0.010)                          (0.044)     (0.038)
Technology Strength                           -0.004    0.025                            0.033       0.148
Metric                                       (0.008)   (0.009)                          (0.046)     (0.045)

Adjusted R-Squared       0.38       0.39      0.38      0.39         0.70       0.73      0.71       0.73
SIC3 Fixed Effects        X          X         X          X           X          X         X          X
Notes: See Table 3.
                                     App. Table 6: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Counts
                                         Unweighted Estimations                                               Weighted Estimations
                        Existing      Add        Add          Add            Add          Existing       Add         Add           Add       Add
                        Industry     Labor +    Chinitz       Tech         Facility       Industry      Labor +     Chinitz       Tech     Facility
                        Structure   I/O Flow    Metric       Flows        Expansions      Structure    I/O Flow     Metric       Flows    Expansions
                           (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)      (9)        (10)
                                                        Dep. Variable is Log Entry Count of New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment        0.120       0.056       0.047          0.037        0.042          0.406       0.020        -0.071      -0.104     -0.008
in City-Industry        (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.005)        (0.048)     (0.038)      (0.036)     (0.035)    (0.029)
Labor Market                         0.086       0.070          0.022        0.017                      0.679        0.395       0.230      0.200
Strength Metric                     (0.010)     (0.010)        (0.011)      (0.009)                    (0.073)      (0.065)     (0.070)    (0.054)
Inputs / Supplier                    0.096       0.042          0.026        0.004                      0.262        -0.098      -0.174     -0.177
Strength Metric                     (0.011)     (0.013)        (0.013)      (0.011)                    (0.071)      (0.073)     (0.071)    (0.051)
Chinitz Measure of                               0.107          0.107        0.092                                   0.979       0.954      0.611
Small Suppliers                                 (0.016)        (0.016)      (0.014)                                 (0.075)     (0.073)    (0.049)
Outputs / Customer                   0.048       0.040          0.033        0.020                      0.046        0.094       0.069      -0.004
Strength Metric                     (0.012)     (0.010)        (0.010)      (0.008)                    (0.039)      (0.036)     (0.034)    (0.021)
Technology Strength                                             0.122        0.090                                               0.411      0.266
Metric                                                         (0.013)      (0.012)                                             (0.056)    (0.048)
Log Facility Entry by                                                        0.336                                                          0.186
Multi-Unit Firms                                                            (0.012)                                                        (0.008)

Adjusted R-Squared        0.45        0.45       0.46            0.46        0.56           0.76         0.77            0.79    0.79        0.84
City Fixed Effects         X           X          X               X           X              X            X               X       X           X
SIC3 Fixed Effects         X           X          X               X           X              X            X               X       X           X
Notes: See Table 4.
                         App. Table 7: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Counts by Entrant Size
                                     Unweighted Estimations                                             Weighted Estimations
                      Total               Entering Employment Of                       Total                Entering Employment Of
                      Entry       1-5        6-20        21-100         101+           Entry        1-5        6-20        21-100     101+
                        (1)       (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)      (9)      (10)
                                                   Dep. Variable is Log Entry Count of New Firms by City-Industry
Log of Employment      0.037     0.007      -0.014         -0.013       -0.006         -0.104      -0.243       -0.439      -0.579    -0.049
in City-Industry      (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)        (0.008)      (0.008)        (0.035)     (0.040)      (0.063)     (0.143)   (0.069)
Labor Market           0.022     0.018      0.030          0.024        0.019          0.230       0.263        0.407       0.627     0.426
Strength Metric       (0.011)   (0.011)    (0.013)        (0.017)      (0.020)        (0.070)     (0.096)      (0.163)     (0.369)   (0.405)
Inputs / Supplier      0.026     -0.002     0.023          0.040        -0.022         -0.174      -0.277       -0.334      -0.607    -1.234
Strength Metric       (0.013)   (0.013)    (0.014)        (0.020)      (0.027)        (0.071)     (0.082)      (0.139)     (0.370)   (1.133)
Chinitz Measure of     0.107     0.108      0.070          0.031        0.009          0.954       1.026        1.320       1.823     0.990
Small Suppliers       (0.016)   (0.017)    (0.013)        (0.010)      (0.007)        (0.073)     (0.092)      (0.164)     (0.351)   (0.803)
Outputs / Customer     0.033     0.032      0.037          0.052        0.047          0.069       0.073        0.176       0.463     0.465
Strength Metric       (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.013)        (0.024)      (0.047)        (0.034)     (0.034)      (0.069)     (0.199)   (0.433)
Technology Strength    0.122     0.120      0.110          0.075        0.021          0.411       0.489        0.668       0.775     0.542
Metric                (0.013)   (0.014)    (0.017)        (0.019)      (0.032)        (0.056)     (0.075)      (0.132)     (0.269)   (0.563)

Adjusted R-Squared     0.46      0.38        0.24           0.10        0.00           0.79         0.74            0.62    0.39      0.07
City Fixed Effects      X         X           X              X           X              X            X               X       X         X
SIC3 Fixed Effects      X         X           X              X           X              X            X               X       X         X
Notes: See Table 5.
    App. Table 8: Conditional Estimations of Mfg. Entry Counts through Natural Advantages
                                  Unweighted Estimations                          Weighted Estimations
                          Existing        Add             Add           Existing         Add            Add
                          Industry       Labor +         Tech           Industry        Labor +        Tech
                          Structure     I/O Flow         Flows          Structure      I/O Flow        Flows
                            (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)
                                     Dep. Variable is Log Entry Count of New Firms by City-Industry
Pred. Log of Empl.         0.397          0.391          0.346            1.993          1.070         1.193
in City-Industry          (0.033)        (0.036)        (0.037)          (0.283)        (0.343)       (0.339)
Pred. Labor Market                        0.125          0.064                           1.425         1.514
Strength Metric                          (0.059)        (0.060)                         (0.377)       (0.442)
Pred. Inputs / Supplier                   -0.232         -0.226                          -0.373        -0.344
Strength Metric                          (0.061)        (0.060)                         (0.306)       (0.318)
Pred. Outputs /                           0.033          0.033                           0.704         0.727
Customer Strength                        (0.037)        (0.036)                         (0.255)       (0.262)
Pred. Technology                                         0.184                                         -0.252
Strength Metric                                         (0.058)                                       (0.443)

Adjusted R-Squared          0.44          0.44           0.44             0.75           0.76          0.76
City Fixed Effects           X             X              X                X               X            X
SIC3 Fixed Effects           X             X              X                X               X            X
Notes: See Table 6.
