                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      FIXED COSTS AND LONG-LIVED INVESTMENTS

                                         Christopher L. House

                                         Working Paper 14402
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14402


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




I gratefully acknowledge the comments of Lutz Kilian, John Leahy, Ana-Maria Mocanu, Matthew
Shapiro, Nancy Stokey, Gianluca Violante, Caroline Weber, and seminar participants at the University
of Michigan, Ohio State University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York University,
NYU Stern, the NBER Monetary Economics group and the Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics
(SITE). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Christopher L. House. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Fixed Costs and Long-Lived Investments
Christopher L. House
NBER Working Paper No. 14402
October 2008
JEL No. E22,E32

                                               ABSTRACT

Neoclassical investment models predict that firms should make frequent, small adjustments to their
capital stocks. Microeconomic evidence, however, shows just the opposite — firms make infrequent,
large adjustments to their capital stocks. In response, researchers have developed models with fixed
costs of adjustment to explain the data. While these models generate the observed firm-level investment
behavior, it is not clear that the aggregate behavior of these models differs importantly from the aggregate
behavior of neoclassical models. This is important since most of our existing understanding of investment
is based on models without fixed costs. Moreover, models with fixed costs have non-degenerate, time-varying
distributions of capital holdings across firms, making the models extremely difficult to analyze. This
paper shows that, for sufficiently long-lived capital, (1) the cross-sectional distribution of capital holdings
has virtually no bearing on the equilibrium and (2) the aggregate behavior of the fixed-cost model
is virtually identical to that of the neoclassical model. The findings are due to a near infinite elasticity
of investment timing for long-lived capital goods — a feature that fixed-cost models and neoclassical
models share. The analysis shows that the so-called "irrelevance results" obtained in recent numerical
studies of fixed-cost models are not parametric special cases but instead reflect fundamental properties
of long-lived investments.


Christopher L. House
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
238 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
chouse@umich.edu
                                    I. INTRODUCTION
Conventional neoclassical investment models typically assume that capital adjustment
costs rise smoothly with investment and thus predict that firms should make frequent,
small adjustments to their capital stocks. Microeconomic evidence, however, shows that
many firms make infrequent, large adjustments to their capital stocks. Motivated by the
micro-evidence, researchers have developed investment models that feature fixed costs of
adjustment. While these models generate the observed firm-level investment behavior, it
is not clear whether the aggregate equilibrium behavior of such models differs
significantly from the equilibrium behavior generated by more conventional investment
models. Several prominent numerical studies of calibrated DSGE models with fixed
adjustment costs suggest that there may be only minor differences between the two
models. The cause of these “irrelevance results” is typically attributed to consumption
smoothing forces present in general equilibrium settings. The irrelevance results have
been contested by other researchers on the grounds that they hold only for some
parameter values and are not a general feature of equilibrium models with fixed costs.
       The aggregate behavior of models with fixed adjustment costs is important for
several reasons.    Much of our existing understanding of investment is based on
neoclassical models that abstract from fixed adjustment costs. Because the earlier models
contrast sharply with the microeconomic evidence, researchers are justifiably concerned
that policy conclusions or econometric predictions based on these models may be
misleading.    On the other hand, if the aggregate behavior of the two modeling
frameworks is similar, then the apparent failure of conventional neoclassical models at
the micro level does not necessarily imply that we need to abandon neoclassical modeling
techniques to analyze aggregate investment. Indeed, there may be reasons to prefer the
neoclassical framework. Unlike neoclassical investment models, fixed-cost models are
analytically very cumbersome. Models with fixed costs typically have non-degenerate
distributions of capital across firms. The distribution is a time-varying object which
enters the models as an additional state variable and makes the models extremely difficult
to analyze, particularly in equilibrium settings.
       This paper analyzes the approximate equilibrium behavior of an investment model
where fixed costs matter at the microeconomic level. I focus on long-lived investment




                                              2
goods – investment goods with low rates of economic depreciation. The main insight of
the paper is that, in the face of fixed adjustment costs, optimal investment behavior is
characterized by an extremely high intertemporal elasticity of substitution for investment
purchases. For sufficiently long-lived capital goods (goods with low rates of economic
depreciation), the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is nearly infinite. This property
has a number of implications.
       First, for long-lived investment goods, the underlying distribution of capital
holdings across firms has little bearing on the equilibrium. Because firms are willing to
drastically change the timing of their investments, firms that are bunched up or spread out
relative to the steady state distribution can simply delay or accelerate the timing of their
investment purchases to avoid high prices or take advantage of low prices. Thus, the
high intertemporal elasticity of investment timing effectively breaks the link between the
distribution of firms’ capital holdings and aggregate investment, thereby eliminating any
role for the cross-sectional distribution at the aggregate level.
       Second, the near infinite elasticity of investment timing is a property that the
fixed-cost model shares with the neoclassical investment model.           In an instructive
limiting case in which the economic depreciation rate approaches zero, the equilibrium in
the fixed-cost model corresponds exactly to the equilibrium in the neoclassical model.
Thus, at the aggregate level, investment and investment prices, particularly for long-lived
capital goods, can be accurately analyzed with traditional, neoclassical investment
models. While the traditional models cannot match the behavior of the firms at the
microeconomic level, they provide an easy, reliable guide to aggregate behavior, policy
analysis and empirical predictions. This finding supports the recent “irrelevance results”
in Thomas [2002] and Veracierto [2002]. Indeed, rather than being an artifact of a
particular calibration, the irrelevance results reflect deep, fundamental properties of
investment models with long-lived capital goods.
       In contrast to the received wisdom of the literature, the source of the equivalence
between neoclassical models and fixed-cost models is not consumption smoothing per se.
Because both neoclassical and fixed-cost models have high intertemporal elasticities for
the timing of investment, anything that causes the effective price of new capital goods to
increase with aggregate investment will make the models difficult to distinguish with




                                               3
aggregate data.    Thus, an increasing quadratic adjustment cost in a neoclassical
framework and an upward-sloping supply curve in the fixed-cost model will result in the
same equilibrium paths provided that the elasticity of the marginal cost of investment is
the same in each case. Consumption smoothing in DSGE models is but one source of an
increasing marginal cost of investment and is not the key cause of the equivalence
between the models.
       I supplement the approximate analytical results with numerical analysis. The
analysis shows that the limiting approximations are highly accurate even for realistic
depreciation rates away from the low-depreciation limit.        Among other things, the
numerical analysis shows that while there are substantial variations in the cross-sectional
moments of the distribution, these moments provide little information on the evolution of
future prices and investment.
       The remainder of the paper is set out as follows: Section II presents background
information and provides a brief overview of the related literature. Section III presents
the basic model and analyzes the equilibrium in the low depreciation limit. Section IV
presents a numerical analysis of the model and considers the quantitative performance of
the limiting analysis in environments with realistic depreciation rates.         Section V
concludes.


                   II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED LITERATURE
In micro data, plant level investment is characterized by long periods of relative inaction
punctuated by episodes of high investment. Thus, rather than spreading investments over
time, firms make large, infrequent adjustments to their capital stocks. Doms and Dunne
[1998] show that, for U.S. manufacturing, most plants experience at least one year in
which their capital stock rises by at least 50 percent. For many establishments, half of all
plant-level investment spending over a 17-year horizon is concentrated in the three years
surrounding the year with the plant’s greatest investment. Cooper et al. [1999] show that
each year, roughly 1 out of every 5 manufacturing plants experiences an “investment
spike,” which they define as an increase in plant-level capital of at least 20 percent.
Aggregate variation in investment spikes accounts for the bulk of the variation in U.S.
manufacturing investment. Gourio and Kashyap [2007] show that the aggregate variation




                                             4
in investment spikes is primarily driven by changes in the number of firms experiencing
spikes rather than changes in the average size of spikes.1 Taken as a whole, the evidence
from the micro-data stands in stark contrast to the predictions of standard neoclassical
investment models with convex adjustment costs (e.g., Abel [1982], Hayashi [1982] and
Summers [1981]). Models with fixed costs rationalize the lumpy investment behavior
seen in the data. To avoid paying the fixed cost, firms make infrequent, large changes to
their capital stock.
        Unlike earlier convex models, investment models with fixed costs are difficult to
solve even in partial equilibrium settings and are often completely intractable in general
equilibrium. Indeed, much of the recent literature focuses simply on numerically solving
such models. The difficulty in solving these models arises because not all firms have the
same capital stock. At any point in time, some firms have old, outdated capital and are
likely to adjust in the near term while other firms have recently adjusted and will not
purchase new capital for quite some time. The distribution of capital stocks changes
whenever shocks or policies disturb the market. Thus, to solve the model, one must keep
track of an endogenous, time-varying distribution of capital holdings across firms.
        Because the position and dynamics of the distribution of capital holdings can
influence the equilibrium, the distribution often plays a prominent role in the questions
posed by the literature on fixed costs. For example, suppose there is an unusually large
number of firms with relatively old capital. This situation might be thought of as “pent-
up demand.” In this case, one would expect to see a predictable surge of demand in the
near term as these firms update their capital. Thus, investment prices would be high in
the short-run and fall as time passes. The opposite scenario is also possible. If many
firms recently adjusted, then there would be few firms that currently need new capital.
This situation might be thought of as “capital overhang.”                  In this case, investment
demand and prices should be unusually low in the near term. Only later, when the other
firms’ capital depreciates sufficiently, will investment demand recover.                    Moreover,

1
  Doms and Dunne [1998] and Cooper et al. [1999] base their findings on data from the Longitudinal
Research Database (LRD), which includes most U.S. manufacturing plants. Gourio and Kashyap [2007]
use both LRD and Chilean data on manufacturing plants. (See also Fuentes and Gilchrist [2005] and
Fuentes et al. [2006].) Like Cooper et al. [1999], Gourio and Kashyap define investment spikes to be
increases in plant-level capital of 20 percent or more and show that variation in aggregate investment is
associated with variation in aggregate investment spikes. (See also Cooper and Haltiwanger [2006].)




                                                   5
economic policies could have different effects in each case. In the pent-up demand case,
a tax subsidy might have a considerable impact on investment since there are many firms
close to the point at which they would invest. In the capital overhang case, because there
are very few firms with low capital stocks, the same subsidy might have little effect.2 In
theory, each different configuration of the distribution could imply a different equilibrium
outcome and have different policy implications.
        The cross-sectional distribution of capital thus presents both a problem and an
opportunity for researchers. Accounting for the equilibrium behavior of an endogenous
distribution is computationally and analytically very difficult. The combination of an
incredibly large state space (the distribution) and highly non-linear behavior on the part
of firms makes fixed-cost models difficult to analyze even in numerical settings. At the
same time, variations in the cross sectional distribution could have rich implications for
the study of investment behavior and policy analysis.
        While many researchers have analyzed models of investment with heterogeneous
agents and fixed costs, most of the well known results in this area come from models of
individual firms taking prices as given.3 Caballero and Engel [1999] assume that all
supply curves are perfectly elastic. This is tantamount to working in a partial equilibrium
framework since, with perfectly flat supply curves, investment decisions of other firms
have no influence on equilibrium prices. Adda and Cooper [2000] analyze a model of
consumer durables with discrete replacement. Like Caballero and Engel, Adda and
Cooper assume that prices, though stochastic, are independent of aggregate investment.
In both cases, the complexity that arises from the distribution is suppressed.
        Because obtaining analytical results for models with fixed costs in equilibrium
settings is difficult, much of the progress in this area has been made with numerical
studies of particular dynamic models.4 Using numerical techniques, Thomas [2002] and

2
  Adda and Cooper [2000] present a dynamic analysis of a French automobile scrapping subsidy with
implications exactly in this spirit.
3
  See, among others, Abel and Eberly [1994], Bertola and Cabellero [1990], Cabellero [1993], Caballero
and Leahy [1996], Caballero and Engel [1999], Cooper and Haltiwanger [1993], Cooper et al. [1999], Dixit
and Pindyck [1994], and Eberly [1994]. For studies that confine attention to steady state analysis, see,
Caplin and Spulber [1987], Hendel and Lizzeri [1999, 2002], House and Leahy [2004], House and
Ozdenoren [2007], and Stolyarov [2002]. Caplin and Leahy [1991, 1997] make the simplifying assumption
that firm-level investment demand does not react to endogenous changes in the distribution of firms.
4
  Typically, analytical results require strong assumptions to facilitate analysis. See Danziger [1999] for a
closed-form analysis of a model with fixed costs. Gertler and Leahy [2006] adapt Danziger’s approach to a




                                                     6
Veracierto [2002] find that calibrated DSGE models with fixed costs behave almost
identically to conventional DSGE models that abstract from such micro-frictions.
Thomas [2002] and Khan and Thomas [2007] attribute these “irrelevance results” to the
consumption smoothing motives of the representative household in their models. Gourio
and Kashyap [2007] and Bachmann, et al. [2008] have challenged these results on the
grounds that they hold only for certain parameter values and are not general properties of
models with fixed adjustment costs. While numerical analysis has advanced rapidly in
recent years, numerical techniques are limited to solving and cataloging particular cases.
Furthermore, the techniques required are still quite cumbersome and the underlying
economic forces at play are often obscured. The main objective of this paper is to shed
light on these forces.


                                              III. MODEL
The basic structure of the model is inspired by the model in Caplin and Leahy [2004,
2006]. The model is in continuous time. The demand side of the model consists of a
continuum of firms (measure one) that maximize their discounted profits net of
investment costs. Firms discount the future at the discount rate r . Each firm owns a
stock of capital k , which depreciates exponentially at the rate δ . Because I focus on
long-lived investment goods, I assume the depreciation rate is less than five percent
annually. Flow profits are A(t ) k (t )α , where 0 < α < 1 and A(t ) is a shock to the
profitability of capital. When a firm adjusts its capital stock, say from k to k ' , it incurs
two costs. The first is a fixed cost of adjustment F > 0 , which is paid whenever
investment at the firm is non-zero. The second is a cost per-unit of investment given by
p (t ) ⋅[ k '− k ] . To make matters simple, I assume that when a firm adjusts, it must adjust

to a fixed level of capital k . (The assumption of a constant reset level is innocuous. I
discuss this assumption further later.) Thus, the firm’s problem is simply to decide when


more conventional model of price rigidity. Caplin and Leahy [2006] assume that idiosyncratic depreciation
shocks smooth out the distribution over time thus simplifying the solution. Feasible numerical approaches
have only recently been made available. Krusell and Smith [1997, 1998] assume that expectations are
based on a small number of moments of the distribution rather than on the entire distribution (see also Rios-
Rull [1999]). Other approaches use additional heterogeneity to make the model differentiable so that linear
methods can be used. For examples of the latter, see Dotsey, et al. [1999], Thomas [2002], Veracierto
[2002], Khan and Thomas [2003] and King and Thomas [2006].




                                                     7
to adjust. If the firm doesn’t adjust, its capital stock obeys k = −δ k . If the firm makes
an adjustment at time T, it jumps from its current capital stock k (T ) to the reset level of

capital k and incurs the adjustment cost p(T ) ⋅ ⎡⎣⎢ k − k (T )⎤⎦⎥ + F .

         To focus attention on the demand side of the model, the supply side is
intentionally kept as simple as possible. The flow supply of investment is governed by an
investment supply curve p(t ) = z (t ) ⋅ S ( I (t )) .          I (t ) is the flow supply of aggregate
investment, p(t ) is the prevailing market price of new investment goods and z (t ) is an

investment supply shock. The supply curve is upward sloping ( S ' > 0 ) and S (0) = 0 .

Note that the model has no representative consumer and thus has no direct role for
consumption smoothing as emphasized in the DSGE literature.
         A perfect-foresight equilibrium is a fixed point in prices. Taking the price path
p(t ) and the productivity path A(t ) as given, firms make optimal investment decisions.
The investment decisions imply a time path for aggregate investment
                                                       ∞
                                          I (t ) = ∫       f ( s, t ) i ( s, t ) ds ,                    (1)
                                                    0

where f (t , s ) is the date t measure of firms with capital of age s and i ( s, t ) is optimal

investment for a firm at date t that last adjusted s periods ago. Aggregate investment then
implies a price path p '(t ) = z (t ) ⋅ S ( I (t )) . Equilibrium requires p '(t ) = p (t ) .
         Obtaining analytical results for equilibrium models with fixed costs is virtually
impossible. Consequently, almost all results for these models come from numerical
examples (the solution of which is also quite difficult). The difficulty in solving the
model arises from the presence of the time-varying distribution f – an infinite-
dimensional, endogenous state variable. The strategy I follow in this paper is to derive
approximate analytical results by establishing some basic properties of firm behavior and
incentives in the steady state. These properties can be used to analyze the approximate
behavior of the system away from the steady state. I then use numerical techniques to
confirm the approximate analytical results.




                                                       8
                  3.1 The Optimal Timing of Investment in the Steady State
In the steady state, the price level and the level of productivity are constant. I normalize
both the steady state price (p) and steady state productivity (A) to be 1. Let V denote the
steady state value of having k units of capital and behaving optimally. The optimization
problem of a typical firm is to choose a time to adjust T to maximize
                                                       α
                      V (T ) = ∫ e−rt (e−δt k ) dt + e−rT ⎣⎡V − F ⎦⎤ − e−rT ⎡⎢⎣ k − e−δT k ⎤⎦⎥ .
                                    T
                                                                                                        (2)
                                0

The first order condition for the optimal choice of T is
                                              α
                            VT (T ) = (k (T )) − r ⎡⎢⎣V − F − k ⎤⎥⎦ − (r + δ ) k (T ) = 0 ,             (3)

where k (T ) = e−δT k . At the optimum, the loss the firm would incur by waiting a bit

more (dT) is zero. The first term in VT is the gain the firm would get by using its existing
capital stock more. The second term reflects the fact that waiting delays the payoff
V − F − k > 0 . The last term shows that the firm also suffers by delaying the resale of
its existing capital and because the capital stock deteriorates, reducing its resale value. At
the optimum, all of these forces balance and the firm is indifferent between adjusting and
waiting.
        The second order condition shows what happens to the first-order costs and
benefits as the firm delays or accelerates adjustment.                     The second order condition
requires

                                           δ k (T ) ⎡⎢αk (T ) − (r + δ )⎤⎥ > 0 .
                                                             α−1
                                                                                                        (4)
                                                     ⎣                   ⎦
Condition (4) says that if it is optimal to adjust at time T, then the marginal product of
                                                 α−1
capital when the firm adjusts αk (T )                  must be strictly greater than the user cost of

capital r + δ . The difference between the marginal product and the user cost plays an
important role in the analysis. I refer to this difference as the Jorgenson gap and denote it
                      α−1
as G (δ , T ) = αk (T )     − (r + δ ) .

        While I do not allow the firm to choose its reset level of capital k , I assume that
k is optimal in the steady state. If the firm adjusts every T periods, and has a reset
capital level k , then I can write V as




                                                           9
                                                        ⎧⎪ 1− e−(r +αδ )T                                     ⎫
                      V (k , T ) =
                                       1
                                                       ⎨⎪k
                                                           α
                                                                          − e−rT        ⎡ F + k (1− e−δT )⎤ ⎬⎪⎪ ,            (5)
                                     1− e−rT           ⎪     r + αδ                     ⎢⎣                ⎥⎦ ⎪
                                                      ⎩⎪                                                     ⎭⎪
                                                                   α
                                                 e−rt ⎡⎢⎣ e−δt k ⎤⎥⎦ dt = k α ⎡⎢1− e−(r +αδ )T ⎤⎥ [ r + αδ ] . If the firm
                                             T                                                              −1
where I have used the fact that          ∫  0                                  ⎣                ⎦

could choose its reset capital stock, then k would solve max k V (k , T ) − k . The first     {                }
order condition for k would require
                                                            ⎛1− e−(r +αδ )T ⎞⎟⎛ r + δ ⎞
                                α ⎡⎢⎣ k (δ , T )⎤⎥⎦
                                                      α−1
                                                            ⎜⎜                ⎟⎜            ⎟
                                                             ⎜⎜ 1− e−(r +δ )T ⎟⎟⎝⎜⎜ r + αδ ⎠⎟⎟ = r + δ ,                     (6)
                                                             ⎝                ⎠

where I have written k (δ , T ) to reflect the dependence of the optimal reset level on the

parameters δ and T. One can show that the marginal product of capital at k is less than
the user cost r + δ . For reference, I let k J denote the capital stock at which the standard
                                                 α−1
user cost relation holds, so α ⎡⎢⎣ k J ⎤⎥⎦             = r + δ . Thus, k exceeds the frictionless capital

stock k J , which in turn exceeds the capital stock at the optimal adjustment horizon
k (T ) . Note that limT →0 k (δ , T ) = k J , so as the horizon T gets shorter, the normal user

cost relationship emerges. Figure 1 shows the relationship between k (T ) , k J , k (δ , T )

and the Jorgenson gap G (δ , T ) .

         It is easy to show that the condition VT (k , T ) = 0 implies condition (3). This first

order condition gives the optimal T for any given k and any F. Alternatively, I can
invert the first order condition to find a fixed cost F (δ , T ) > 0 that rationalizes a given

adjustment horizon T and a given k (δ , T ) . I prefer to cast the problem in terms of

adjustment horizons (T) rather than fixed costs (F) since firms’ adjustment horizons are
more easily observed than are their fixed costs. Thus, in what follows, I devote relatively
little attention to the magnitude of the fixed costs themselves and instead focus on the
length of time it takes firms to adjust. In Cooper et al. [1999], 18 percent of firms
experience an investment spike each year implying an average adjustment horizon of
roughly five to six years.




                                                                 10
                        3.2 The Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution.
In this section I demonstrate that firms in the fixed-cost model have very high
intertemporal elasticities of substitution for the timing of investment purchases. This
high intertemporal elasticity is the key observation that allows us to analyze the solution.
It is also a property that fixed-cost models share with neoclassical investment models.
        Consider the loss to the firm from adjusting early or late by an amount dT . The
loss from this suboptimal behavior is L (dT ) = V (T ) −V (T + dT ) , which, to a second

order approximation, is
                                                 1
                                      L (dT ) ≈ − V ''(T )(dT ) > 0 .
                                                               2

                                                 2
Since T is optimal, we can use (3) and (4) to show that
                     L (dT )         1 ⎡             G (δ , T )         ⎤
                                                                        ⎥ (dT )2 < 1 δα (dT )2 .
                                    ≈ δα ⎢⎢                            ⎥                              (7)
                  r ⎡⎢⎣V − F − k ⎤⎥⎦ 2 ⎢⎣ G (δ , T ) + (1− α )(r + δ ) ⎥⎦          2

Equation (7) says that the loss relative to the annuity value of the firm’s profits is less

than δα (dT ) / 2 . To put this in quantitative terms, consider compensating the firm to
              2



invest one year in advance ( dT = 1 ). If the annual depreciation rate were four percent
( δ = .04 ) and if α = .5 , then the left-hand side of (7) would need to be no greater than
.01. That is, the firm would require only one percent of its annual flow profits in
compensation for adjusting early (or late) by one year. Equation (7) also shows that the
loss is related to the size of the Jorgenson gap G (δ , T ) . If G (δ , T ) is small, then the loss

is even less than δα (dT ) / 2 .
                            2



        This finding – that losses from adjusting early or late even by large amounts are
small relative to flow profits – provides our first glimpse into why the underlying
distribution of firms has little influence on the aggregate behavior of investment. Figure
2 plots two distributions of firms’ capital holdings in an environment in which firms
adjust every 10 years in the steady state. The shaded rectangle represents the steady state
distribution of capital holdings. The steady state distribution is uniform. There is an
equal number of firms with capital of every age. The heavy dark line represents an
extreme alternate distribution in which the firms are concentrated on only five capital
vintages. Each vintage is owned by 1/5 of the firms and there are no other capital



                                                  11
vintages. In fact, because the firms are so willing to retime their investments, this
distribution is much closer to the steady state distribution than it appears. Suppose we
modify the usual profit maximization requirement for equilibrium and instead require that
firms only come within ε > 0 of maximum profits. This relaxed version of equilibrium
is sometimes referred to as an ε -equilibrium (see Everett [1957]). With the parameter
values above, adjusting early or late by one year costs the firm at most one percent of its

annual flow profits.                               (                     )
                              If ε = (0.01) r ⎡⎢⎣V − F − k ⎤⎥⎦ , then the steady state price and

investment paths p (t ) = p = 1 and I (t ) = I for all t constitute an ε -equilibrium for both

the steady state distribution and the extreme distribution. Even though the distribution
looks starkly different from uniform, it is actually within ε of the steady state.
        Returning to strictly optimal firm behavior, consider the change in payoffs from a
small change in the purchase price of capital dp. In this case, the change in the payoff is
simply −dp ⎡⎢⎣ k − k (T )⎤⎥⎦ . Putting this loss relative to the annuity value of profits gives

                                   L (dp )           ⎡             eδT −1              ⎤
                                                 = α ⎢⎢                                ⎥ (dp ) ,
                                                                                       ⎥                              (8)
                              r ⎡⎢⎣V − F − k ⎤⎥⎦     ⎣⎢ G (δ , T ) + (1 − α )( r + δ ) ⎦⎥
which is positive if prices rise and negative if they fall. Using (7) we can solve for the
price change required to make the firm indifferent between adjusting now and adjusting
in one year. This price change is
                                       1 G (δ , T )           G (δ , T )
                                                    (dT ) ≈ −            (dT ) .
                                                         2                    2
                                 dp ≈ − δ δT                                                                          (9)
                                       2 e −1                   2T
Not surprisingly, the Jorgenson gap G (δ , T ) again emerges as the central determining

factor for how willing firms are to retime capital purchases in response to price changes.
At this point, it helps to get a sense of the magnitude of the gap.                                    Recall that
                   α−1
G (δ , T ) = αk (T )     − (r + δ ) . If k is optimal, then k (δ , T ) satisfies equation (6) so that

k (T ) = e−δT k (δ , T ) and we can solve directly for G (δ , T ) . To get a simple expression

for G (δ , T ) , notice that (6) suggests that, for small T, the optimal reset level k (δ , T ) is

not far from the frictionless level k J . If we assume that k (δ , T ) ≈ k J , then
                                                             α−1
                           G (δ , T ) ≈ α ⎡⎢⎣ e−δT k J ⎤⎥⎦         − (r + δ ) ≈ δ (r + δ )(1− α )T ,                 (10)




                                                              12
where I have used e(1−α)δT −1 ≈ (1− α ) δT . For example, if T = 10 , δ = .04 , r = .02 , and

α = .5 , then (10) suggests that G (δ , T ) ≈ .012 . Thus, the gap between the marginal

product and the user cost when the firm adjusts is roughly 1 percentage point. Because
the approximation above assumes that k = k J rather than k = k (δ , T ) > k J , the true gap

is actually somewhat smaller than the approximation suggests. Figure 3 plots the exact
G (δ , T ) for several time horizons T and depreciation rates δ .

        We can now use (9) and (10) to find the price change required to induce a firm to
change its investment timing by an amount dT.
                                         1
                                   dp ≈ − δ (r + δ )(1− α )(dT ) .
                                                                2

                                         2
For long-lived investment goods, this price change is very small indeed. Mechanically,
the magnitude of the price change is dominated by the presence of the term δ (r + δ )

which is very small for depreciation rates less than .05.            For example, given the
parameters above, the price change required to induce a firm to change its timing by one
year is roughly dp ≈ −0.0006 or 6 basis points (6/100ths of one percent). By retiming
their investments, the firms will cause investment to be greatly smoothed out at the
aggregate level. The price incentives necessary to achieve this smoothing are so small
that they will not be detectable in data.
        Of course, the quantitative evaluation above depends on parameters. Using a
higher discount rate, or a lower curvature parameter α will increase the price response,
though not by a large amount. Increasing r to .08 or reducing α to zero will both
increase the price change to 12 basis points. (Gourio and Kashyap [2007] use a numerical
model to analyze the effects of changing α .)      Adding economic growth acts like a form

of depreciation. With growth, the price change is −(1/ 2)(δ + g )(r + δ + g )(1− α )(dT ) .
                                                                                            2



If g = .02 , then the price response would again be 12 basis points.
        Another way to see the same point is to compute a price path for which the firm is
indifferent as to when to adjust. If we allow for a time-varying price p (t ) in (2), then the

first-order condition for T is




                                              13
                                                             ⎧⎪                 p (T )                ⎫⎪
                 k (T ) − r ⎢⎣⎡V − F − p (T ) k ⎤⎥⎦ − p (T )⎨⎪(r + δ ) k (T ) −        (            )⎬⎪ = 0 .
                       α
                                                                                         k (T ) − k             (11)
                                                            ⎪⎪
                                                             ⎩                  p (T )               ⎪⎪
                                                                                                      ⎭
If the firm were indifferent between any adjustment horizon, then (11) must hold for all
T. The solution to this differential equation satisfies
                                                       V −F          e−αδt
                                  p (t )(1− e−δt ) =        − k α−1        + e−rt C ,                           (12)
                                                         k          r + αδ
where C is an unknown constant.5 Restricting the path to satisfy p (T ) = 1 we have

                                                        1
                                     p (t ) ≈ 1− e−δT     δ (r + δ )(1− α )(t − T ) .
                                                                                   2

                                                        2
If the gap G (δ , T ) is small, the indifferent price path stays close to the steady state price

    p = 1 . Clearly the price path that makes firms indifferent about when to adjust is more
flat for long-lived capital than for short-lived capital.
           Figure 4 plots several indifferent price paths for various depreciation rates δ
assuming that firms adjust every 10 years in steady state. All of the indifferent price
paths are quite flat. Even for δ = .2 , the firm requires only a 2 percent price cut to adjust
two years early or late. For δ = .05 , a price reduction of only 20 basis points is enough
to cause the firm to delay or accelerate investment by roughly two years. Again, the
important thing to realize is that the indifferent price paths are very close to the steady
state price. Put differently, in the steady state, while it is optimal to adjust at date T, the
firm is willing to adjust at almost any date.


                                               3.3 Implications
In this section I consider the consequences of the near infinite elasticity of investment
demand with respect to anticipated price changes in fixed-cost models. I also compare
the fixed-cost model with a standard neoclassical investment model. The comparison
reveals that the equilibrium behavior of both models can be reduced to a simple supply
and demand system. The supply and demand analysis allows me to summarize how
various shocks influence the equilibrium.



5
    To derive this condition, I assume the reset value V is independent of the time of adjustment T.




                                                        14
Investment Demand. The analysis above shows that slight changes in prices cause firms
to dramatically alter the timing of their investment decisions. For sufficiently long-lived
investment projects and sufficiently patient firms (low δ and low r), the incentive to
delay or accelerate investment in response to predictable price changes is nearly infinite.
Thus, despite the apparent complexity of the fixed-cost model, characterizing its dynamic
behavior is disarmingly simple. Investment demand is approximately summarized by a
perfectly flat demand curve.       The demand curve may shift, but these shifts are
unpredictable. Specifically, the demand curve will shift in response to highly persistent
innovations. If the shocks confronting the firm are short-lived, and thus have little impact
on the long-run value of capital, the demand curve simply remains close to the steady
state price. This continues to be true regardless of whether there are relatively many or
relatively few firms near the steady state adjustment trigger. If there are many firms
considering adjustment, the demand curve shifts to the right. If few firms are at near the
adjustment margin, the demand curve shifts to the left. Because demand is nearly
horizontal, the price is unaffected and the equilibrium quantity of investment is
determined solely by the supply curve.
       The reader may be struck that the implied price path is so close to a partial
equilibrium framework (in which prices are assumed to be fixed), but yet aggregate
investment is not influenced by the micro-level heterogeneity. After all, researchers have
previously found that the distribution of capital has effects in partial equilibrium settings.
Of course, the two results are perfectly consistent. Because firms are so sensitive to price
changes, even a seemingly small departure from perfectly constant prices will cause
dramatic changes in the equilibrium. This is why the early partial equilibrium models
produce results that are in stark contrast to the more recent equilibrium models and is
why partial equilibrium analyses of fixed cost models give such misleading results.
       The near invariance of prices to transitory shocks in equilibrium is why the
assumption of a constant reset capital stock ( k ) has little bearing on the outcome. If
prices changed over time then the firms would optimally vary the reset level. However,
since prices are essentially constant, the optimal reset level is also essentially constant.




                                             15
(Giving the firms the option to vary the reset capital level with prices makes them even
more sensitive to price changes thus enhancing the results even further. 6)


Comparison with Neoclassical Investment Models. The extremely high intertemporal
elasticity of investment demand is a feature that the fixed-cost model shares with
neoclassical investment models and it is why the two models, though very different at the
micro-level, are often indistinguishable at the aggregate level. In neoclassical settings,
firms equate the marginal cost of investment with the marginal benefit of more capital.
Let q (t ) be the marginal benefit of additional capital. In a neoclassical framework,
                                                      ∞
                                        q (t ) = ∫ e−(r +δ )s MP k ( s ) ds ,                                (13)
                                                  t


where MP k ( s ) is the marginal product of capital at time s. For the optimal level of

investment, q (t ) = p (t ) .

        For low δ and low r, there cannot be large predictable movements in the shadow
value of capital q (t ) . With sufficiently long-lived capital and sufficiently short-lived

shocks, one can safely approximate q (t ) with its steady state value q .7 The marginal

value of capital q (t ) is a discounted sum of payoffs.                    If the firm is patient and

depreciation is slow, the integral places substantial weight on terms in the distant future.
Because transitory shocks influence only the first few terms in the integral, they have a
negligible impact on the value of capital and thus q (t ) ≈ q . By affecting most or all of

the terms in the integral, more persistent, long-lasting shocks have a substantial effect on
q (t ) . Nevertheless, since the shadow value is largely determined by the future terms in

(13), q (t ) will remain virtually constant in expected value.

        For sufficiently long-lived capital goods, the investment demand curves implied
by the neoclassical model and the fixed cost model are the same. Because it is nearly
perfectly elastic with respect to predictable variations in prices, investment demand can

6
  Using the numerical model in Section IV, I evaluated the relative performance of a model with a variable
reset capital stock. The outcomes were essentially the same.
7
  Barsky et al. [2007] and House and Shapiro [2008] evaluate the accuracy of this approximation in
neoclassical settings.




                                                      16
be approximately summarized by a flat line at the steady state price. As a result, in the
low-depreciation limit, any differences in equilibrium outcomes reflect differences in the
specification of supply. If supply is the same in the two models, then the equilibrium
outcome in the fixed-cost model and the equilibrium outcome in the neoclassical model
will be virtually identical. More precisely, in the low-depreciation limit, both models
have identical reactions to transitory shocks.        Neither transitory supply shocks nor
transitory demand shocks cause perceptible changes in prices and only supply shocks
cause changes in investment.8


The Distribution of Capital Holdings. The distribution of capital holdings features
prominently in both the theoretical and empirical literature on fixed costs. In theory, the
equilibrium should depend on the cross sectional distribution of capital holdings across
firms. In empirical studies, researchers have tried to test whether observed variations in
the distribution predict future movements in investment and prices. Using LRD data,
Caballero et al. [1995] show that changes in the distribution of capital explain changes in
the responsiveness of investment to shocks. Similar results are in Caballero and Engel
[1999] who use BEA investment data and show that the distribution has predictive power
for aggregate investment.
        The analysis in this paper suggests that, for sufficiently long-lived investments,
variations in the distribution of capital holdings across firms should have no independent
influence on equilibrium investment or prices. In particular, if the only changes to the
system are changes in the distribution, then equilibrium prices and investment should
remain close to their steady state levels. Thus, the model and analysis so far indicate that,
for long-lived investments, the coefficients on moments of the cross-sectional distribution
in forecasting regressions should be close to zero and the increase in predictive power
from adding additional moments should be negligible.              That is, knowledge of the
distribution should provide little to no information regarding the future behavior of
investment or prices.



8
  This is reminiscent of recent work by Jonas Fisher who argues that investment supply shocks are
primarily responsible for aggregate business cycle fluctuations. See Fisher [2006].




                                               17
        Of course, the analysis above is only approximate. Furthermore, the identical
behavior of the neoclassical model and the fixed-cost model, and the irrelevance of the
distribution are results that we should expect only in the low-depreciation limit. In the
next section, I consider a numerical version of the model to assess the accuracy of the
approximate solution and the limiting results. The numerical model shows that the
approximation is accurate even for modest depreciation rates.


                   IV. NUMERICAL ANALYSIS AND APPLICATIONS

Based on the analysis in Section III and the discussion in Section 3.3, we should expect to
observe the following in fixed-cost models for long-lived investments: (1) a temporary
cost shock should have no noticeable effect on the price of new capital but should reduce
equilibrium investment by the amount of the shock; (2) a temporary demand shock
(modeled as a temporary increase in A ) should have virtually no influence on prices or
investment; (3) different initial distributions of capital should have no consequences for
prices or investment; and (4) for sufficiently transitory shocks, the aggregate behavior of
the fixed-cost model should be identical to the aggregate behavior of a conventional
neoclassical investment model.
        In this section I analyze a numerical version of the model in Section III. The
numerical model confirms the limiting analysis of the preceding section and allows me to
evaluate the accuracy of the approximation for realistic parameter values. I begin by
sketching out the broad features of the numerical model. The details of the numerical
solution are in the appendix.


                                   4.1 Quantitative Model
The numerical model is cast in discrete time with time intervals of size Δ . There are
J + 1 possible capital stocks k , k1 , k2 , ..., k J with k j = e−Δj k . The lowest possible

capital stock is k J . Let V j ,t be the value of having capital stock j at time t and let Vt be

the value of having the reset level k at time t.




                                              18
        The numerical solution uses a method developed jointly by Robert King, Julia
Thomas and Marcelo Veracierto.9 The key simplifying assumption of the method is to
assume that firms draw idiosyncratic fixed costs of adjustment each period. Thus, instead
of facing the fixed cost F each period, firm i faces the stochastic fixed cost εi ,t where

εi ,t ∼ Ψ (ε) , E ⎡⎣ εi ,t ⎤⎦ = F , εi ,t ≥ 0 and εi ,t is i.i.d. across periods and across firms. For

purposes of computation, I assume that εi ,t is a mixture of a log-normal random variable

and a wide uniform. Given a time interval Δ , I construct the discount factor β = e−rΔ . I
can then write the value for a firm with cost draw ε , capital stock k = k j at time t as

                             {                                                                                       }
          V j ,t (ε) = max Δ⋅ At k j α + β Et ⎡⎣⎢ v j +1,t +1 ⎤⎦⎥ , Δ⋅ At k α + β Et ⎡⎣ v1,t +1 ⎤⎦ − ε − pt (k − k j ) ,   (14)

where
                                                               ∞
                                                  v j ,t = ∫ V j , t ( ε ) d Ψ ( ε ) .                                     (15)
                                                              0

The marginal firms with capital stock j have critical cost draw
                         εˆ j ,t = Δ⋅ At ⎢⎣⎡ k α − k j α ⎥⎦⎤ + β Et ⎡⎢⎣v1,t +1 − v j +1,t +1 ⎤⎥⎦ − pt (k − k j ) .         (16)

The critical εˆ j ,t is differentiable. Firms with cost draws higher than εˆ j ,t choose not to

adjust and firms with cost draws lower than εˆ j ,t adjust. If a firm with capital stock j

chooses to adjust, its investment is k − k j . Aggregate investment I t is the sum of

individual firm-level investment.
        To close the model, I assume an isoelastic supply curve
                                                                               1
                                                         pt = zt ⋅ ( I t I )ξ .                                            (17)

Here ξ is the elasticity of investment supply, I is steady state investment and zt is a
cost shock with mean 1. The cost shock (z) and the productivity shock (A) are assumed
to have simple autoregressive forms
                                              At +1 = (1− ρ A ) + ρ A At + η A,t +1 ,                                      (18)
                                               zt +1 = (1− ρ z ) + ρ z zt + η z ,t +1 .                                    (19)


9
 Dotsey, King and Wohlman [1999] used this technique to analyze a menu cost model. Thomas [2002]
and Veracierto [2002] used it to analyze investment. King and Thomas [2006] analyze labor adjustment.




                                                             19
        I choose parameter values for illustrative purposes only. The elasticity of supply
ξ is set to 1. The autoregressive parameters ρ z and ρ A are set to imply a 6-month half-

life of the shocks and, together with the variances of the innovations η z and η A , imply an
unconditional variance of one percent for z and A.10 I set the discount rate r to 2 percent
annually. I set the parameter α to 0.35 and I set T to 10 so that firms adjust once every
ten years in steady state. I choose a ten year adjustment horizon because it is both a
plausible calibration and also a good number for expositional purposes. Since ten years
is less frequent than the frequency of investment spikes in the Cooper et al. [1999] study
(between five and six years), the fixed costs implied by the baseline calibration are
greater than the data require. The baseline parameter values are summarized in Table 1.
        Because it plays a central role in governing the system, I consider several
different depreciation rates.           By definition, long-lived capital goods have low
depreciation rates.       I consider a capital good to be long-lived if it has an annual
depreciation rate less than five percent. Examples of such goods include manufacturing
structures, commercial office buildings, electrical transmission and distribution
apparatus, telecommunications structures, and so forth. Most structures are long-lived
capital goods (structures typically have depreciation rates between two and four percent).
Because structures make up roughly thirty percent of all non-residential investment, long-
lived investments are not a trivial fraction of investment activity. The baseline annual
depreciation rate δ is 5 percent.


                                      4.2 Quantitative Analysis
I can now assess the accuracy of the analysis from Section III. I begin by considering
temporary supply shocks and temporary demand shocks. I also consider the quantitative
role of the distribution in governing the equilibrium and in forecasting future price
movements.



10
   A 6-month half-life is fairly transitory compared with productivity shocks in the RBC literature. TFP
shocks with quarterly autoregressive roots of 0.95 have half-lives of almost 3.5 years. The 6-month half-
life is a common degree of persistence in the price rigidity literature. Allowing for more persistent shocks
is straightforward. For sufficiently long-lived capital, the neoclassical model and the fixed costs model
behave identically regardless of the persistence.




                                                    20
Supply Shocks. I consider a positive innovation of one percent to zt in equation (17).
This increases the cost of investment and shifts the supply schedule back. I consider five
annual depreciation rates: 0.20, 0.10, 0.05, 0.02 and 0.01. Twenty percent depreciation is
comparable to depreciation rates experienced by computers, software and some vehicles.
Typical business equipment has a depreciation rate of roughly ten percent per year. The
five, two and one percent depreciation rates correspond to depreciation rates of many
structures (e.g., residential investment and business structures have depreciation rates of
roughly two percent. For more on empirical depreciation rates, see Fraumeni [1997]).
       Figure 5 shows the system’s reaction to the temporary cost shock. The top panel
shows the response of aggregate investment. The middle panel shows the response of the
price level and the bottom panel shows the cost shock variable itself (the cost shock is the
same for each depreciation rate). In the figure, as one would expect from the earlier
analysis, the equilibrium price of new investment changes only slightly in response to the
shock. For δ = 0.10 and δ = 0.20 , the increase in prices on impact is roughly 12 basis
points (0.12 percent). For lower depreciation rates the price change is even smaller. For
example, for δ = 0.01 and δ = 0.02 , the increase in prices is roughly 1 basis point
(1/100th the size of the impulse).     Since prices change only slightly, most of the
adjustment to the shock occurs through changes in aggregate investment. For each
depreciation rate, the drop in investment is almost 1.00 percent. For δ = 0.01 and
δ = 0.02 , the drop is 0.99 percent.     For the higher depreciation rates, the drop in
investment is roughly 0.9 percent. This behavior is exactly what the earlier analysis
predicted. The approximation is better for low depreciation rates as the gap G (δ , T )

approaches zero and the elasticity of demand approaches infinity.


Demand Shocks. Figure 6 shows the response to a temporary one percent increase in
productivity At . Since supply is unchanged and since the elasticity of supply is 1.00, the
reactions of prices and investment are identical. As predicted, the changes in prices and
investment are small. For δ = 0.20 and δ = 0.10 , prices and investment rise by roughly
15 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively. For δ = 0.01 and δ = 0.02 , the increases
are 3 basis points and 2.5 basis points. Because the shock is transitory, the value of long-




                                            21
lived capital goods is essentially unaffected.11


A Non-uniform Initial Distribution. I now consider the equilibrium when the system
begins with an out-of-steady-state distribution.12 The initial distribution I consider has an
unusually large number of firms with capital that is five years old.                        To make the
illustration stark, the initial density of firms with capital between 4.5 and 5.5 years old is
twice the density elsewhere. The distribution is shown in the top panel of Figure 7. The
steady state distribution is shown for comparison. Because the out-of-steady-state
distribution has twice as many firms with five-year-old capital, one would anticipate that,
in roughly five years, prices and investment would rise sharply as these firms approach
the adjustment trigger. If firms could not change the timing of investment at all, then
prices and aggregate investment would rise by 100 percent.
         The middle panel of Figure 7 shows the equilibrium path of aggregate investment.
Since the supply curve is stable and the elasticity of supply is 1.00, investment and prices
are identical.     The initial distribution has some influence on the equilibrium.                      The
conventional supply and demand prediction that prices and investment should rise as the
mass of firms adjusts is present in the figure but is quantitatively negligible relative to the
magnitude of the distributional change. Instead of an increase of 100 percent, investment
rises by only one-half of one percent for capital with a ten percent depreciation rate. For
capital with a five percent depreciation rate, the equilibrium increase in investment is
only 20 basis points. The reason the distribution exerts such little influence on the
equilibrium is the high intertemporal elasticity for the timing of investment combined
with a slight increase in prices.
         The middle panel presented results for an elasticity of investment supply of 1.00.
Some estimates of investment supply elasticities are substantially higher than this (see for
example House and Shapiro [2008]).                 If the intertemporal elasticity of investment
demand were literally infinite (as it is in the low-depreciation limit), then the form of the

11
   The near-infinite elasticity of investment demand implies that after-tax prices are constant for temporary
shocks. A temporary investment subsidy increases pre-tax prices by the amount of the subsidy. House and
Shapiro [2008] use this property to estimate ξ following the 2002 bonus depreciation provisions. While
their analysis uses a neoclassical model, the estimates are valid in a model with fixed-costs of adjustment.
12
   This thought experiment is inspired by Gourio and Kashyap [2007] who consider a similar out-of-
equilibrium experiment in their numerical model.




                                                    22
supply curve would not matter at all. Since the elasticity of investment demand is actually
finite, higher supply elasticities will temper the price changes and allow the distribution
to play a slightly greater role. The bottom panel of Figure 7 considers five different
supply elasticities. Each line corresponds to a different value of ξ . The depreciation rate
is set to its baseline value δ = 0.05 . It is remarkable how little influence the supply
elasticity has on the equilibrium. Even with ξ = 20 , the maximum change in aggregate
investment is only 2 percent. Compared to the exogenous 100 percent increase in firms
with five-year-old capital, this is very small. Only for an elasticity of 100 does aggregate
investment react noticeably, and even then by less than 10 percent.


Using the Distribution to Forecast Prices. Another way to quantify the importance of the
distribution of capital holdings it to ask whether it can be used to forecast prices. Firms
care about the distribution only because it contains information about future prices. If the
distribution is important in forecasting prices then the R2 of a forecasting equation should
be higher if we include information about the distribution. The analysis in Section III
suggests that, because the distribution of capital holdings has only minor bearing on the
equilibrium, the improvement in forecasts of future prices (and investment) should be
negligible.
        Consider forecasting equations of the form
                        pt +h = β0 + β p pt + β z zt + β A At + ∑ m βm M tm + et +h ,          (20)

where h is the forecast horizon, the variables M tm are a set of moments of the date t
distribution and e is a reduced-form error. Although any set of moments is admissible, I
consider the number of firms in each fifth of the capital space at time t. Specifically, at
time t, M tm is
                                                           T
                                                       m
                                                           5
                                           M tm =     ∑        T
                                                                   ft (a) ,                    (21)
                                                    a =(m−1)
                                                               5


for m = 1,...,5 and where ft (a ) is the number of firms with capital of age a at time t. In

the steady state, M m = 1/ 5 for all m .




                                                23
           To assess the predictive value of these moments, I use the numerical model to
calculate the asymptotic values of the coefficients in (20).13 I consider the baseline
parameter values and uncorrelated, i.i.d., supply and demand shocks η z and η A . The

shocks are normally distributed with variances that, together with ρ A and ρ z , imply zt

and At have unconditional variances of one percent.

           Table 2 reports the standard deviations of investment I t , price pt , the supply and

demand variables zt and At and the moments M t1 ,..., M t5 from the numerical model.
Table 3 reports estimated coefficients for the forecasting equation (20) for horizons
h = 1, 2, 4 and 8 quarters. The most important forecasting variable is the price itself.
The model implies that prices are very close to a random walk. Thus, while the shocks
have only small impacts on prices, the effects are long-lasting.                         Notice that the
coefficients on the moments, while small, are not zero. The distribution is a true state
variable so it is relevant for forecasting prices. However, the gain in forecast accuracy
measured by the change in R2 as we add more and more moments is negligible ( M t5 is
not included because it is an exact linear combination of the other moments). To a first
approximation, it is reasonable for investors to simply ignore the distribution when
forming expectations about future prices.
           These findings are governed to some extent by parameter values. Table 4 reports
results for several different parameter values. Each row reports the R2 for particular
forecast horizons and specifications (i.e., how many moments are included).                          The
columns consider different parameter values. Column (0) reports results for the baseline
specification. Columns (1) – (9) consider models with baseline parameter values except
for the parameter listed in the column heading. Columns (1) – (3) consider depreciation
rates δ = .02, .10, and .50; (4) – (6) report results for supply elasticities ξ = 5, 10, and
100; (7) – (9) consider curvature parameters α = .50, .15, and .05. Column (10) reports
results from a “myopic” model with δ = .50 , r = .50 , α = .10 and ξ = 5 .
           As in the baseline case, the performance of the forecasting equations is for the
most part unchanged as we include additional moments of the distribution. There are


13
     The results reported below come from a simulation of 100,000 years of quarterly observations.




                                                      24
exceptions. For high depreciation rates (e.g. δ = .50 ) and for high supply elasticities
(e.g. ξ = 100 ), the moments of the distribution matter somewhat. The distribution also
matters more for distant forecast horizons. This is not surprising since the average
adjustment horizon in the model is T = 10. In the myopic calibration, the distribution
matters at almost every horizon.14


                     4.3 Comparison with Neoclassical Investment Models
Because both the fixed-cost model and the neoclassical investment model have extremely
high elasticities of substitution for the timing of investment, the models should be
difficult to distinguish using aggregate data alone. In this section, I solve a standard
neoclassical investment model and compare the equilibrium outcomes with a similarly
calibrated fixed-cost model.
        Figure 8 presents simulated data from both the neoclassical investment model and
the fixed-cost model. The neoclassical model is a standard discrete time investment
model with flow production function At ktα . The supply curve for both models is given
by (17). The parameters of both models are set to the baseline values in Table 1. Both
models are subjected to exactly the same sequence of shocks.
        The upper panels in Figure 8 show results for aggregate investment, while the
lower panels show results for prices. The panels on the left show simulated time series.
The thin black line is the fixed-cost model while the thick grey line is the neoclassical
model. While the time paths for aggregate investment are essentially identical, there are
noticeable differences in the price series. The middle panels show the impulse response
to a cost shock like the one considered in Figure 5. The response of aggregate investment
is identical while the price response displays small differences. The panels on the right
show scatterplots of 500 years of quarterly data. Each dot represents a data point from
the neoclassical model and the corresponding data point from the fixed-cost model.
14
   Careful readers will note that the R2 in Krusell and Smith [1998] are much closer to 1.00 than those
reported here. While the model they study is different, the main cause of the difference is that Krusell and
Smith approximate the contemporaneous pricing function pt ({M tm }) and forecast future prices with an
approximate transition function for the moments themselves Q :{M tm } → {M tm+1} , while I form the price
forecasts directly. Regressing current prices pt on current states zt , At and moments {M tm } , gives an R2
close to 1.00 (essentially regardless of the number of moments included). I thank Gianluca Violante for
particularly helpful comments on this point.




                                                    25
Again, the investment data are virtually the same (all the observations are on the 45
degree line) while the price data display a noticeable difference. This pattern is robust to
wide variations in the parameters.
         Why is aggregate investment so similar across the two models while prices are
not? Two points are worth emphasizing. First, the analysis in Section III said that the
near-infinite elasticity of investment timing would eliminate price fluctuations in
equilibrium. That result, however, was only approximate in nature. While the elasticity
is very high, it is not infinite. The fact that we observe price changes in the simulation
reflects this approximation error.             Since observed changes in prices arise from
imperfections in the approximation, we cannot use the approximations to argue that the
price paths should be identical.
         Second, price changes reflect changes in the equilibrium value of capital. In both
cases, the price is tied to the long-run demand for capital. Unlike the demand for
investment, which can be characterized by a (nearly) flat demand curve, the long-run
demand for capital is downward sloping and the shape of this demand curve depends on
the details of the model. In the neoclassical model, the price reflects the discounted
marginal product of capital. In the fixed-cost model, the price reflects the discounted
average product of capital. Thus, while we can ignore the details of the demand side of
the model when we analyze investment, we cannot ignore these details when we analyze
the long-run demand for capital. Since the price depends on the demand for capital, it is
not surprising that we observe different equilibrium price paths.15


                                    4.4 Relation to DSGE Models.
Most of the other well-known work in this area considers the numerical evaluation of
calibrated DSGE models. Superficially, the investment supply and demand framework
analyzed here—the supply side in particular—may seem fundamentally different from
the DSGE models. Here I briefly consider the relationship of my model to DSGE
models. I pay particular attention to the analog of the supply curve in the GE models.



15
  Caplin and Leahy [2004] use a model with fixed costs and permanent shocks to establish a mapping
between the parameters of the fixed-cost model and the neoclassical model such that the equilibria are the
same. Their analysis requires a key assumption to keep the distribution of capital close to the steady state.




                                                    26
        Consider the following conventional one-good general equilibrium model. A

                                                   Et ∑ j=0 β j {u (Ct + j ) − v ( N t + j )} subject to
                                                            ∞
representative agent maximizes utility

F ( K t , N t ) = Ct + I t and K t +1 = K t (1− δ ) + I t . Here C is consumption, N is labor, F (⋅)

is the production function, I is investment and K is the capital stock.
        The marginal cost of an additional unit of investment at date t is the marginal
utility of consumption u '(Ct ) . The elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption with

respect to investment is the analog of the elasticity of supply in the framework in Section
III. That is, ξ = (∂I ∂ ⎡⎣u '(C )⎤⎦ )×(u '/ I ) . Near the steady state
                                                       −1                 −1
                                      ⎛ v '' F '' ⎞⎟ F ' N ⎛⎜ u '' ⎞⎟ C
                                 ξ = ⎜⎜ N −      N⎟       − ⎜ C ⎟⎟      .                                     (22)
                                     ⎜⎝ v '  F ' ⎠⎟    I    ⎝⎜ u ' ⎠ I
F ' and F '' are the first and second derivatives of the production function F with respect
to labor N. The elasticity of supply will be high if the curvature terms C ⋅ (u '' u ') ,

N ⋅ (v '' v ') and N ⋅ ( F '' F ') are small or if the ratios ( F ' N ) I and C I are large.

        If investment is small relative to total labor product and total consumption, then
large percent changes in investment do not entail large percent changes in either
consumption or labor and thus the percent increase in marginal cost is limited. Likewise,
if the curvature terms are low then there can be large swings in consumption and labor
without large changes in the marginal utility of consumption, the marginal disutility of
                                                                                                   1− 1
labor, or the marginal product of labor. Consider the standard example: u (C ) = C                   σ
                                                                                                          ,
            1+ 1
v(N ) = N      η
                   and F ( K , N ) = K γ N θ ; σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for

consumption, η is the Frisch labor supply elasticity, and θ is the elasticity of output with
respect to labor. In this case,
                                                    η       Y  C
                                         ξ=                θ +σ .                                             (23)
                                              1 + η (1− θ ) I  I

A reasonable calibration might be σ = 0.2 , η = 1/ 2 , and θ = 2 / 3 . If we assume that the
investment to GDP ratio is roughly 0.15 then Y / I ≈ 6.6 and C / I ≈ 5.6 . In this case,
the elasticity implied by (23) is roughly 3. If σ = η = 1 , then the implied elasticity is 8.9.




                                                  27
Based on the analysis above, these calibrations will not permit micro-level heterogeneity
to play a noticeable role in the equilibrium.
       Assuming that the one-good DSGE framework is correct, one could estimate the
parameters and calculate the implied elasticity. In her original paper, Thomas [2002]
calibrates her model so that σ = 1 and η = ∞ , which would seem to be indulging in a
parameterization that gives micro-level heterogeneity a good chance to play a role. The
investment to GDP ratio implied by her model is 0.20. The implied elasticity in her
model is roughly 14. The baseline calibration in Bachmann et al. [2008] has σ = 1 ,
η = ∞ and an investment to GDP ratio of 0.145 implying ξ ≈ 20 . They also consider
σ = 10 , which gives ξ ≈ 73 . Alternatively, one could estimate the elasticity directly.
House and Shapiro [2008] use variation in tax rates to estimate ξ . Their estimates
suggest that ξ is between 6 and 13.


                                      4.5 Discussion.
In this section I explain why the near-infinite intertemporal elasticity of investment
demand is the source of the “irrelevance results” found by the earlier literature. I also
briefly discuss credit constraints, idiosyncratic shocks, and the cyclicality of aggregate
investment.


The Source of the Irrelevance Results. The analysis in this paper strengthens and extends
the “irrelevance results” obtained in many earlier papers on fixed costs in equilibrium
settings. Prominent examples include Thomas [2002], Veracierto [2002], Gourio and
Kashyap [2007], and Khan and Thomas [2003, 2008]. Broadly speaking, these papers
show that the distribution of capital holdings matters if prices are held constant, but the
distributional effects on aggregate investment vanish in general equilibrium.
     The main contribution of this paper is to reveal the source of the irrelevance results.
My numerical results echo the earlier findings in a more general setting, showing that
specific reasons for an upward sloping investment supply schedule are not essential. In
contrast, most of the earlier research attributes the irrelevance results to consumption
smoothing motives. For example, in her 2002 paper Thomas writes (p. 510) that the
“households’ preference for smooth consumption profiles restrains shifts in investment



                                                28
demand. This dampening force plays the predominant role in equilibrium investment
determination and produces the invariance result.”                  The consumption smoothing
incentive results in “pronounced differences in interest rates” (Thomas, p. 527) and
“procyclical real wage(s)” (Thomas, p. 530).              Thus, “equilibrium price movements
smooth the economy’s response to such a degree that distributional effects are
eliminated” (Thomas, p. 511).16
     This reasoning is, however, incomplete. While price movements are a “dampening”
force which “restrains” investment demand, the earlier work did not find that the partial
equilibrium results were dampened; they were eliminated entirely. Moreover, the price
movements at the heart of the explanation are barely detectable in the earlier papers (see
for instance Figures 5 and 6 in this paper, or Figures 4.a and 4.b in Thomas [2002]). The
missing link in the explanation is the near-infinite intertemporal elasticity of investment
demand. Extreme price sensitivity implies that price movements are virtually eliminated
in equilibrium. While the distribution may change, it has no bearing on aggregate
investment because firms are willing to delay or accelerate the timing of their
investments by seemingly large amounts in response to small price changes. The precise
source of price movements is irrelevant. Consumption smoothing and variations in
interest rates play no role in the result. In my model there is no representative consumer
and interest rates are assumed constant.


Idiosyncratic Shocks, Credit Constraints and One-Hoss Shays. The model intentionally
abstracts from a variety of complicating features to expose the mechanisms at work.
Undoubtedly many firms base their investment decisions on factors other than price. For
example, many firms face binding credit constraints when making investment decisions.
Idiosyncratic demand or supply considerations also surely play an important role in
determining investment timing. Some firms simply have to replace capital because of an
unforeseen event like a fire or a flood which might cause their existing capital stock to
fail suddenly – a “one-hoss shay” depreciation process.


16
  This reasoning permeates the literature. In their most recent paper, Khan and Thomas [2008] write that
“movements in relative prices […] eliminate the implications of plant-level nonconvexities for aggregate
dynamics.” The effects disappear because “procyclical […] real wages and interest rates substantially
dampen the changes in plants’ target capital stocks […]” (p. 429).




                                                  29
          Surprisingly, as long as some firms are free to re-time their investments as the
model here assumes, complications like those mentioned above leave the basic results
intact.    Firms that are free to re-time their investments effectively arbitrage away
predictable movements in investment prices.                   The other firms invest as their
circumstances dictate (due to credit conditions or other firm-specific factors).                   The
presence of firms that can freely change the timing of their investments will imply that
the expected price of investment goods remains nearly constant and thus, again,
aggregate investment is determined by investment supply alone.17


The Cyclicality of Aggregate Investment. Aggregate investment is highly cyclical.
Figures 5 and 6 suggest that most variation in aggregate investment comes from
investment supply shocks rather than demand shocks. This is not a necessary feature of
investment in fixed-cost models. The reason demand shocks play such a small role here
is that they are temporary. Permanent (or very long-lasting) changes to the productivity
of capital will shift investment demand and cause sharp changes in both investment and
prices.    In addition, the supply shocks need not be investment-specific.                  A general
technology shock, like that in conventional RBC models, increases both supply and
demand for investment (i.e., a one-percent productivity shock would increase A and z
simultaneously by one percent).
          As seen in the data, most of the fluctuations in aggregate investment in the model
are associated with changes in the number of firms making adjustments. There is some
variation in investment for each firm that adjusts, since, by delaying or accelerating the
timing of investment, the firm influences the size of its capital purchases k − k (T ) .

However, since depreciation is slow, the implied variation in k (T ) is quite small.


Breaking the Irrelevance Result. The reason for the irrelevance results is the
extraordinarily high elasticity of investment demand. A modification that would break
the irrelevance result must interfere directly with this elasticity. Unfortunately, this
elasticity cannot be traced to a single free parameter. Instead, the near-infinite elasticity

17
  Khan and Thomas [2003] numerically demonstrate that idiosyncratic shocks have little impact on the
equilibrium in a DSGE model with fixed investment adjustment costs.




                                                  30
arises naturally in models of long-lived investments. If there is a parameter in the model
that governs this elasticity it is δ (r + δ ) – a combination of parameters that are not

subject to much dispute. For the distribution of capital to play a role at the aggregate
level, there must be some additional friction that tempers the firms’ willingness (or their
ability) to delay or accelerate investment. These frictions could take the form of planning
costs which inhibit the firm’s ability to adjust the timing of their investments, or
information costs which prevent the firms from reacting to small price changes. In any
case, a mechanism that succeeds in breaking the irrelevance result must not only make
demand less elastic, it must do so for virtually all firms in the economy. If some firms
are free to adjust the timing of their investments, the irrelevance result will emerge.


                                     V. CONCLUSION
The study of investment is of central importance to understanding business cycles and
economic activity. The drive to base aggregate theories on solid micro-foundations as
well as the desire to match firm-level investment patterns has led to the development of
complex models of investment behavior at the firm level. Investment models featuring
fixed costs of adjustment are attractive because they imply that investment at the plant-
level will be infrequent, as seen in micro data sets. In this paper, I have analyzed the
approximate equilibrium behavior of a dynamic investment model with fixed adjustment
costs. The analysis shows that for sufficiently long-lived capital goods, the elasticity of
intertemporal substitution for the timing of investment is extremely high.            As the
depreciation rate approaches zero, this elasticity approaches infinity. The near-infinite
elasticity of intertemporal substitution eliminates virtually any role for microeconomic
heterogeneity in governing investment demand. This high elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is a property that conventional neoclassical models of investment demand
and models with fixed costs have in common. Thus, even though simple neoclassical
investment models are starkly at odds with the micro data, they capture virtually all of the
relevant aggregate investment dynamics embodied in models with fixed investment
adjustment costs. This finding is highly robust and explains why researchers working in
the DSGE tradition have found little role for fixed costs in numerical trials. Because the
differences between the two models are small for plausible depreciation rates and vanish




                                             31
in the low-depreciation limit, conventional models offer an easy and accurate vehicle for
economic analysis of investment decisions at the aggregate level.
       Earlier numerical studies demonstrated that in many cases, DSGE models with
fixed costs have aggregate dynamics that are virtually the same as the aggregate
dynamics of conventional DSGE models that ignore fixed costs at the micro-level. My
analysis makes two basic contributions to this research area. First, it shows why the
irrelevance results occur in the numerical studies. The similarity at the aggregate level is
not caused by consumption smoothing in a general equilibrium setting. Rather it is due to
the extreme willingness on the part of firms to adjust the timing of investment to take
advantage of predictable price changes.       The firms are so willing to retime their
investments that in equilibrium there can be no such price changes. With prices pinned
down, aggregate investment is simply determined by the supply curve. Consumption
smoothing is just one example of a source of increasing marginal costs of investment.
Decreasing returns to scale in the production of capital goods, upward sloping labor
supply curves or rising input costs of any sort will all cause marginal costs to rise and
eliminate any meaningful role for fixed costs in governing aggregate investment.
       Second, the analysis suggests mechanisms that could undo the apparent
irrelevance of fixed costs. Specifically, anything which causes firms to resist changing
the timing of their investments can potentially revive the potency of the distribution as a
state variable and thus make the fixed cost model and the neoclassical model behave
differently. These frictions must apply to many, if not all, firms. Frictions such as
idiosyncratic shocks or credit constraints which constrain some firms but not others will
leave the equilibrium largely unchanged as the other firms freely re-time their
investments and eliminate price movements through arbitrage. In the absence of frictions
that inhibit firms’ freedom or incentive to change the timing of investments, fixed cost
models and neoclassical models will display virtually identical aggregate behavior.




                                            32
                                    REFERENCES

Abel, Andrew B. 1982. “Dynamic Effects of Permanent and Temporary Tax Policies in a
q Model of Investment,” Journal of Monetary Economics 9, 353-373.

Abel Andrew B. and Eberly, Janice C. 1994. “A Unified Model of Investment Under
Uncertainty,” American Economic Review. 84(5), pp. 1369-1384.

Adda, Jerome and Cooper, Russell. 2000. “Balladurette and Juppette: A Discrete
Analysis of Scrapping Subsidies,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, 778-806.

Bachmann, Ruediger; Caballero, Ricardo, and Engel, Eduardo. 2008. “Aggregate
Implications of Lumpy Investment: New Evidence and a DSGE Model.” NBER working
paper No. 12336.

Barsky, Robert B.; House, Christopher L.; and Kimball, Miles S. 2007. “Sticky-Price
Models and Durable Goods,” American Economic Review, 97(3), pp. 984-998.

Bertola, Giuseppe, and Caballero, Ricardo. 1990. “Kinked Adjustment Costs and
Aggregate Dynamics,” in Blanchard, O., and Fischer, S., eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1990.

Caballero, Ricardo. 1993. “Durable Goods: An Explanation for their Slow Adjustment,”
Journal of Political Economy 101, 351-384.

Caballero, Ricardo and Engel, Eduardo. 1999. “Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.
Manufacturing: A Generalized (S,s) Approach.” Econometrica, 67(4), pp. 783-826.

Caballero, Ricardo; Engel, Eduardo and Haltiwanger, John. 1995. “Plant-Level
Adjustment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Vol. 1995, No. 2, pp. 1-54.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Leahy, John V. 1996. “Fixed Costs: The Demise of Marginal q.”
NBER working paper No. 5508.

Caplin, Andrew and Leahy, John V. 1991. “State Dependent Pricing and the Dynamics of
Money and Output.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, 683-708.

Caplin, Andrew and Leahy, John V. 1997. “Aggregation and Optimization with State-
Dependent Pricing,” Econometrica, 65, pp. 601-627.

Caplin, Andrew and Leahy, John V. 2004. “On the Relationship between Representative
Agent Models and (S,s) Models.” in Productivity, East Asia Seminar on Economics, Ito
and Rose eds., Vol. 13, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 351-376.




                                         33
Caplin, Andrew, and Leahy, John V. 2006. “Equilibrium in a Durable Goods Market with
Lumpy Adjustment.” Journal of Economic Theory, 128, May 2006, pp. 187-203.

Caplin, Andrew and Spulber, D. 1987. “Menu Costs and the Neutrality of Money.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, pp. 703-725.

Cooper, Russell and Haltiwanger, John. 1993. “The Aggregate Implications of Machine
Replacement: Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review 83(3), pp. 360-382.

Cooper, Russell and Haltiwanger, John. 2006. “On the Nature of Capital Adjustment
Costs.” Review of Economic Studies, 73, pp. 611-634.

Cooper, Russell, Haltiwanger, John and Power, Laura. 1999. “Machine Replacement and
the Business Cycle: Lumps and Bumps.” American Economic Review 89, 921-946.

Danziger, Lief. 1999. “A Dynamic Economy with Costly Price Adjustments.” American
Economic Review, 89, 878-901.

Dixit, Avinash K. and Pindyck, Robert S. 1994. Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ.

Doms, Mark and Dunne, Timothy. 1998. “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
Plants.” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, pp. 409-429

Dotsey, M.; King, R. and Wolman, A. 1999. “State Dependent Pricing and the General
Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104,
655-690.

Eberly, Janice. 1994. “Adjustment of Consumers' Durables Stocks: Evidence from
Automobile Purchases.” Journal of Political Economy 102, 403-436.

Everett, H. 1957. “Recursive Games.” in Contributions To The Theory Of Games, vol.
III, in H.W. Kuhn and A.W. Tucker, eds. Vol. 39 of Annals of Mathematical Studies.
Princeton University Press.

Fisher, Jonas D.M. 2006. “The Dynamic Effects of Neutral and Investment-Specific
Technology Shocks.” Journal of Political Economy, June 2006, 114(3), pp. 413-452.

Fraumeni, Barbara M. 1997. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National
Income and Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business. July, pp. 7-23.

Fuentes, Olga and Gilchrist, Simon. 2005. “Skill-Biased Technology Adoption: Evidence
for the Chilean Manufacturing Sector.” Working paper, Boston University.

Fuentes, Olga; Gilchrist, Simon and Rysman, Marc. 2006. “Irreversibility and Investment
Dynamics for Chilean Manufacturing Plants.” Working paper, Boston University.




                                          34
Gertler, Mark, and Leahy, John. 2006. “A Phillips Curve with an Ss Foundation.” NBER
working paper, No. 11971.

Gourio, Francois and Kashyap, Anil. 2007. “Investment Spikes: New Facts and a General
Equilibrium Exploration.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54: Supplement 1, pp. 1-22.

Hayashi, Fumio. 1982. “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Interpretation.” Econometrica. 50, January, pp. 213-224.

Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri, 1999, “Adverse Selection in Durable Goods
Markets.” American Economic Review, 89, pp. 1097-1115.

Hendel, Igal, and Alessandro Lizzeri, 2002, “The Role of Leasing under Adverse
Selection.” Journal of Political Economy, 89, pp. 1097-1115.

House, Christopher L., and Leahy, John. 2004. “An sS Model with Adverse Selection.”
Journal of Political Economy 112, 581-614.

House, Christopher L. and Ozdenoren, Emre. 2008. “Durable Goods and Conformity,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), pp. 452-468.

House, Christopher L. and Shapiro, Matthew D. 2008. “Temporary Investment Tax
Incentives: Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation.” American Economic
Review, 93(3), pp. 437-768.

Khan, Aubhik and Thomas, Julia. 2003. “Nonconvex Factor Adjustments in Equilibrium
Business Cycle Models: Do Nonlinearities Matter?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50,
pp. 331-360.

Khan, Aubhik and Thomas, Julia. 2008. “Idiosyncratic Shocks and the Role of
Nonconvexities in Plant and Aggregate Investment Dynamics.” Econometrica, 76(2), pp.
395-436.

King, Robert G. and Thomas, Julia. 2006. “Partial Adjustment without Apology.”
International Economic Review, 47(3), pp. 779-809.

Krusell, P., and Smith, A. 1997. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity, Portfolio Choice
and Equilibrium Asset Returns.” Macroeconomic Dynamics, 1(2), pp. 387-422.

Krusell, P., and Smith, A. 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the
Macroeconomy.” Journal of Political Economy 106, 867-898.

Rios-Rull, Jose Victor. 1999. “Computation of Equilibria in Heterogeneous Agent
Models.” in Computational Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies, Marimon, R.
and Scott, A. eds. Oxford University Press.




                                          35
Stolyarov, Dmitriy. 2002. “Turnover of Used Durables in a Stationary Equilibrium: Are
Older Goods Traded More?” Journal of Political Economy, 110(6), pp. 1390-1413.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1981. “Taxation and Corporate Investment: a q-Theory
Approach.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1981(1), pp. 67-127.

Thomas, Julia. 2002. “Is Lumpy Investment Relevant for the Business Cycle?” Journal of
Political Economy, 110, 508-534.

Veracierto, Marcelo. L. 2002. “Plant-Level Irreversible Investment and Equilibrium
Business Cycles.” American Economic Review, 92, 181-197.




                                         36
                                                  Appendix
This appendix presents the numerical model analyzed in “Fixed Costs and Long-Lived Investments” by
C.L.House.
Numerical Model:
Here I present details on the numerical model used to analyze the behavior of the system away from the
low-depreciation limit. The numerical solution follows the approach advanced by Dotsey, King and Wohlman
[1999], Thomas [2002], Veracierto [2002], and Khan and Thomas [2003], King and Thomas [2006].
    The numerical model is in discrete time. The size of each time interval is ∆. The possible capital stocks
are given by a list of length J + 1 so that kj is the capital stock for a firm that last adjusted j periods ago.
Then, kj+1 = kj e−δ∆ and k0 = k̄. The minimum possible capital stock is kJ . Let Vj,t be the value of having
kj at the beginning of period t and let V̄t be the value of having k̄ at the beginning of period t. These values
are time-dependent because prices and other endogenous variables fluctuate over time.
    The key aspect of the numerical approach is the use of idiosynchratic fixed costs rather than the single
fixed cost F . Each firm i is presented with a fixed cost at time t given by εi,t . The fixed costs are i.i.d. across
firms and over time. The fixed cost is assumed to have positive support (i.e., εit takes values in [0, ∞)) and
to have mean F . I assume the stochastic fixed cost has a density function ψ (ε) and associated distribution
Ψ (ε). For purposes of computation, I take ε to be a mixture of a log normally distributed variable εLN and
a wide uniform εU .                             ¡     ¢
    The log normal random variable obeys ln εLN ∼ Φ (μ, σ) where Φ is a Gaussian distribution with mean
μ and variance σ 2 . Because I require E [εit ] = F , for any σ, the parameter μ must satisfy
                                                              1
                                                 μ = ln (F ) − σ 2                                               (1)
                                                              2
which follows from a well-known property of log-normal distributions. Thus, once F is given, the log normal
distribution has only a single free parameter: σ. The wide uniform variable has density 2F1 . centered around
F . The final composite random variable is ε = ωεLN + (1 − ω) εU with ω ∈ (0, 1). Thus the expected value
of ε is F . The density of ε is the weighted sum of the two densities:
                                      "            (     µ         ¶2 )#
                                         1 11          1 ln ε − μ          (1 − ω)
                           ψ (ε) = ω √          exp −                    +
                                         2π ε σ        2      σ              2F

and (using properties of the log-normal distribution), the c.d.f. of ε is
                                           ∙        µ          ¶¸
                                         ω            ln ε − μ       (1 − ω)
                                 Ψ (ε) =    1 + erf       √       +          ε
                                         2              σ 2             2F
                                              Rx     ©     ª
where erf is the error function erf (x) = √2π 0 exp −s2 ds. In the numerical setup below, I also require
                           Rb
the truncated expectation 0 εψ(ε)dε. This expectation is
                   Z b                     ½         ¾ "          Ã        !#
                                    1            1 2                ξb − σ       (1 − ω) 2
                       εψ(ε)dε = ω · exp μ + σ · 1 + erf              √        +        b
                     0              2            2                       2         4F

where ξ b = ln b−μ
               σ .
   Since the Vj,t ’s are the values of having kj at the beginning of period t, we can write
                             ©                                                                ¡        ¢ª
             Vj,t (ε) = max ∆ · zt kjα + βEt [vj+1,t+1 ] , ∆ · zt k̄α + βEt [v1,t+1 ] − ε − pt k̄ − kj
              R
where vj,t = Vj,t (ε) ψ (ε) dε is the expected value of being in state j at time t prior to the realization of
the stochastic fixed cost ε. For the lowest capital stock kJ I assume that the firm must adjust and pays F
with certainty. Thus, the expected value of entering the last grid point is
                                                                               ¡         ¢
                             vJ,t = VJ,t = ∆ · zt k̄α + βEt [v1,t+1 ] − F − pt k̄ − kJ                     (2)



                                                         37
   Define ε̂j,t as the critical draw for the fixed cost for firms in position j at time t that makes them just
indiﬀerent between adjusting and not:
                                        £         ¤                               £        ¤
                          ε̂j,t = ∆ · zt k̄α − kjα + βEt [v1,t+1 − vj+1,t+1 ] − pt k̄ − kj                 (3)

Note, if ε < ε̂j,t then I adjust. Thus, we can write vj,t as
          Z
vj,t =       Vj,t (ε) ψ (ε) dε
          Z ε̂j,t
                  £                                   ¡       ¢¤                          ¡                             ¢
     =             ∆ · zt k̄α + βEt [v1,t+1 ] − ε − pt k̄ − kj ψ (ε) dε + [1 − Ψ (ε̂j,t )] ∆ · zt kjα + βEt [vj+1,t+1 ]
            0
                                                                                         Z    ε̂j,t
                  ¡                               ¡       ¢¢                                                                      ¡                            ¢
      = Ψ (ε̂j,t ) ∆ · zt k̄α + βEt [v1,t+1 ] − pt k̄ − kj −                                          εψ (ε) dε + [1 − Ψ (ε̂j,t )] ∆ · zt kjα + βEt [vj+1,t+1 ]
                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                    Z     ε̂j,t
                  ¡      £         ¤                               ¡       ¢¢                                                                ¡                            ¢
      = Ψ (ε̂j,t ) ∆ · zt k̄α − kjα + βEt [v1,t+1 − vj+1,t+1 ] − pt k̄ − kj −                                                     εψ (ε) dε + ∆ · zt kjα + βEt [vj+1,t+1 ]
                                                                                                                      0
                             Z       ε̂j,t
      = Ψ (ε̂j,t ) ε̂j,t −                   εψ (ε) dε + ∆ · zt kjα + βEt [vj+1,t+1 ]
                                 0

Thus, we have
                                                                 Z   ε̂j,t
                                     vj,t = Ψ (ε̂j,t ) ε̂j,t −               εψ (ε) dε + ∆ · zt kjα + βvj+1,t+1                                            (4)
                                                                 0
   Finally, the supply curve for new investment is
                                                                               µ         ¶ 1ξ
                                                                                    It
                                                                     pt = p̄
                                                                                    I¯
where It is total (aggregate) investment at time t and ξ > 0 is the elasticity of supply.
Steady State:
I normalize the supply curve so that in the steady state pt = p = 1. There is then the question of how one
can solve for the steady state values vj , ε̂j . It is tempting to use the solution from the non-stochastic model
in Section III of the text to find V̄ however this is not correct. The presence of the stochastic fixed costs
(rather than the pure fixed cost F ) makes the value of being at k̄ higher than otherwise because the firm has
the option to adjust early to take advantage of a low fixed cost or to adjust late and avoid a high fixed cost.
    To find the steady state of the modified model I follow the procedure outlined below:

   1. Pick parameters r α δ σ ω J and T . Set μ from equation (1). Set the step size ∆. The discount factor
      is β = e−r∆ .
   2. Set k̄ at the non-stochastic level from equation (6) in the text. Construct the grid k1 = k̄e−δ∆ ,
      k2 = k̄e−δ2∆ , ... kj = k̄e−δj∆ .
   3. Set v1 (Note for the initial guess of v1 , I appeal to the non-stochastic
                                                                           ¡    setting¢in the text in which case
      V̄ ≈ ∆ · k̄α + βv1 . The initial setting of v1 is therefore v1 ≈ β −1 V̄ − ∆ · k̄α ).
   4. Equation (2) gives the steady state vJ = VJ as
                                                                                  ¡       ¢
                                                     vJ = VJ = ∆ · k̄α + βv1 − F − k̄ − kJ .

   5. Equation (3) then implies ε̂J−1
                                                          £           ¤                 £         ¤
                                               ε̂J−1 = ∆ · k̄α − kJ−1
                                                                  α
                                                                        + β [v1 − vJ ] − k̄ − kJ−1 .

   6. I then calculate vJ−1 via quadrature using equation (4)
                                                      Z ε̂J−1
                                                                               α
                            vJ−1 = Ψ (ε̂J−1 ) ε̂J−1 −         εψ (ε) dε + ∆ · kJ−1 + βvJ
                                                                                0



                                                                               38
  7. Then given vj+1 we can calculate ε̂j with equation (3)
                                          £        ¤                  £        ¤
                                ε̂j = ∆ · k̄α − kjα + β [v1 − vj+1 ] − k̄ − kj

      and vj with (4)
                                                           Z    ε̂j
                                     vj = Ψ (ε̂j ) ε̂j −              εψ (ε) dε + ∆ · kjα + βvj+1
                                                            0

  8. I repeat step (7) until I arrive at an implied v1 say v10 . If my initial guess v1 = v10 then I have a set of
     steady state values and cutoﬀs. If not, I update v1 and repeat from step 3. The steady state cutoﬀs ε̂j
     values imply adjustment probabilities Ψj = Ψ (ε̂j ) for each grid point j = 1, 2, ...J − 1 and I set ΨJ = 1
     since they must adjust at this point.

Equilibrium:
Let fj,t be the number (i.e., fraction) of investors at grid point j. Total investment at any date t is then
                                                    J
                                                    X                  ¡        ¢
                                             It =         Ψj,t · fj,t · k̄ − kj
                                                    j=1

                                        PJ
The total number of firms is fixed         j=1   fj,t = 1. Note, the numbers of firms at each grid point evolve
according to
                                            fj,t = fj−1,t−1 (1 − Ψj−1,t−1 )
for 2 ≤ j ≤ J. For j = 1, we have
                                                          J
                                                          X
                                                 f1,t =         Ψj,t−1 · fj,t−1
                                                          j=1

so that all of the firms that adjusted last period arrive at gridpoint 1 the following period. To find the steady
state values for fj I use
                                                                                             j−1
                                                                                             Y
                 fj = (1 − Ψj−1 ) fj−1 = (1 − Ψj−1 ) (1 − Ψj−2 ) fj−2 = ... = f1                    (1 − Ψj−m )
                                                                                             m=1

for all j between 2 and J. Then, to find f1 , I use
   J
   X
         fj = f1 + f1 (1 − Ψ1 ) + f1 (1 − Ψ1 ) (1 − Ψ2 ) + ... = f1 [1 + (1 − Ψ1 ) + (1 − Ψ1 ) (1 − Ψ2 ) + ...] = 1
   j=1

So that                                      ⎡
                                                    J
                                                           ( j−1                  )⎤−1
                                                    X        Y
                                       f1 = ⎣1 +                       (1 − Ψj−m ) ⎦
                                                    j=2        m=1

The following auxiliary parameters are used in the numerical model: σ = 0.0025, ω = 0.99, ∆ = 1/4 and
J = 80. The model is linearized and solved with the Anderson-Moore (AIM) algorithm.




                                                                 39
                              TABLE 1. BASELINE PARAMETERS

Parameter                                                    Baseline Value
Discount rate, annual ( r )                                       0.02
Curvature of profit function ( α )                                0.35
Steady state adjustment horizon ( T ) (years)                    10.00
Elasticity of aggregate investment supply ( ξ )                   1.00
Half-life of demand shock (years)                                 0.50
Half-life of supply shock (years)                                 0.50
                        TABLE 2: STATISTICAL PROPERTIES OF SIMULATED DATA

                                          Standard Deviations
                It       pt       zt       At     M t1    M t2       M t3     M t4     M t5
                0.961   0.127    1.000    1.000    0.179    0.174    0.165    0.156    0.494


                                           Correlation Matrix
                It       pt       zt       At      M t1   M t2       M t3     M t4     M t5
                1.000   -0.266   -0.993    0.059    0.406   -0.067   -0.081   -0.066   -0.075
               -0.266    1.000    0.382    0.426   -0.773   -0.680   -0.569   -0.456    0.853
               -0.993    0.382    1.000   -0.002   -0.487   -0.022    0.006    0.005    0.180
                0.059    0.426   -0.002    1.000    0.033    0.007    0.002    0.003   -0.016
                0.406   -0.773   -0.487    0.033    1.000    0.482    0.328    0.318   -0.742
               -0.067   -0.680   -0.022    0.007    0.482    1.000    0.452    0.294   -0.770
               -0.081   -0.569    0.006    0.002    0.328    0.452    1.000    0.417   -0.744
               -0.066   -0.456    0.005    0.003    0.318    0.294    0.417    1.000   -0.673
               -0.075    0.853    0.180   -0.016   -0.742   -0.770   -0.744   -0.673    1.000


Note: The table shows the standard deviations and correlation coefficients for simulated variables:
Investment, prices, supply parameters, productivity parameters, and moments M t j . The moments are
described in the text. The data are simulated from a version of the model with δ = .05 . The supply and
demand shocks are normally distributed and independent. Their variances are set to imply a 1 percent
unconditional standard deviation in the long run. The estimated coefficients come from a simulated data
set of 100,000 years of quarterly observations.
                      TABLE 3: FORECASTING EQUATIONS FOR INVESTMENT PRICES

         Forecast
                                               Forecast Coefficients
         Horizon
                       β0      βp      βz       βA       β1      β2       β3       β4       R2
                      0.000   0.981   0.001   -0.016    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.877
                      0.001   0.978   0.001   -0.016   -0.002    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.877
                      0.002   0.972   0.001   -0.015   -0.004   -0.003    n.a.     n.a.    0.877
          1 quarter
                      0.005   0.951   0.001   -0.014   -0.010   -0.008   -0.005    n.a.    0.877
                      0.008   0.937   0.002   -0.013   -0.015   -0.011   -0.008   -0.002   0.877

                      0.000   0.961   0.001   -0.027    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.804
                      0.001   0.957   0.001   -0.026   -0.004    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.804
                      0.003   0.943   0.002   -0.026   -0.007   -0.007    n.a.     n.a.    0.804
         2 quarters
                      0.010   0.904   0.002   -0.023   -0.020   -0.016   -0.010    n.a.    0.804
                      0.013   0.890   0.003   -0.023   -0.024   -0.019   -0.013   -0.002   0.804

                      0.000   0.924   0.002   -0.039    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.719
                      0.002   0.914   0.002   -0.038   -0.008    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.719
                      0.007   0.886   0.003   -0.037   -0.015   -0.014    n.a.     n.a.    0.719
           1 year
                      0.019   0.814   0.004   -0.033   -0.038   -0.030   -0.018    n.a.    0.719
                      0.022   0.799   0.005   -0.032   -0.043   -0.034   -0.021   -0.002   0.719

                      0.000   0.850   0.004   -0.046    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.612
                      0.004   0.828   0.003   -0.044   -0.018    n.a.     n.a.     n.a.    0.612
                      0.013   0.775   0.004   -0.041   -0.032   -0.025    n.a.     n.a.    0.612
          2 years
                      0.032   0.668   0.007   -0.035   -0.067   -0.050   -0.028    n.a.    0.612
                      0.030   0.680   0.006   -0.036   -0.063   -0.047   -0.026   0.001    0.612


Note: The table shows the estimated coefficients for reduced-form forecasting equations of the form
pt +h = β0 + β p pt + β z zt + β A At + ∑ m βm M tm + et +h where M tm are moments of the cross-sectional
distribution of capital holdings at date t. The moments are described in the text. The data are simulated
from a version of the model with δ = .05 . The supply and demand shocks are normally distributed and
independent. Their variances are set to imply a 1 percent unconditional standard deviation in the long run.
The estimated coefficients come from a simulated data set of 100,000 years of quarterly observations.
                                            TABLE 4: PRICE FORECASTS (R2), SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS

           Forecast                                                               Model
                       Moments
           Horizon                 (0)        (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)     (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
                                 Baseline   δ = .02   δ = .10   δ = .50   ξ =5    ξ = 10   ξ = 100   α = .50   α = .15   α = .05   Myopic
                          0       0.880     0.923     0.837     0.692     0.927   0.920     0.849     0.867     0.905     0.910    0.624
                          1       0.880     0.923     0.837     0.692     0.927   0.920     0.849     0.867     0.905     0.910    0.624
                          2       0.880     0.923     0.838     0.692     0.927   0.920     0.849     0.867     0.905     0.910    0.624
           1 quarter
                          3       0.880     0.923     0.838     0.692     0.927   0.920     0.849     0.867     0.905     0.910    0.626
                          4       0.880     0.923     0.838     0.692     0.927   0.920     0.849     0.867     0.905     0.910    0.632

                          0       0.809     0.878     0.740     0.524     0.865   0.847     0.708     0.790     0.843     0.849    0.449
                          1       0.809     0.878     0.740     0.524     0.865   0.847     0.708     0.790     0.843     0.849    0.449
                          2       0.809     0.878     0.740     0.525     0.865   0.847     0.708     0.790     0.843     0.849    0.451
           6 months
                          3       0.809     0.878     0.740     0.525     0.866   0.847     0.709     0.790     0.843     0.849    0.457
                          4       0.809     0.878     0.740     0.525     0.866   0.847     0.710     0.790     0.843     0.849    0.475

                          0       0.726     0.826     0.625     0.358     0.759   0.715     0.473     0.703     0.762     0.765    0.259
                          1       0.726     0.826     0.625     0.358     0.759   0.715     0.473     0.703     0.762     0.765    0.261
                          2       0.726     0.826     0.625     0.359     0.759   0.715     0.474     0.703     0.762     0.765    0.269
            1 year
                          3       0.726     0.826     0.626     0.361     0.760   0.716     0.477     0.703     0.762     0.766    0.296
                          4       0.726     0.826     0.626     0.361     0.760   0.716     0.478     0.703     0.762     0.766    0.321

                          0       0.622     0.761     0.478     0.189     0.578   0.497     0.191     0.598     0.647     0.640    0.067
                          1       0.622     0.761     0.479     0.191     0.578   0.498     0.192     0.598     0.647     0.641    0.078
            2 years       2       0.622     0.761     0.480     0.196     0.579   0.499     0.197     0.598     0.647     0.641    0.108
                          3       0.622     0.761     0.480     0.200     0.580   0.500     0.204     0.598     0.647     0.641    0.164
                          4       0.622     0.761     0.480     0.200     0.580   0.500     0.204     0.598     0.647     0.641    0.165



Note: The table shows the R2 for different forecasting equations, model specifications and forecast horizons. Forecast equations are of the form
pt +h = β0 + β p pt + β z zt + β A At + ∑ m βm M tm + et +h where M tm are moments as described in the text. Column 1 is the baseline calibration.
Columns 2 – 10 consider alternate calibrations. Parameter changes are described in the column heading. Parameters not listed are kept at baseline
values. Column 11 (Myopic) gives results for δ = .50 , r = .50 , α = .10 and ξ = 5 . Supply and demand shocks are normally distributed and
independent with variances set to imply a 1 percent unconditional standard deviation. Statistics come from a simulation of 100,000 years of
quarterly observations.
                             G (δ , T )


    r+δ
                    }
                                                                      αk α−1


                                                                          k
                  k(T)             kJ            k

FIGURE 1: OPTIMAL BEHAVIOR IN THE STEADY STATE AND THE JORGENSON GAP G (δ , T )
         f (t)                                     2
                                                  10




        1
       10




                                                                                                     t
                  1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10

                         FIGURE 2: TWO DISTRIBUTIONS OF CAPITAL HOLDINGS.

The shaded rectangle represents the uniform steady state distribution. In this case, there is an even number
of firms with capital t years old for t ∈ (0,10) . The heavy grey line represents an extreme alternative
distribution. There are mass points of firms with 1-year-old capital, 3-year-old capital, etc. Each mass point
has 2/10 of the firms. There are no firms with capital of any other age.
                                                                       FIGURE 3: THE JORGENSON GAP

                                                                                  Jorgenson Gap, G(δ, T)

                  T=2
                  T=4
                  T=6
                  T=8
 0.5              T = 10


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1
0.05
  0
       0                               0.05                               0.1                                 0.15   0.2   0.25
                                                                                Annual Depreciation Rate, δ




                       Jorgenson Gap, G(δ, T), Long-Lived Capital

                  T=2
                  T=4
0.05              T=6
                  T=8
                  T = 10
0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01


  0
       0   0.01     0.02   0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07             0.08    0.09    0.1
                              Annual Depreciation Rate, δ
                                                     FIGURE 4: INDIFFERENT PRICE PATHS




          1
      0.998
      0.995


       0.99




       0.98




       0.96




       0.94




       0.92




                                                                                                                                  δ = .2
                                                                                                                                  δ = .1
                                                                                                                                  δ = .05
                                                                                                                                  δ = .02
        0.9
              8          8.5             9              9.5             10             10.5            11             11.5                  12
                                                                      Years

Notes: The lines plot price paths p(t) for which the firms are indifferent as to when they adjust their capital stock. The paths were made under
the assumption that the reset value V was constant. The steady state price level is 1.00.
                                         FIGURE 5: EQUILIBRIUM RESPONSE TO A SUPPLY SHOCK
                                                            Aggregate Investment
 0.4
               δ = .20
 0.2
               δ = .10
  0            δ = .05
               δ = .02
-0.2           δ = .01

-0.4

-0.6

-0.8

  -1
       1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10       11        12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



                                                                Price Level
  1




0.5




  0




-0.5
       1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10       11        12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20


                                                               Supply Shock
  1


0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


  0
       1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10      11         12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                                 Quarters
                                          FIGURE 6: EQUILIBRIUM RESPONSE TO A DEMAND SHOCK
                                                             Aggregate Investment
0.75
                δ = .20
                δ = .10
  0.5           δ = .05
                δ = .02
                δ = .01

  0.2
  0.1
   0



-0.25
        1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10       11        12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



                                                                 Price Level
0.75



  0.5




  0.2
  0.1
   0



-0.25
        1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10       11        12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20



                                                               Demand Shock
   1


 0.8


 0.6


 0.4


 0.2


   0
        1   2             3   4   5   6       7     8    9       10      11         12   13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20
                                                                  Quarters
                              FIGURE 7: EQUILIBRIUM FROM AN OUT-OF-STEADY-STATE DISTRIBUTION

                                                              Initial Distribution
0.05
                                                                                                                Alternate Distribution

0.04                                                                                                            Steady State Distribution



0.03


0.02


0.01


  0
       0             10           20            30                     40                  50          60       70                          80
                                                             Capital Age, Quarters


                                             Aggregate Investment: Alternate Depreciation Rates
 1.5
           δ = .20
           δ = .10
  1        δ = .05
           δ = .02
           δ = .01
 0.5



  0



-0.5
             1            2            3          4                  5               6             7        8        9                      10
                                                                     Years


                                             Aggregate Investment: Alternate Supply Elasticities
  8
           ξ=1
  6        ξ=5
           ξ = 10
  4        ξ = 20
           ξ = 100
  2


  0

  -2


  -4
             1            2            3          4                  5               6             7        8        9                      10
                                                                     Years
             FIGURE 8: COMPARING THE FIXED-COST MODEL WITH THE NEOCLASSICAL MODEL, BASELINE PARAMETER VALUES
                     Aggregate Investment                                            Aggregate Investment                                                                         Aggregate Investment
      2.5                                                                 0.4                                                                                             4
                                              Neoclassical Model
        2                                     Fixed-Cost Model                                                                                                            3
                                                                          0.2
      1.5
                                                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                        Investment: Neoclassical Model
        1                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                          1
      0.5
                                                                          -0.2

        0                                                                                                                                                                 0

                                                                          -0.4
      -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                         -1

       -1                                                                 -0.6
                                                                                                                                                                         -2
      -1.5
                                                                          -0.8
                                                                                                                                                                         -3
       -2

      -2.5                                                                 -1                                                                                            -4
                20       40              60           80           100           5          10          15   20                                                            -4   -2             0            2   4
                              Quarters                                                     Quarters                                                                              Investment: Fixed-Cost Model




                              Prices                                                        Prices                                                                                         Prices
     0.25                                                                0.25                                                                                            0.5

                                                                          0.2                                                                                            0.4
      0.2
                                                                         0.15                                                                                            0.3

     0.15                                                                 0.1                                                                                            0.2




                                                                                                                  Prices: Neoclassical Model
                                                                         0.05                                                                                            0.1
      0.1

                                                                            0                                                                                             0

     0.05
                                                                         -0.05                                                                                      -0.1


        0                                                                 -0.1                                                                                      -0.2

                                                                         -0.15                                                                                      -0.3
     -0.05
                                                                          -0.2                                                                                      -0.4

      -0.1                                                               -0.25                                                                                      -0.5
                20       40              60           80           100           5          10          15   20                                                        -0.5                   0                 0.5
                              Quarters                                                     Quarters                                                                               Prices: Fixed-Cost Model


Notes: The parameter values for the fixed-cost model are given in Table 1. The neoclassical model is described in the text. Parameter
values are identical to those in the fixed cost model. The scatter-plot shows 500 years of simulated data. Both models experienced
identical shocks.
