                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES:
     EVIDENCE FROM THE NATIONAL COMORBIDITY SURVEY - REPLICATION

                                           Pinka Chatterji
                                          Margarita Alegria
                                          David Takeuchi

                                        Working Paper 14404
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14404


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We acknowledge funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation #1K23 DA018715-01A2 and
from NIH Research Grant # 1P50 MHO 73469 funded by the National Institute of Mental Health.
The project was supported by NIH Research Grant # U01 MH 06220-06A2 funded by the National
Institute of Mental Health. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Pinka Chatterji, Margarita Alegria, and David Takeuchi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Psychiatric Disorders and Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from the National Comorbidity
Survey - Replication
Pinka Chatterji, Margarita Alegria, and David Takeuchi
NBER Working Paper No. 14404
October 2008, Revised December 2010
JEL No. I0

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper uses the National Comorbidity Survey – Replication to estimate the effects of recent psychiatric
disorder on employment, hours worked, and earnings. We employ methods proposed in Altonji, Elder
and Taber (2005) which use selection on observable traits to provide information regarding selection
along unobservable factors. Among males, disorder is associated with reductions of 13-17 percentage
points in labor force participation and employment, depending on the sample and the model. Among
females, we find smaller, less consistent associations between disorder and labor force participation
and employment. There are no effects of disorder on earnings or hours worked among employed individuals.


Pinka Chatterji                                      David Takeuchi
State University of New York at Albany               University of Washington
Economics Department                                 4101 15th Ave, NE
1400 Washington Avenue                               Seattle, WA 98105-6299
Albany, NY 12222                                     dt5@u.washington.edu
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu

Margarita Alegria
Center for Multicultural Mental Health Research
Cambridge Health Alliance/Harvard Medical School
120 Beacon Street, 4th Floor
Somerville MA 02143
malegria@charesearch.org
1.0      Introduction

         Many studies have documented the economic burden of psychiatric disorders in

the US and worldwide. Psychiatric disorders are highly prevalent, and there is significant

co-morbidity within psychiatric disorders as well as between psychiatric disorders and

other health problems (Kessler et al., 2005a). Despite recent progress, a high rate of

unmet need for treatment persists in the US (Kessler et al., 2005b).2 As a result,

psychiatric disorders remain a leading cause of disability. As of 2000, depressive

disorders alone were the fourth leading cause of disease burden worldwide, accounting

for 4.4 percent of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) and 12 percent of all total years

lived with disability in the world (Ustun et al., 2004)..

         This paper focuses on one disabling aspect of psychiatric disorder – we seek to

estimate the effect of recent disorder on labor market outcomes. The central issue in

estimating the causal effect of psychiatric disorder on labor market outcomes is that

individuals may select into disorder along difficult-to-measure traits that also influence

their labor market outcomes, such as self-esteem, motivation, and personality (Ettner et

al., 1997; Marcotte & Wilcox-Gok, 2003). Prior researchers have addressed this issue

using instrumental variables and other methods that rely on identifying exclusion

restrictions (e.g. exogenous variables that are included in the psychiatric disorder

equation but left out of the labor market outcome equation) (see Ettner et al., 1997 and



2 Data from the National Comorbidity Study Replication (NCS-R) indicate that in the US about 26 percent
of adults meet diagnostic criteria for having any psychiatric disorder in the past 12 months (Kessler et al.,
2005a). Psychiatric disorders are frequently co-morbid with chronic pain, neurological disorders,
circulatory disorders, and gynecological problems. About 45 percent of adults with any kind of psychiatric
disorder in the past 12 months have two or more psychiatric disorders (Kessler, 2005a). In the early
1990’s, 20 percent of adults with 12-month psychiatric disorder received some form of treatment in the past
year -- as of the time period 2001 to 2003, this rate had increased to 33 percent (Kessler et al, 2005b).


                                                                                                           2
Marcotte et al., 2000 for examples). These identifying assumptions frequently are hard to

justify based on economic theory.

       In this paper, we build on prior work by examining the effect of psychiatric

disorder on labor market outcomes using methods recently proposed in Altonji, Elder and

Taber (AET) (2005a). These methods do not rely on any identifying exclusion

restrictions. Instead, the AET method uses observed differences between those with and

without psychiatric disorder to provide information regarding the likely magnitude and

direction of selection along unobserved characteristics.

       We also build on prior research by using more recent data from the NCS-R. In

addition to being more current, the NCS-R has two main advantages over its predecessor,

the National Comorbidity Survey (NCS), that are relevant to the present study. First, the

NCS-R includes assessments of psychiatric disorder that are based on the DSM-IV

diagnostic system rather than the now dated DSM-III-R. The DSM-IV reflects

psychiatric epidemiologists’ increasing emphasis during the 1990’s on requiring

individuals to have significant distress or impairment in order to meet criteria for

psychiatric disorder (Kessler & Merikangas, 2004). Second, the NCS-R includes

somewhat more extensive information on correlates of psychiatric disorder than the NCS.

For example, in the NCS-R, respondents provide not only information on whether their

parents ever experienced psychiatric symptoms (which is also available in the NCS), but

also about the duration of those symptoms specifically during the respondent’s childhood.

       Our results indicate that among males, having a psychiatric disorder in the past 12

months is associated with reductions of 13 to 17 percentage points in the likelihood of

current labor force participation and in the likelihood of employment, depending on the




                                                                                          3
model and sample. These findings are similar to those previously reported by Ettner et

al. (1997), who use data from the National Comorbidity Survey and report that having a

12-month psychiatric disorder reduces the likelihood of employment among males by

about 11 percentage points. Among females, we also find negative associations between

recent disorder and labor force participation and employment. Compared to the findings

for males, however, these effects for females are somewhat smaller in magnitude and are

less consistent across models.



2.0      Psychiatric illness and labor market outcomes

         There is growing interest in the impact of psychiatric conditions on labor market

outcomes. Relative to other chronic illnesses, psychiatric disorders tend to have early

onset in the lifespan, affecting individuals during their most productive working years.3

Psychiatric disorders may affect labor market outcomes through several mechanisms.

First, the symptoms of psychiatric illness can directly impair an individual’s ability to

obtain and maintain employment, and may detract from earnings, by affecting factors

such as productivity, mood, energy level, memory, concentration, decisiveness,

motivation, and social relations. Second, employers may be unable or unwilling to make

any needed accommodations for an employee with mental health problems. Third,

individuals with psychiatric disorders may face outright discrimination if their symptoms

or medical history are known to potential employers. In addition to these direct effects

on employment outcomes, all of these issues can indirectly reduce the likelihood of




3In fact, the high proportion of YLDs attributed to psychiatric disorders is likely due to the early onset of
many psychiatric disorders.


                                                                                                                4
employment by lowering wages and thus lowering the likelihood of labor force

participation (Currie & Madrian, 1999; Ettner et al., 1997).4

        In prior literature, it has been acknowledged that in a model of labor market

outcomes, psychiatric disorders may be endogenous in a structural sense (e.g., if mental

health and labor market outcomes are determined simultaneously, reverse causality is

possible) and/or in a statistical sense (e.g., unobserved heterogeneity). Researchers have

addressed this problem using instrumental variables (IV) and bivariate probit methods.5

For example, using NCS data and an IV approach, Ettner et al. (1997) report that past

year mental disorder is associated with a reduction of about 11 percentage points in the

probability of being employed, but there are less consistent effects on earnings and hours

worked. Marcotte et al. (2000), also using the NCS and IV methods, report adverse

effects of depression on earnings among females. In further work with the NCS,

Marcotte & Wilcox-Gok (2003) use both IV and quantile regression models and report

that psychiatric disorders have different effects across the earnings distribution, with the

largest effects concentrated among the lowest-earners. Alexandre and French (2001),

using bivariate probit and IV methods and data on low-income adults in Miami, find that

self-rated depression is associated with adverse labor market outcomes, reducing the


4 Although most empirical studies presume a detrimental effect of poor health on labor market
participation, Currie & Madrian (1999) note that the effects of health on labor market participation are
theoretically ambiguous.
5 There is a related economics literature that focuses specifically on the labor market consequences of
substance use, and many of these studies also apply IV methods to address the potential endogeneity of
substance use. Many of these studies do not use diagnostic measures of substance disorder and, in general,
there is inconsistent evidence of negative effects on outcomes. For example, while Terza (2002), utilizing
data from the 1988 Alcohol Supplement to the National Health Interview Survey, and MacDonald &
Shields (2004), using data from the Health Survey of England, both find that measures of problem drinking
are negatively associated with the likelihood of employment, Tekin (2004), using data from the Russian
Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS), finds that alcohol consumption is not associated with
employment. Also, many studies report that some forms of moderate drinking are actually associated with
higher earnings (Berger & Leigh, 1988; Hamilton and Hamilton, 1997; Barrett (2002); Zarkin et al. (1998);
Tekin (2004); van Ours (2004); Auld (2005)).


                                                                                                         5
probability of being employed by about 19 percentage points and decreasing the number

of weeks worked in the past year by 7-8 weeks. Chatterji et al. (2007), based on the

National Latino and Asian American Study (NLAAS) and using a bivariate probit model,

find that among Latinos, having a mental disorder in the past 12 months reduces the

likelihood of employment by about 11 percentage points for males, and by about 22

percentage points for females (Chatterji et al., 2007).6

         The challenge inherent in applying these empirical methods is finding a credible

identification strategy; practical implementation of either the IV or the bivariate probit

method requires the existence of at least one exogenous variable that affects psychiatric

disorder but that is not directly related to labor market outcomes as well. Some examples

of identifying variables used in prior work are parental alcohol dependency (Mullahy and

Sindelar, 1996) or parental history of mental health and substance problems (Ettner et al.,

1997; Marcotte et al., 2000; Marcotte & Wilcox-Gok, 2003; Renna, 2008); early onset of

psychiatric disorders or substance use (Ettner et al., 1997; Renna, 2008); long-term non-

acute illnesses such as asthma or diabetes (McDonald and Shields, 2004, McCulloch,

2001); religiosity (Alexandre and French, 2001, McDonald and Shields, 2004,

McCulloch, 2001, Heien, 1996, Hamilton and Hamilton, 1997); social support (Hamilton

6 Other studies do not directly address the potential endogeneity of psychiatric disorder. In one of the first
studies in this area using diagnostic criteria for psychiatric illness, Frank and Gertler (1991) use data on
men from the Baltimore Epidemiologic Catchment Area study and find that mental distress is associated
with a 21 percent reduction in earnings. Mental distress in this study is captured by whether or not the
individual has at least two of the following three indications of psychiatric disorder – last year DSM-III
diagnosis, at least four symptoms of psychiatric distress as measured on the General Health Questionnaire,
and at least one self-reported disability day (Frank and Gertler, 1991). Cowell et al. (2009), using the
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions (NESARC), report that psychiatric
disorders detract from employment among women and detract from full-time work among men. Tian et
al. (2005), using data on older individuals from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), find that
depression with comorbid pain is associated with worse labor market outcomes. Using data on employed
respondents from the Ontario Health Survey’s Mental Health Supplement, Dewa & Lin (2000) find that
psychiatric illness, particularly affective disorders and comorbid conditions, are associated with increases
in the number of days workers report that they are partially unable to function normally, or are able to
function normally only with extreme effort (Dewa & Lin, 2000)


                                                                                                             6
et al., 1997); availability of social support agencies (Alexandre and French, 2001); and

state-level alcohol and illicit drug policies and prices (Barrett, 2002, DeSimone, 2002).

       These identifying variables have been controversial for both conceptual and

empirical reasons. In the case of personal characteristics, it is difficult to make a strong

theoretical argument that they are exogenous and that they are not directly related to the

outcome of interest. For example, when discussing religiosity as an identifying variable,

Alexandre and French (2001) note that it is possible that religious beliefs directly affect

or are correlated with unmeasured factors that affect work habits, or that attending

religious services is helpful to career networking.

       In the case of state-level policies, such as state-level alcohol taxes, it is perhaps

more conceptually plausible that these variables may be related to disorder (alcohol

disorder, for instance) but exogenous and not directly related to individual labor market

outcomes. As Dee (1999) and others point out in the context of state alcohol use

policies, however, state-level policies may be associated with unobserved state

characteristics that are correlated with both disorder and labor market outcomes.

Including state fixed effects is a potential solution to this problem, but this is not possible

with a cross-sectional data set such as the NCS-R. Moreover, the predictive power of

state policies frequently is poor, particularly when state fixed effects are included. This

problem is likely to be particularly difficult in the context of psychiatric disorders (as

opposed to measures of substance use), since it is difficult to identify a state-level policy

or policy change that would be highly correlated with disorder at the individual level.




                                                                                                7
3.0    Methodological approach

         The estimating equations are:

                              (1) L    P  X  

                              (2) P    X  

where L is a labor market outcome, α and θ are intercepts, P is a binary measure of

recent psychiatric disorder, X is a set of individual demographic, family background, and

other characteristics that may affect labor market outcomes and psychiatric disorders, and

ε and υ are error terms. (All measures are described in the next section.) The coefficient

 represents the contemporaneous association between recent psychiatric disorder and

outcomes. This association is contemporaneous in the sense that the model controls for

any indirect effects of disorder that may operate through elements of X, such as marital

status and educational attainment. Although our primary measure of P is an indicator of

any psychiatric disorder in the past 12 months, in alternate models, we replace this single

measure with three dichotomous indicators representing the following broad categories of

psychiatric illness: any affective disorder in the past 12 months; any anxiety disorder in

the past 12 months; and any substance disorder in the past 12 months.

       Below, as a supplementary analysis, we examine educational attainment as

potential indirect channel by considering the effects of early onset of disorder on labor

market outcomes with and without controls for educational attainment included in the

model. However, we note that ideally a multi-period framework is needed to analyze

lagged effects of psychiatric conditions. Our data are cross-sectional and thus do not




                                                                                             8
allow us to establish a temporal sequence of the effects of health on outcomes (Chirikos

& Nestel, 1984). This limitation also applies to occupation as an indirect channel.7

         Despite the inclusion of X, there is strong reason to remain concerned about the

potential endogeneity of mental disorder in the labor market outcome equation; that is, it

is not reasonable to assume that corr(ε, υ | X) = 0. First, in a complete model of health

and labor market outcomes, mental health is endogenous in the sense that it is jointly

determined with labor market outcomes (Currie & Madrian, 1999). Second, a reverse

causal pathway is possible. Labor market status can directly affect mental health through

mechanisms such as work-related stress, health behaviors (e.g., sedentary lifestyle), self-

esteem, family dynamics, social networks, and role functioning (Ettner, 2000, Quesnel-

Vallee & DeHaney, 2010; Zabkiewicz, 2010; Dziak et al., 2010; Joyce et al., 2010).8

Some recent evidence for this reverse causal pathway is Kuhn et al. (2009), who report

that job loss caused by an exogenous shock (the closing of a plant in Austria) is

associated with increases in expenditures on mental health services.

         Third, Grossman (1972) emphasizes that one’s stock of health is an endogenous

choice variable. Current mental health depends on initial health, depreciation of the

health stock in all previous periods, and gross investment (and thus inputs used to

produce investments) in all previous periods (Grossman, 1972). In X, we include controls

for factors that may affect labor market outcomes directly and also may affect current

mental disorder through prior health investments, such as family background. However,




7 A related limitation regarding occupation is that it is potentially endogenous since psychiatric disorders
can drive occupational choices. Also, unmeasured individual attributes can influence both psychiatric
disorders and occupational decisions, as well as affect labor market outcomes.
8 As Ettner (2000) reviews, these direct effects of labor market status on mental health may be positive or
negative.


                                                                                                               9
it is possible that we have not been able to completely account for such effects, and that

these factors remain in the error terms of Equations 1 and 2.

         In the case of binary labor market outcomes, we address the problem of correlated

unobserved variables by estimating equations (1) and (2’) with the bivariate probit model.

This approach models the corr(ε, υ | X) explicitly using a full information maximum

likelihood strategy. We take into account the complex survey design when estimating the

bivariate probit model. The bivariate probit model assumes that the disturbance terms in

equations (1) and (2’) are jointly normally distributed, and the equations are estimated

simultaneously using the maximum likelihood method.

                                      (1) L    P  X  

                                     (2’) P    X  Z  


                                                0   1          
                                     (3)   ~ N   ,                   
                                                0             1  


         Although the bivariate probit model can be identified without an exclusion

restriction, this strategy is not considered credible in the empirical literature. Thus, as our

initial approach, we follow prior research and include a set of variables Z in the

psychiatric disorder equation but exclude them from the labor market equation. We note,

however, that both the exclusion restrictions and the functional form restrictions of the

model drive its identification. The identifying variables are early onset of disorder and

whether the respondent has a parent who experienced psychiatric symptoms during most

or all of the respondent’s childhood.9


9 Onset of disorder before adulthood is likely to be highly correlated with recent disorder as an adult, but it
is unlikely to directly affect adult work outcomes, as long as the model includes controls for education,


                                                                                                             10
         For continuous labor market outcomes, we address the potential endogeneity of

psychiatric disorder using two-stage least squares models, with the same identifying

variables as instruments. That is, we estimate equation (4) below

                                                  
                           (4) L   1  X1  P    1i

                     
         in which P is the predicted value from equation 2’ in which psychiatric disorder

is regressed on observable individual characteristics (X) and instrumental variables (Z).

         Using these empirical methods to address the endogeneity of psychiatric

conditions with respect to labor market outcomes may reduce the magnitude of the effect

if the most important unobserved variables are factors that are positively correlated with

psychiatric disorder and are negatively correlated with labor market outcomes such as

stressful life events, adverse childhood circumstances, and low ability. However, the

opposite may be true if the important unmeasured factors are traits which are positively

correlated with both disorder and labor market outcomes. For example, there is evidence

for self-selection into jobs by personality traits (Heineck, 2007), and some personality

traits such as withdrawal and aggression may be positively associated with labor market

outcomes (see Groves, 2005) as well as with disorder. In fact, Mueller and Plug (2006)

provide support that antagonism in men (which is the negative counterpart of

agreeableness), may be linked to an increase in wages of 4 to 6 percent for a one standard

deviation increase in antagonism.



marital status, and other possible mediating variables. Similarly, parental psychiatric symptoms during the
respondent’s childhood may be associated with respondent’s psychiatric illness as an adult through genetic
or environmental channels. However, after adjusting for education and other adult characteristics, it is
unlikely that parental symptoms during the respondent’s childhood directly affect the respondent’s adult
labor market outcomes.


                                                                                                         11
         In the case of the bivariate probit model, both the exclusion restrictions and the

functional form assumption identify the model (Altonji et al., 2005b). Therefore, in order

to determine whether it truly is the exclusion restrictions (and not the nonlinearity) that is

driving the identification of the bivariate probit model, we re-estimate all bivariate probit

models with 2SLS and compare the results. These analyses are presented in Appendix

Tables 2a-b. Also, we gauge the power of our identifying variables and test the

overidentifying assumptions.10 These results indicate that our identifying variables do

not perform well in the female samples, although they do perform well in the male

samples. It is not clear why this should be the case. Moreover, one cannot make a strong

case for these exclusion restrictions based on economic theory.

         Under these circumstances, we prefer the approach described in AET (2005a).

The AET approach is based on estimation of a bivariate probit model without any

identifying restrictions but with a constrained correlation coefficient, .11 The primary

advantage of this approach in our context is that it does not rely on questionable

identifying variables. Identification comes from both the restriction on ρ as well as from

functional form (Altonji et al., 2005). The methods proposed by AET utilize information

on selection into psychiatric disorders and labor market outcomes along observed factors

to gain information regarding the likely degree of selection along unobserved factors.

Although one can never know for certain the degree of selection on unobserved variables,

this approach is useful when used in conjunction with other information. The approach

10 Based on the 2SLS models of all outcomes, we use the Durbin-Wu-Hausman to test the endogeneity of
psychiatric disorder with respect to labor market outcomes. In addition, we test the null hypothesis that the
excluded instruments are uncorrelated with the error term and appropriately excluded from the labor market
equation using Hansen’s J statistic, the minimized value of the GMM criterion. As suggested by Staiger &
Stock (1997), we use the F-statistic of the joint significance of the identifying instruments to gauge their
relevance.
11 Altoni et al. (2002) present the formal econometric theory underlying this method.



                                                                                                          12
demonstrates how sensitive the estimates are to what could be viewed as a relatively

stringent assumption about the degree of selection on unobserved variables.

         The first part of the AET method involves a robustness check to determine

whether the effect of psychiatric disorder on labor market outcomes is sensitive to

various levels of imposed correlation between the unobserved determinants of both

outcomes. This analysis can uncover the threshold of selection on unobservables, if any,

at which psychiatric disorder no longer has a statistically significant effect on

employment. In the present study, depending on the outcome and the sample, we find

evidence of both positive and negative selection along measured factors. Thus, we

impose on the model both negative and positive values of  ranging from -0.30 to 0.30

and examine whether or not the effect of psychiatric disorder on labor market outcomes is

robust to such changes.12

         The second part of the method uses the degree of selection on observed

characteristics to set the degree of selection on unobserved characteristics at a level that

could be considered to be conservative. AET (2005a) argue that if the observable

determinants of an outcome are truly just a random sub-set of the complete set of

determinants, selection on observable characteristics must be equal to selection on

unobservable characteristics. That is, under certain assumptions,13 the portion of the

outcome variable that is associated with the observed variables has the same relationship

12  We apply the AET (2005a) approach only to the two binary labor market outcomes – labor force
participation and employment. The AET (2005a) approach can be applied in the setting of a continuous
dependent variable as well by calculating a ratio of how large selection on unmeasured factors would need
to be to relative to selection on measured factors to eliminate the causal effect. However, we did not apply
it in our case because in our standard OLS and IV models, we had no evidence that psychiatric disorders
were associated with the continuous outcomes we examined (earnings, hours worked).
13 Briefly, the assumptions are that: (1) the observed variables are selected at random from the full set of
variables that determine psychiatric disorders and labor market outcomes; and (2) the number of observed
and unobserved factors is large enough so that no element dominates the distribution of the outcome. (AET,
2002a).


                                                                                                         13
with psychiatric disorder as the portion that is related to the unmeasured factors. More

formally, AET (2005a) show that this condition implies:

                           (5) cov(L*, X’)/var(X’) = cov(L*, )/var()

       where L* is an unobserved, continuous measure of the net benefits from the labor

market outcome (e.g., employment), X’ is the vector of observed variables that affect L*

weighted by their corresponding coefficients, and  is the unobserved determinants of

variables that affect L* weighted by their relevant coefficients. In words, imposing

equation (5) on the bivariate probit model means that the data collected in a survey are

just as relevant to the outcome being studied as the data that were not collected. In

contrast, standard estimation methods, such as OLS and probit models, assume that the

data that were not collected are not relevant to the outcome being studied.

       This paper uses a highly specialized survey that was designed to study the

prevalence and correlates of psychiatric disorders. In particular, the NCS-R is the result

of three decades of research on the descriptive epidemiology of psychiatric disorders, and

it builds on other large-scale efforts to collect data on the correlates of psychiatric

disorder such as the Epidemiologic Catchment Area (ECA) surveys and the NCS (Kessler

& Merikangas, 2004). In this sense, the estimate obtained under the assumption that

selection on unobservable variables is equal to selection on observables could be

considered unrealistically stringent, given the richness of these data and the targeted

nature of the CPES survey.

       Nevertheless, we acknowledge that important unmeasured factors may remain,

even in the context of an extensive, targeted survey effort. Moreover, even observed

correlates of psychiatric disorder will be measured imperfectly. Even so, these estimates



                                                                                           14
generated by imposing a likely – but not certainly - stringent degree of selection are

useful. We gain new information about the relationship between psychiatric disorder and

labor market outcomes by gauging whether this well-documented association persists

when an explicit degree of selection along unmeasured factors is imposed on the model.



4.0    The NCS-R

         The NCS-R is the most recent nationally representative survey available that

includes diagnostic assessments of psychiatric disorders as well as rich data on the

correlates of disorders. The study took place between February 2001 and April 2003

with a response rate of 70.9%. Eligible respondents were English-speaking, non-

institutionalized adults ages 18 or older living in civilian housing in the coterminous

United States. The NCS-R was administered in two parts: [1] Part I was administered to

all respondents and included core diagnostic assessments; [2] a subset of Part I

respondents also completed Part II of the survey which included additional batteries of

questions addressing service use, consequences of psychiatric illness, other correlates of

psychiatric illness and additional disorders. The survey was conducted in respondents’

homes using laptop computer-assisted personal interview (CAPI) methods and

professional interviewers (Kessler et al., 2004).

       We use data from the 5,692 NCS-R respondents who participated in both Part I

and Part II of the survey. Of the 5,692, we excluded from the sample persons over 64

years old and under 25 years old (n = 1,507), and those with missing outcome

information (n = 339), leaving us with a full analytic sample of 4,137 respondents (1,751




                                                                                          15
males and 2,386 females).14 Missing values for covariates were imputed with sample

means. For most covariates, less than 1 percent of the sample had missing values. For

two variables (religious frequency and father’s psychiatric symptoms during the

respondent’s childhood), 11 percent and 16 percent had missing information.

We estimate all models separately by gender. In addition, we examine the robustness of

our findings by estimating all models using samples limited to respondents with lifetime

history of mental disorder.15

         The dependent variables are measures of current labor market outcomes. We use

two measures of current employment status: in labor force - a binary indicator of whether

the respondent is in the labor force (either employed or unemployed vs. neither); and

employed - a binary indicator of whether the respondent is currently employed for pay,

either full-time or part-time. These indicators were created from a question about the

respondent’s current work situation, as of the day of the survey.

         Among employed respondents, we examine the number of hours worked in the

past year and yearly earnings. The number of hours worked is constructed by

multiplying the average hours the respondent reports working in an average week by the


14 Note that there are some respondents who have missing values for more than one of these categories.
For this reason, the sum of the categories is greater than the total number of respondents excluded from the
sample. We considered an observation to have missing outcome data if either the constructed value for
work status was missing (n = 13) OR the detailed underlying variable “your current employment” was
missing (n =335). We took this conservative approach because we found that the constructed variable
“work status” potentially misclassifies respondents who actually have missing data on work status by
placing them in the “out of labor force” category. We compared the basic characteristics of the 339
respondents with missing outcome data to the rest of the sample. The respondents with missing outcome
data were older than those with available data – the mean age of those with missing data was 50 vs. 42 in
the remaining sample. They also are less likely to be college-educated, are less likely to be married, and
have more chronic health conditions.
15 Restricting the sample to those with history of disorder is intended to make respondents with and without
recent disorder more similar along observable characteristics. However, we note that this approach is only
helpful in implementing the AET method if making those with and without recent disorder more similar
along measured characteristics also makes those with and without recent disorder more similar along
unobservable characteristics.


                                                                                                         16
number of weeks the respondent worked for pay in the past year. We measure earnings

based on respondents’ reports of own personal earnings before taxes in the past 12

months. Respondents were asked to indicate which of 36 categories represented their

earnings in the past month. The lowest two categories were less than zero and zero. Up

to $20,000, the categories were in $1,000 increments. After that point, the categories are

set up in $5,000 increments until $50,000, $25,000 increments until $100,000, and larger

increments at the highest income levels (with the highest category including $1,000,000

or higher income). Following Ettner et al. (1997), we used the midpoint of each

category, and analyze earnings as a continuous variable. We use log earnings as the

dependent variable in regression models.16

        The presence of lifetime psychiatric disorder, 12-month psychiatric disorder, and

subthreshold depressive disorder or minor depressive disorder was evaluated via the

World Health Organization Composite International Diagnostic Interview (WMH-CIDI)

(Kessler & Ustun, 2004). Diagnoses are based on DSM-IV diagnostic systems. Findings

of the instrument show good concordance between DSM-IV diagnoses based on the

WMH-CIDI and the SCID (Haro et al., 2006). Our main covariate of interest is a dummy

variable indicating whether or not the respondent meets DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for

any mental disorders in the past 12 months.17 Any psychiatric disorder includes the

following fourteen diagnoses: (1) major depressive episode (2) dysthymia; (3)

agoraphobia; (4) generalized anxiety disorder (GAD); (5) panic attack; (6) panic disorder;

(7) social phobia; (8) alcohol abuse; (9) alcohol dependence; (10) illicit drug abuse; (11)

illicit drug dependence; (12) post-traumatic stress disorder; (13) anorexia; and (14)

16 About 1 percent of employed respondents reported zero or less than zero earnings. These respondents
were given a value of .5.
17 Work-related criteria were excluded from the diagnostic alogorithms.



                                                                                                         17
bulimia. We also consider an alternate set of models which include, in place of the any

disorder measure, three dichotomous indicators of any affective disorder (major

depressive episode or dysthymia) in the past 12 months, any anxiety disorder

(agoraphobia, social phobia, generalized anxiety disorder, post traumatic stress disorder,

panic disorder) in the past 12 months, and any substance disorder (alcohol abuse or

dependence, drug abuse or dependence) in the past 12 months.

         We begin with models that only include controls for age, age squared,

race/ethnicity (Latino, African-American, Asian vs. non-Latino white), and region

(Midwest, South, West, with Northeast as the reference category). We then estimate

more fully specified models that additionally include controls for: marital status (married,

widowed/divorced/separated with single as the baseline); education (12 years, 13-15

years, 16+ years with less than 12 years as the baseline); number of living

biological/adopted children under age 5, 5-12 and 13-17; US citizen; nativity

(immigrant); indicators for lifetime chronic illness (dichotomous indicators for asthma,

diabetes, cardiovascular disease, ulcers, cancer); an indicator for current smoking;18

number of moves to a new neighborhood or town when growing up; whether the

respondent lived with both parents until age 16; whether the respondent’s family received

public assistance for 6 or more months during the respondent’s youth; frequent

attendance at religious services; and a set of indicators for current or former occupation.19


18 Since smoking is a potentially endogenous variable, we excluded smoking and re-estimated all models
using the full samples of males and females to gauge whether excluding this variable affected the findings.
The estimates generated from these models are very similar to those presented in the paper.
19 The ten indicators are: corporate/general managers, professionals, associate professionals, office clerks,
customer service clerks, personal/protective service workers, trade workers, operators, perform routine
tasks, and other. The corporate/general managers category is the baseline category in the regression
models. Generally speaking, individuals who never worked should have missing values for current and
former occupation. However, the skip pattern of the employment section of the survey is designed in a way
that it makes it unlikely that respondents will not provide information on current or former occupation.


                                                                                                          18
        The standard bivariate probit and 2SLS models include the full list of covariates

above in both equations. In addition, the labor market equation includes county level

poverty and unemployment rates. The mental disorder equation additionally includes: (1)

an indicator of whether the respondent’s mother/mother figure experienced periods of

sadness for 2+ weeks, or experienced periods of constant anxiety for a month or more,

during most or all of the respondent’s childhood; (2) an indicator of whether the

respondent’s father/father figure experienced periods of sadness for 2+ weeks, or

experienced periods of constant anxiety for a month or more, during most or all of the

respondent’s childhood; and (3) the number of psychiatric disorders the respondent has

experienced with onset prior to age 18. The number of childhood onset disorders

variable was constructed based on information available in the CPES regarding the age of

onset of each adult disorder for the respondent.



5.0     Results: Effects of psychiatric disorders on employment

        5.1      Descriptive Statistics and Baseline Models

        Table 1 shows weighted means for the male and female samples. Among males,

86 percent are currently in the labor force, and 85 percent are currently employed.

Among employed males, mean work hours and earnings are 2,280 hours in the past year

(about 43 hours per week) and $49,952 respectively. In the male sample, 18 percent of

respondents meet diagnostic criteria for at least one psychiatric disorder in the past 12

months (Table 1). Among females, 77 percent are in the labor force, 71 percent are

employed, and, among the employed, mean work hours and earnings are 1,909 hours per

There are 216 observations with missing values for occupation. These missing values were imputed with
sample means. We included a missing value indicator for occupation in the regression, but did not retain
this variable in the final analysis because it was not statistically significant


                                                                                                       19
year and $28,483 respectively. In the female sample, 25 percent have experienced a

psychiatric disorder in the past 12 months (Table 1).

       In Appendix Tables 3a-b, we also show: (1) weighted descriptive statistics for the

samples limited to respondents with lifetime disorder; and (2) differences in observed

characteristics between those with and without a recent psychiatric disorder for both the

full samples and the samples limited to respondents with lifetime disorder. Two findings

are notable. First, it appears that individuals select into disorder along factors that are

negatively associated with labor market outcomes (such as chronic health conditions, lack

of college education, and disadvantaged family backgrounds) as well as along factors that

are positively associated with labor market outcomes (such as white race, US born, and

divorced marital status for women). Second, while we see fewer striking observable

differences in the samples limited to those with lifetime disorder, there are still important

observable differences between those with and without disorder in the lifetime disorder

samples.

       Tables 2 and 3 summarize findings from baseline probit models of labor force

participation and employment (Table 2), and baseline OLS models of work hours and

earnings among currently employed respondents (Table 3). Estimates are shown for the

four samples (all males, males with lifetime disorder, all females, females with lifetime

disorder). The models include a full set of controls, as indicated in the tables.

       In the male samples, the univariate probit results show that recent psychiatric

disorder is associated with reductions of about 13 percentage points in the likelihood of

current labor force participation and in the likelihood of current employment (Table 2,

Panel A). These effects correspond to about 15 percent reductions in labor force




                                                                                              20
participation and employment, when evaluated at the sample means for the full sample of

males. In the female samples, the univariate probit model findings indicate that recent

disorder reduces the likelihood of employment and labor force participation by about 5-7

percentage points. At the mean employment and labor force participation levels in the

full sample of females, these effects correspond to a 7 percent reduction in labor force

participation and a 7 percent reduction in employment (Table 2, Panel B).

       In the male samples, recent psychiatric disorder is associated with reductions in

work hours, but these effects are not statistically significant in the OLS models (Table 3,

Panel A). There is no consistent detrimental effect of recent disorder on earnings among

employed males; in fact, among males with lifetime disorder, findings from the OLS

models indicate that onset of a recent disorder is actually associated with a 13 percent

increase in earnings (Table 3, Panel A). This finding raises concern about reverse

causality in this model, which we attempt to address below using 2SLS methods. There

are no statistically significant associations between recent disorder and earnings, or recent

disorder and work hours, among employed females (Table 3).

       We also use these baseline models to examine the degree of selection on

observable characteristics. We do so by successively estimating models with no controls,

demographic controls only (race, age, region), and a full set of controls (race, age, region,

education, family structure, US citizen, immigrant, smoker, chronic physical illnesses,

occupation, county unemployment and poverty, religious services attendance, family

background). These findings are shown in Appendix Table 4. Here, we briefly

summarize findings.




                                                                                           21
       These models show that there is some degree of selection on observable

characteristics in all four samples. For example, compared to a model with no controls,

when a full set of controls is included, the magnitudes of the marginal effects are about

24 percent lower in the labor force participation and employment models based on the

full male sample. However, we note the following: (1) selection on observed variables is

weaker in the female samples compared to the male samples; and (2) selection on

observable factors is stronger in the full samples compared to the lifetime disorder

samples. Based on linear probability models adjusted for the survey design (not shown),

the R-squared in the labor force participation model is .19 for males and .14 for females,

and the R-squared in the employment model is .19 for males and .20 for females.

       Appendix Table 1 shows findings from models in which we replace the single

indicator of “any disorder” with three dichotomous indicators of whether the respondent

met 12-month criteria for anxiety disorders, affective disorders, and substance disorders.

In the two male samples, we observe that both anxiety and depressive disorders detract

from labor market outcomes, but substance disorder is not associated with employment

and labor force participation. The lack of a detrimental effect of substance use on

employment is surprising, and inconsistent with Ettner et al. (1997), Mullahy & Sindelar

(1996) and others. Among women, depressive disorders are negatively associated with

employment and labor force participation in both samples, while anxiety disorder detracts

from labor force participation in the females with lifetime disorder sample only. Ettner et

al. (1997) report similar findings for women, although they find agoraphobia and drug

dependence (which are specific disorders within the anxiety and substance classes) are




                                                                                            22
negatively associated with employment for females. There are no consistent patterns in

the effects of disorders on hours worked and earnings among employed individuals.

       Our fully specified models include controls for education, occupation, and marital

status, but these variables may capture a portion of the effect of disorder on labor market

outcomes. For example, Breslau et al. (2008) using the NCS show that some psychiatric

disorders (primarily externalizing disorders) are associated with termination of schooling;

since schooling is an important determinant of labor market outcomes, it may act as a

mechanism linking early onset of disorder to labor market outcomes.

       To examine this possibility more closely, we estimated models in which the

recent disorder indicator is replaced by an indicator of “onset of any disorder prior to age

18.” We then estimated the fully specified model with and without controls for

education, with and without controls for occupation, and with and without controls for

marital status, to determine whether the effect of disorder on labor market outcomes is

sensitive to the inclusion of these possible “mechanism” variables. We find no evidence

that the inclusion of these sets of variables affects the estimated coefficient on “early

onset” (results available upon request). In the case of education, the reason may be that

depression and anxiety, the most prevalent adult disorders, do not appear to detract from

educational outcomes (Breslau et al., 2008).

       5.3     Standard Bivariate Probit and 2SLS Models

       The second and fourth columns of Table 2 show the estimated coefficient on

recent psychiatric disorder from a bivariate probit model. For males and females, the

bivariate probit model results are consistent in sign with the univariate probit results,

although the magnitudes of the effects are somewhat larger in the bivariate probit models




                                                                                            23
compared to the baseline models. In each of the four samples, we find that recent

disorder is associated with a statistically significant reduction in the likelihood of labor

force participation and employment. Note that the estimated correlation between the

equations’ error terms is positive but not statistically significant in any of the models,

suggesting that there is no advantage in estimating the equations jointly.

         Among employed males, the 2SLS models show inconsistent effects across the

full and lifetime disorder samples. For males, there are negative effects of recent disorder

on work hours in the lifetime disorder sample only, and negative effects on earnings in

the full sample only (Table 3, Panel A). Among females (Table 3, Panel B), findings

from the 2SLS models show no statistically significant associations between recent

disorder and outcomes.           As a group, the identifying variables are excellent predictors of

recent psychiatric disorder, with a F-statistic ranging from 10 to 188 depending on the

model (a summary of first stage results is available in Appendix Table 5). However, in

two models based on the female sample, we reject the over-identification test statistic,

indicating that our instruments are not appropriately left out of the labor market equations

(results not shown).20 This casts some doubt on the identification strategy as a whole,

since we have no conceptual reason why these instruments would be appropriate for

males but not females. As we have emphasized previously, in any case it is hard to

provide a provide a strong case for these exclusion restrictions based on economic theory.

         5.4       AET Models

         Table 4 shows results from the empirical strategy proposed by Altonji et al.,

which does not rely on identifying assumptions that may be problematic. The middle

20 When early onset of disorder is excluded, and only the parental psychiatric disorder variables are used as
identifying instruments, we fail to reject the over-identification test statistic, and the F-statistic is about 31.
However, in these models, the IV findings are positive in sign and statistically insignificant.


                                                                                                                24
column (column 4) reproduces the standard univariate probit findings from Table 2,

which is based on the assumption of no selection along unmeasured factors. The columns

to the left of column 4 show estimates of the effect of recent disorder on labor force

participation and employment from bivariate probit models without any identifying

exclusions restrictions (that is, the same set of covariates is included in both equations)

but with the correlation between the error terms in the two equations set at increasingly

stronger, negative levels, ranging from -.10 to -.30 (Table 4, Columns 1-3). Columns 5-7

show results from the same exercise, but with the correlation coefficient set to

increasingly stronger positive values ranging from .10 to .30 (Table 4, columns 5-7).

       Finally, the bivariate probit model is estimated without identifying restrictions but

subject to the stringent condition regarding selection on unobserved factors proposed by

AET – selection on unobservables is set equal to selection on observables. Because this

assumption is unlikely to hold in reality, we do not emphasize the magnitude of the

estimated correlation coefficient in this model (although it is reported in column 8 of

Table 4). However, the estimated coefficient on recent disorder in this model informally

can be considered to be a conservative estimate of the true effect of psychiatric disorder

on labor market outcomes (Altonji et al., 2005).

       Among males, we see that the effects of recent disorder on labor force

participation and employment remain statistically significant and negative even when

moderate levels of either negative or positive selection along unobservables are imposed

on the model. Only when ρ is set to -0.30 does the estimated effect of disorder on

outcomes become statistically insignificant. Among females, the effect of disorder on

outcomes is more sensitive to the imposed level of correlation. If the ρ is set to positive




                                                                                              25
values, the negative effects of disorder on outcomes persist. However, even small

amounts of negative selection on unmeasured factors makes the effect of disorder on

outcomes statistically insignificant. In the case of the labor force participation model, the

predictive power of the model is better for males compared to females; thus, the same

imposed level of selection on unmeasured factors would lead to more selection bias in the

female sample. It is difficult, however, to intuitively interpret these imposed correlations

on the model and assess whether they are realistic levels of correlation.

       In Column (8) of Table 4, we show estimates in which selection into recent

disorder along observables is set equal to the degree of selection on unobservable factors;

intuitively, this represents the stringent case in which the data collected is no more

helpful in reducing bias in a univariate probit model than the data that were not collected

(Altonji et al., 2005). In our case, however, since selection on observables is relatively

modest, the correlation between unmeasured factors that we impose on the model also is

relatively modest. In all four samples, the negative effects of recent disorder on labor

force participation and employment persist when this condition is imposed. The findings

as a whole (from both the full and lifetime disorder samples) suggest that recent disorder

reduces labor force participation and employment by 9 to 15 percentage points among

males and by 9 to 19 percentage points among females. For males, even if one believes

that selection along unmeasured factors is more than twice as strong as selection along

measured factors (if ρ is set at -.20 in the labor force participation model estimated using

the full sample of males, for example), we still would see negative (albeit much smaller)

effects of recent disorder on labor market participation. This appears to be true for

females as well, although we find positive selection in the female samples.




                                                                                             26
       The NCS-R reflects state-of-the-art measurement of the correlates of psychiatric

disorder, and unlike many multi-purpose surveys (e.g., the National Longitudinal Survey

of Youth), the NCS-R focuses on a single research area, psychiatric epidemiology. This

fact suggests that selection on unmeasured factors should be less important than selection

on measured factors. Thus, it may be appropriate to interpret the condition imposed in

column (8) as a conservative estimate of the true effect. However, we acknowledge that

the predictive power of our models is still modest, as usually is the case in social

sciences, and much remains unexplained. Given the large unexplained portion of the

model, even “small” amounts of selection on unmeasured factors can be large relative to

the amount of selection on measured factors and potentially can affect the results. This

turned out to be the case for the female samples, but not the male samples.



6.0    Discussion and Conclusions

       This study demonstrates that psychiatric disorders detract significantly from labor

force participation and employment. Among males, we find consistent evidence that

recent disorder is associated with about 13 to 17 percentage point reductions in

employment and labor force participation. These findings persist across: various

specifications; estimation with both the full and lifetime disorder samples; and a strong

assumption regarding selection that is imposed on the model.

       The magnitudes of the effects that we find for males are reasonably close to the

11 percentage point reduction in employment associated with recent psychiatric disorder

that Ettner et al. report for males based on the National Cormorbidity Survey (NCS).

However, it is puzzling that unlike Ettner et al. (1997), Marcotte et al. (2000) and others,




                                                                                            27
we find no effects of recent disorder on work hours and earnings. This may be due to the

somewhat stronger economy of the early 2000’s – during the time period when the NCS

data were collected (1990-1992) overall unemployment rates ranged from 5.6 to 7.5

percent, while these rates were 4.7 to 6.0 percent during the time period when the NCS-R

were collected (2001 to 2003) (Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2010). Moreover, the findings

that substance disorders appear to have limited impact on labor market burden is not

consistent with prior research and might be related to the way the CIDI appears to

underestimate the prevalence of substance disorders (Grant et al., 2007) and/or the social

desirability of self-reporting substance use in a face to face interview.21

         Compared to our results for males, our findings based on the female samples are

less consistent. As we found in the male samples, the baseline results for females show a

negative association between recent disorder and labor force participation/employment,

and no consistent association between disorder and work hours and earnings. The

magnitudes of the associations, however, are smaller than those for males, and the

negative effects are eliminated when low amounts of negative selection are imposed in

the bivariate probit models. Females appear to have some more complex selection issues

compared to males in the sense that there is negative selection as well strong positive

selection along some measured characteristics such as divorce and prior disorder.

         Using longitudinal data to study indirect effects may be a useful way to shed light

on the economic implications of negative and positive selection. In the case of negative


21 According to a Letter to the Editor in the Archives of General Psychiatry (Grant et al., 2007), a
limitation of the World Mental Health–Composite International Diagnostic Interview (WMH-CIDI) used
by Kessler and colleagues in the NCS-R, is that it skips all respondents’ past questions on DSM-IV
dependence if they do not respond positively to questions on DSM-IV abuse. As a result, the last year rates
of alcohol and drug dependence are noticeably lower in the NCS-R (1.3% and 0.4%) than in the NESARC
(3.8% and 0.6%).



                                                                                                         28
selection, individuals may have unmeasured personal attributes (e.g., low self-esteem ,

poor interpersonal skills) that increase risk for psychiatric disorder and directly detract

from labor market outcomes. However, in addition to these direct effects, these attributes

also may indirectly affect labor market outcomes by interfering with human capital

development earlier in life. Similarly, the strong degree of positive selection we find

among females requires further study of indirect effects. Certain personality traits and

behaviors may increase risk of psychiatric disorder and also directly improve labor

market outcomes for women. However, it seems likely that indirect channels also will be

important. Future research should consider these potential indirect effects of psychiatric

disorder using longitudinal data.




                                                                                              29
References

   1. Alexandre, P.K. and French, M.T. Labor supply of poor residents in metropolitan
      Miami, Florida: The role of depression and the co-morbid effects of substance
      use. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 2001; 4: 161-173.

   2. Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E., Taber, C.R.. Selection on observed and unobserved
      variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools. Journal of Political
      Economy 2005a; 113: 151-184.

   3. Altonji JG, Elder TE, Taber CR. An evaluation of instrumental variables
      strategies for estimating the effects of Catholic schooling. Journal of Human
      Resources 2005b; 40: 791-821.

   4. Auld, CM. Smoking, drinking, and income. Journal of Human Resources 2005;
      2, 505-518.

   5. Barrett, G.F. The effect of alcohol consumption on earnings. Economic Record
      2002; 78(1): 79-96.

   6. Berger, Mark C. and Leigh, J. Paul, “The Effect of Alcohol Use on
      Wages,” Applied Economics, October 1988, 20(10), 1343–1351.

   7. Breslau J, Lane M, Sampson N, Kessler, RC. Mental disorders and subsequent
      educational attainment in a US national sample. Journal of Psychiatric Research
      2008; 42: 708-716.

   8. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population
      Survey, Accessed at http://www.bls.gov/cps/prev_yrs.htm, 2/10.

   9. Chatterji P, Alegria M, Lu M, Takeuchi D. Psychiatric disorders and labor
      market outcomes: Evidence from the National Latino and Asian American Study.
      Health Economics 2007; 16: 1069-1090.

   10. Chatterji P, Alegria M, Lu M, Takeuchi D. Psychiatric Disorders and
       Employment: New Evidence from the Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiology
       Surveys (CPES). National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       w14404, October, 2008.


   11. Chirikos TN, Nestel, G. Further evidence on the economic effects of poor health.
       The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1984, 61-69.




                                                                                         30
12. Cowell AJ, Luo Z, Masuda YJ. Psychiatric disorders and the labor market: An
    analysis by disorder profiles. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and
    Economics 2009; 12:3-17.

13. Currie J, Madrian, BC. Health, health insurance, and the labor market. In:
    Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Eds. Ashenfelter, O & Card, D, 1999,
    pp.3309-3415.

14. Dee, T.S. (1999). State alcohol policies, teen drinking and traffic fatalities.
    Journal of Public Economics, 72, 289-315.

15. DeSimone, J. Illegal drug use and employment. Journal of Labor Economics
    2002; 20: 952-977.

16. Dewa, C, Lin E. Chronic physical illness, psychiatric disorder, and disability in
    the workplace. Social Science & Medicine 2000; 51: 41-50.

17. Dziak E, Janzen BL, Muhajarine, N. Inequalities in the psychological well-being
    of employed, single, and partnered mothers: the role of psychosocial work quality
    and work-family conflict. International Journal for Equity in Health 2010, 9: pp.
    6.

18. Ettner, S.L., Frank, R.G., and Kessler, R.C. The impact of psychiatric disorders
    on labor market outcomes. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 1997; 51: 64-
    81.

19. Frank, R. and Gertler, P. As assessment of measurement error bias for estimating
    the effect of mental distress on income. The Journal of Human Resources 1991;
    26: 154-164.

20. Grant BF, Compton WM, Corwley TJ, Hasin DS, Helzer JE, Li T, Rounsaville
    BJ, Volkow ND, Woody GE. Errors in assessing DSM-IV substance use
    disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry 2007; 64: 379-380.

21. Grossman M (1972). The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
    Investigation.New York: Columbia University Press, for the National Bureau of
    Economic Research.

22. Groves, M. How important is your personality? Labor market returns to
    personality for women in the US and UK. Journal of Economic Psychology
    2005:; 26: 827-841.




                                                                                        31
23. Hamilton, V. and Hamilton, B. Alcohol and earnings: Does drinking yield a wage
    premium? Canadian Journal of Economics 1997; 30: 135-151.

24. Hamilton, V., Merrigan, P., and Dufresne, E. Down and out: estimating the
    relationship between mental health and unemployment. Health Economics 1997;
    6: 397-406.

25. Haro, J., Arbabzadeh-Bouchez, S., Brugha, T., Girolamo, G., Guyer, M., Jin, R.,
    et al. (2006). Concordance of the Composite International Diagnostic Interview
    Version 3.0 (CIDI 3.0) with standardized clinical assessments in the WHO World
    Mental Health Surveys. International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research
    15(4), 167 - 180.

26. Heien, D. Do drinkers earn less. Southern Economic Journal 1996; 63: 60-8.

27. Heineck, G. (2007), ‘Does it pay to be nice? Personality and earnings in the UK’,
    University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, LASER Discussion Paper No. 3.

28. Joyce K, Pabayo R, Cirtchley JA, Bambra C. Flexible working conditions and
    their effects on employee health and wellbeing. Cochrane Database of Systematic
    Reviews, 2010, 2.

29. Kessler RC, Chiu WT, Demler O, Walters EE. Prevalence, severity, and
    comorbidity of twelve-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
    Survey Replication (NCS-R). Archives of General Psychiatry, 2005a
    Jun;62(6):617-27.

30. Kessler RC, Demler O, Frank RG, Olfson M, Pincus HA, Walters EE, et al.
    Prevalence and Treatment of Mental Disorders, 1990 to 2003. NEJM, 352; 24:
    2515-2523. 2005b

31. Kessler R, Ustun T: The World Mental Health (WMH) survey initiative version
    of the World Health Organization (WHO) Composite International Diagnostic
    Interview (CIDI). International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 13:93-
    121, 2004

32. Kessler R, Merikangas K: The National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-
    R). International Journal of Methods in Psychiatric Research 13:60-68, 2004.

33. Kuhn, A, Lalive, R, Zweimuller, J. The public health costs of job loss. Journal of
    Health Economics, 2009; 28: 1099-1115.




                                                                                   32
34. Marcotte DE, Wilcox_Gok, V. Estimating earnings losses due to mental illness:
    A quantile regression approach. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and
    Economics 2003; 6: 123-134.

35. Marcotte DE, Wilxox-Gok, V, Redmond, DP. The labor market effects of mental
    illness: The case of affective disorders. 2000 In: The Economics of Disability, D.
    Salkever and Sorkin, A. (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press), 181-210.

36. McCulloch, A. Social environments and health: a cross sectional survey. British
    Medical Journal 2001; 323: 208-209.

37. MacDonald, Z. and Shields, M.A. Does drinking affect employment? Evidence
    from England. Health Economics 2004; 13: 139-155.

38. Mueller, G., and E. S. Plug (2006): “Estimating the Effect of Personality on Male-
    Female Earnings,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 60, 3–22.

39. Mullahy, J. and Sindelar, J. Employment, unemployment, and problem drinking.
    Journal of Health Economics 1996; 15: 409-434.

40. Quesnel-Vallee, A, DeHaney, S, Ciampi, A. Temporary work and depressive
    symptoms: a propensity score analysis. Social Science and Medicine, 2010; 70:
    1982-7.

41. Renna, F. Alcohol abuse, alcoholism, and labor market outcomes: Looking for the
    missing link. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 2008; 62: 92-103.

42. Staiger, D. and Stock, J.H. Instrumental variables regression with weak
    instruments. Econometrica 1997; 65: 557-86.

43. Tekin, Erdal, “Employment, Wages, and Alcohol Consumption in
    Russia,” Southern Economic Journal, October 2004, 71(2), 397–417.

44. Terza, Joseph V., “Alcohol Abuse and Employment: A Second Look,” Journal of
    Applied Econometrics, July-August 2002, 17(4), 393–404.

45. Tian H, Robinson RL, Sturm, R. Labor market, financial, insurance, and
    disability outcomes among near elderly Americans with depression and pain. The
    Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 2005; 8: 219-228.




                                                                                    33
46. Ustun, TB, Ayuso-Mateos, JL, Chatterji, S, Mathers, C, Murray, CJL. Global
    burden of depressive disorders in the year 2000. British Journal of Psychiatry
    2004; 184: 386-392.

47. van Ours, JC. A pint a day raises a man’s pay; but smoking blows that gain away.
    Journal of Health Economics 2004; 23(5): 863-886.

48. Zarkin. Gary. Michael French, Thomas Mroz, and Jeremy Bray. 1998. "Alcohol
    Use and Wages: New Results from the National Household Survey on Drug
    Abuse." Journal of Health Economics 17:53-58.

49. Zabkiewicz, D. The mental health benefits of work: do they apply to poor single
    mothers? Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 2010; 45: 77-87.




                                                                                     34
                             Table 1: Weighted means
                                                                  Males        Females

                                                                (n = 1,751)   (n = 2,386)
Employment outcomes
In labor force                                                     0.86          0.77
Employed                                                           0.85           0.71
Earnings among employed                                          48,952        28,482.6
                                                                (2,130.7)       (641.7)
Work hours among employed                                         2,280          1,909
                                                                  (25.0)        (17.06)
Psychiatric disorders
Any disorder in past 12 months                                     0.18          0.25
Affective disorder in past 12 months                               0.07          0.12
Anxiety disorder in past 12 months                                 0.12          0.19
Substance disorder in past 12 months                               0.05          0.02
Number of disorders with onset prior to age 18                     0.37          0.41
                                                                  (0.02)        (0.02)
Mother anxious and/or depressed during respondent’s childhood      0.07          0.11
Father anxious and/or depressed during respondent’s childhood      0.03          0.05
Chronic physical illnesses
Arthritis or rheumatism                                            0.22          0.28
Stroke                                                             0.02          0.02
Heart attack                                                       0.03          0.01
Diabetes                                                           0.07          0.07
Ulcer                                                              0.10          0.10
Cancer                                                             0.04          0.06
Demographic, SES, and family background characteristics
Latino                                                             0.11          0.11
African-American                                                   0.12          0.13
Asian                                                                0.02         0.01
US Citizen                                                           0.92         0.97
Immigrant                                                            0.14         0.09
Age                                                                  43.2         43.4
                                                                    (0.40)       (0.34)
Midwest                                                              0.25         0.23
South                                                                0.35         0.36
West                                                                 0.22         0.23
Married                                                              0.68         0.63
Divorced or widowed                                                  0.16         0.22
Number of children aged under 5 years                                0.20         0.19
                                                                    (0.02)       (0.01)
Number of children aged 5-12 years                                   0.44         0.42
                                                                    (0.03)       (0.02)
Number of children aged 13-17 years                                  0.32         0.30
                                                                    (0.02)       (0.02)
12 years of education                                                0.32         0.31
13-15 years of education                                             0.27         0.29
16+ years of education                                               0.27         0.28
Lived with both parents until age 16                                 0.70         0.70
Number of geographic moves during childhood                          2.2           2.0
                                                                    (0.11)       (0.08)
Family received welfare during childhood                             0.10         0.09

Smoker                                                                 0.29         0.25
Attends religious services frequently                                  0.33         0.40
Notes: All statistics are adjusted for complex survey design. For brevity, the occupational categories and the county-level unemployment and
poverty measures are not shown in the table.




                                                                                                                                               36
  Table 2: Standard probit and bivariate probit models of labor force participation and employment
           Panel A                   I. All males (N = 1,751)             II. Males with lifetime disorder (N = 1,051)
   Coeff on Recent Disorder          (1)                   (2)                     (3)                      (4)
            (T-stat)
       [Marginal effect]      Univariate probit       Bivariate probit      Univariate probit        Bivariate probit

                 ρ
             (p-value)
In labor force                     -0.635                  -0.749                -0.561                    -1.21
                                   (-6.58)                 (-3.27)               (-5.63)                  (-2.28)
                                  [-0.132]                [-0.160]              [-0.128]                 [-0.293]

                                                           0.080                                          0.432
                                                          (0.124)                                        (0.343)
Employed                           -0.605                  -0.687                -0.558                    -1.14
                                   (-6.74)                 (-3.34)               (-5.87)                  (-2.12)
                                  [-0.132]                [-0.153]              [-0.133]                 [-0.282]

                                                           0.060                                          0.385
                                                          (0.114)                                        (0.345)

             Panel B                 I. All females (N = 2,386)          II. Females with lifetime disorder (N = 1,514 )
In labor force                     -0.181                  -0.358                -0.277                   -0.829
                                   (-2.64)                 (-2.13)               (-3.41)                  (-1.88)
                                  [-0.048]                [-0.098]              [-0.069]                 [-0.207]

                                                           0.127                                          0.366
                                                          (0.113)                                        (0.288)

Employed                           -0.160                  -0.321                -0.177                   -0.548
                                   (-2.94)                 (-2.04)               (-2.56)                  (-1.14)
                                  [-0.046]                [-0.093]              [-0.069]                 [-0.151]

                                                           0.116                                          0.243
                                                          (0.104)                                        (0.310)
Notes: Table 2 summarizes results from probit and bivariate probit models adjusted for complex survey design. Each cell comes from a separate
model. Table shows coefficient, T-statistic (in parentheses), average marginal effect (in brackets) for the recent mental disorder measure only –
other coefficients not shown. The controls in the employment/labor force participation equations are: race, age, age squared, region, education,
marital status, number of children under age 5, number of children 5-12, number of children 13-17, citizen, immigrant, smoker, chronic physical
illness indicators, county unemployment and poverty rates, 11 occupational categories, number of moves during childhood, received welfare
during childhood, lived with both parents until age 16, and frequent religious attendance. In the bivariate probit models, the psychiatric disorder
equation uses the same set of covariates but omits county level poverty and employment and additionally includes the identifying variables (early
onset of disorder and parental psychiatric symptoms during respondent’s childhood). Estimated ρ and p-value in parentheses are shown.




                                                                                                                                                  38
             Table 3: OLS and 2SLS models of work hours and log earnings
                                        (1)                     (2)               (3)                  (4)
                                                                   Panel A: Males
                                                   All males                    Males with lifetime disorder
                                       Work hours          Log earnings       Work hours          Log earnings
                                        n = 1,422            n =1,339           n = 827              n = 773
                                     OLS       2SLS       OLS       2SLS     OLS      2SLS       OLS       2SLS
                                     -48.3 -139.95 -63.00 -348.95 -63.00 -348.95 0.133 0.209
                                    (-1.06) (-1.48) (-1.46) (-1.97) (-1.46) (-1.97) (2.07) (0.68)
                R2                    0.14      0.14      0.15       0.11    0.15      0.11       0.15     0.15
         First stage R2                         0.23                 0.14              0.14                0.11
F test on identifying instruments              98.37                10.98             10.98                9.65
            (p-value)                          (0.00)               (0.00)            (0.00)              (0.00)
 Over identification test statistic             4.12                 4.63              4.63                2.29
            (p-value)                         (0.127)               (0.09)            (0.09)              (0.32)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                    1.21                 2.76              2.76               0.064
            (p-value)                         (0.729)              (0.904)           (0.904)             (0.200)
                                                                  Panel B: Females
                                                  All females                 Females with lifetime disorder
                                       Work hours          Log earnings       Work hours          Log earnings
                                        n = 1,678            n = 1,551         n = 1,051             n = 976
                                     OLS       2SLS       OLS       2SLS     OLS      2SLS       OLS       2SLS
                                     -3.30    -12.08     0.103     -0.146   43.39     236.6      0.018 -0.589
                                    (-0.08) (-0.13) (1.28) (-0.76) (0.90)             (1.03) (0.20) (-1.27)
                R2                    0.11      0.11      0.10       0.09    0.15      0.13       0.11     0.07
         First stage R2                         0.25                 0.26              0.15                0.15
F test on identifying instruments              123.9               114.36             15.78               13.21
            (p-value)                          (0.00)               (0.00)            (0.00)              (0.00)
 Over identification test statistic            0.711                 1.06             0.124                2.78
            (p-value)                          (0.70)               (0.58)           (0.940)             (0.249)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                   0.011                 2.01             0.746                1.78
            (p-value)                         (0.083)              (0.843)           (0.612)             (0.817)
Notes: Table shows coefficient and T-statistic (in parentheses) for the recent mental disorder measure only – other coefficients not shown. Each
column in each panel comes from a separate model. All models adjusted for complex survey design. The controls are listed in Table 2.
                    Table 4: Constrained Bivariate Probit Models – Male and Female Samples
Coeff on Disorder     (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)                   (8)
  (T-statistic)     ρ = -0.3   ρ = -0.2   ρ = -0.1       ρ=0         ρ = 0.1     ρ = 0.2    ρ = 0.3    ρ set such that selection on
[Marginal effect]                                    (Duplicated                                       observables = selection on
                                                     from Table                                               unobservables
                                                           2)
                                                                A.    Males ( n = 1,750)
In labor force       -0.056     -0.235     -0.415       -0.635        -0.773      -0.952      -1.13               -0.451
                     (-0.61)    (-2.54)    (-4.44)      (-6.58)       (-8.29)    (-10.28)   (-12.36)              (-4.83)
                    [-0.010]   [-0.044]   [-0.081]     [-0.132]      [-0.166]    [-0.214]   [-0.267]             [-0.089]

                                                                                                                ρ = -0.08
Employed             -0.010     -0.212     -0.391      -0.605         -0.749     -0.928       -1.10               -0.644
                    (-0.032)    (-2.40)    (-4.39)     (-6.74)        (-8.41)   (-10.48)    (-12.65)              (-7.21)
                     [-0.37]   [-0.042]   [-0.081]    [-0.132]       [-0.169]   [-0.219]    [-0.273]             [-0.141]

                                                                                                                ρ = 0.04
                                                     B. Males with lifetime disorder (n = 1,051)
In labor force       -0.017     -0.188     -0.356      -0.561     -0.686       -0.847        -1.00                -0.543
                     (-0.18)    (-1.99)    (-3.74)     (-5.63)    (-7.23)      (-9.03)     (-10.91)               (-5.71)
                    [-0.004]   [-0.046]   [-0.079]    [-0.128]   [-0.155]     [-0.195]     [-0.235]              [-0.122]

                                                                                                                ρ = 0.01
Employed             -0.016     -0.187     -0.355      -0.558         -0.684     -0.845       -1.00              -0.627
                     (-0.18)    (-2.09)    (-3.94)     (-5.87)        (-7.61)    (-9.50)    (-11.48)             (-6.96)
                    [-0.004]   [-0.044]   [-0.083]    [-0.133]       [-0.162]   [-0.203]    [-0.245]            [-0.148]

                                                                                                                ρ = 0.06
                                                               C. Females (n = 2,385)
In labor force       0.379      0.209      0.038       -0.181       -0.309    -0.484         -0.661               -0.673
                     (4.70)     (2.45)     (0.46)      (-2.64)      (-3.75)   (-5.91)        (-8.16)              (-8.32)
                    [0.093]    [0.052]    [0.010]     [-0.048]     [-0.084]  [-0.136]       [-0.190]             [-0.194]

                                                                                                                ρ = 0.30
Employed             0.342      0.177      0.012       -0.160        -0.315      -0.476     -0.637               -0.315
                      (4.75)      (2.42)       (0.16)       (-2.94)     (-4.27)     (-6.54)      (-8.88)               (-4.28)
                     [0.095]     [0.049]      [0.003]      [-0.046]    [-0.086]    [-0.131]     [-0.175]              [-0.086]

                                                                                                                     ρ = 0.10
                                                         D. Females with lifetime disorder (n = 1,514)
In labor force        0.256       0.089        -0.077       -0.277     -0.404       -0.565       -0.724                -0.448
                      (3.02)      (1.03)       (-0.89)      (-3.41)    (-4.68)      (-6.62)      (-8.63)               (-5.21)
                     [0.065]     [0.022]      [-0.019]     [-0.069]   [-0.100]     [-0.139]     [-0.179]              [-0.110]

                                                                                                                     ρ = 0.13
Employed              0.342       0.177        0.012        -0.177      -0.315      -0.477       -0.637               -0.315
                      (4.75)      (2.42)       (0.16)       (-2.56)     (-4.27)     (-6.54)      (-8.88)              (-4.28)
                     [0.095]     [0.049]      [0.003]      [-0.069]    [-0.086]    [-0.131]     [-0.175]             [-0.086]

                                                                                                                       ρ = 0.10
Notes: Table shows coefficient, T-statistic (in parentheses), average marginal effect (in brackets) for the recent mental disorder measure only –
other coefficients not shown. Each cell in the tables comes from a separate model. Results generated from probit and bivariate probit models
adjusted for complex survey design. Employment equations include controls listed in notes to Table 2, as well as early onset of disorder and
parental psychiatric symptoms. Psychiatric disorder equation omits county level poverty and employment and includes early onset of disorder and
parental psychiatric symptoms. The estimated ρ that is imposed in column 8 is listed in each cell in column 8.




                                                                                                                                              41
Appendix Table 1: Effect of recent affective, anxiety, and substance use disorders on labor market outcomes
                               Females          Females with lifetime              Males      Males with lifetime
                                                     disorder                                     disorder


                                                     Panel A: In Labor Force (Probit Model)
                               n = 2,386             n = 1,514                    n = 1,751       n = 1,051
     Anxiety disorder            -0.096                -0.194                       -0.493          -0.436
                                 (-1.26)               (-2.25)                      (-4.44)         (-3.25)
                                [-0.029]              [-0.064]                     [-0.135]        [-0.115]
    Affective disorder           -0.303                -0.331                       -0.585          -0.550
                                 (-3.78)               (-4.27)                      (-4.62)         (-4.27)
                                [-0.099]              [-0.114]                     [-0.168]        [-0.115]
    Substance disorder           -0.211                -0.221                        0.130           0.107
                                 (-1.19)               (-1.07)                       (0.57)          (0.49)
                                [-0.068]              [-0.075]                      [0.028]         [0.023]
                                                        Panel B: Employed (Probit Model)
                               n = 2,386             n = 1,514                    n = 1,751       n = 1,051
     Anxiety disorder            -0.070                -0.104                       -0.517          -0.446
                                 (-1.01)               (-1.31)                      (-4.09)         (-3.41)
                                [-0.026]              [-0.040]                     [-0.127]        [-0.129]
    Affective disorder           -0.270                -0.269                       -0.565          -0.571
                                 (-2.91)               (-3.47)                      (-4.29)         (-4.64)
                                [-0.102]              [-0.106]                     [-0.145]        [-0.174]
    Substance disorder           -0.181                -0.174                        0.117           0.121
                                 (-1.13)               (-0.95)                       (0.50)        (0.220)
                                 [-.068]              [-0.068]                      [0.022]         [0.029]
                                                          Panel C: Hours Worked (OLS)
                               n = 1,678             n = 1,051                    n = 1,422        n = 827
     Anxiety disorder           -14.51                  25.13                        -59.9          -86.73
                                (-0.37)                 (0.64)                      (-1.05)         (-1.44)
    Affective disorder           15.26                  34.98                        -92.5         -119.84
                                 (0.29)                 (0.65)                      (-1.35)         (-1.89)
    Substance disorder           -13.6                 -20.13                        -19.5          -12.71
                                (-0.11)                (-0.18)                      (-0.24)         (-0.17)
                                                           Panel D: Log earnings (OLS)
                                          n = 1,551                     n = 976                        n = 1,339                      n = 773
      Anxiety disorder                      0.038                       -0.039                           0.066                         0.110
                                            (0.46)                      (-0.46)                          (0.70)                        (1.20)
      Affective disorder                    0.044                        0.041                          -0.109                        -0.107
                                            (0.59)                       (0.62)                         (-1.04)                       (-1.04)
     Substance disorder                     0.304                        0.200                           0.038                         0.115
                                            (1.36)                       (0.91)                          (0.32)                        (1.08)
Notes: Table shows coefficients, T-statistics (in parentheses), and marginal effects (in brackets for probit models only) for the recent mental
disorder measures only – other coefficients not shown. The three disorders (anxiety, affective, substance) are included in the same model.
Results generated from probit and OLS models that take into account the complex survey design. Models include full set of controls listed in Table
2.




                                                                                                                                               43
                             Appendix Table 2a: 2SLS Models – Male Samples
                                                               Panel A: Males
                                     In labor force      Employed          Work hours         Log earnings
                                       n = 1,751         n = 1,751          n = 1,422            n =1,339
                                    OLS         IV     OLS        IV     OLS         IV       OLS        IV
                                   -0.138 -0.169 -0.138 -0.165 -48.3 -139.95                 0.044 -0.004
                                   (-6.10) (-3.22) (-6.19) (-3.27) (-1.06) (-1.48)           (0.83) (-0.03)
                R2                   0.19      0.19    0.19      0.19    0.14       0.14      0.14      0.14
          First stage R2                       0.26              0.26               0.23                0.24
F test on identifying instruments            138.81            138.81              98.37               93.57
            (p-value)                         (0.00)            (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)
Over identification test statistic             2.95              1.93               4.12                1.83
            (p-value)                        (0.229)            (0.38)            (0.127)             (0.400)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                  0.425             0.343               1.21               0.164
            (p-value)                        (0.485)           (0.442)            (0.729)             (0.314)
                                                     Panel B: Males with lifetime disorder
                                     In labor force      Employed          Work hours         Log earnings
                                       n = 1,051         n = 1,051           n = 827             n = 773
                                    OLS         IV     OLS        IV     OLS         IV       OLS       IV
                                   -0.130 -0.286 -0.123 -0.288 -63.00 -348.95                0.133 0.209
                                   (-5.59) (-2.40) (-5.29) (-2.45) (-1.46) (-1.97)           (2.07) (0.68)
                R2                   0.20      0.16    0.19      0.16    0.15       0.11      0.15     0.15
          First stage R2                       0.16              0.16               0.14               0.11
F test on identifying instruments             20.70             20.70              10.98               9.65
            (p-value)                         (0.00)            (0.00)             (0.00)             (0.00)
Over identification test statistic             4.66              5.75               4.63               2.29
            (p-value)                         (0.10)            (0.06)             (0.09)             (0.32)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                   1.83              2.05               2.76              0.064
            (p-value)                         (0.83)           (0.848)            (0.904)            (0.200)




                                                                                                                44
Notes: Table shows coefficient and T-statistic (in parentheses) for the recent mental disorder measure only – other coefficients not shown. Each
column in each panel comes from a separate model. IV coefficient estimates generated from 2SLS models adjusted for complex survey design.
Employment equations include controls listed in notes to Table 2. Psychiatric disorder equation omits county level poverty and employment. The
variables identifying the labor market equation are early onset of disorder and parental psychiatric symptoms.




                                                                                                                                             45
                            Appendix Table 2b: 2SLS Models – Female Samples
                                                               Panel A: Females
                                     In labor force       Employed         Work hours       Log earnings
                                       n = 2,386          n = 2,386         n = 1,678         n = 1,551
                                    OLS         IV     OLS         IV    OLS         IV     OLS       IV
                                    -0.04     -0.09    -0.04     -0.09   -3.30 -12.08 0.103 -0.146
                                   (-2.43) (-2.17) (-2.90) (-2.03) (-0.08) (-0.13) (1.28) (-0.76)
                R2                   0.14      0.13     0.20      0.19    0.11      0.11    0.10     0.09
          First stage R2                       0.27               0.27              0.25             0.26
F test on identifying instruments             187.5              187.5             123.9           114.36
            (p-value)                         (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)
Over identification test statistic             5.91               7.67             0.711             1.06
            (p-value)                         (0.05)             (0.02)            (0.70)           (0.58)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                   1.54               1.35             0.011             2.01
            (p-value)                        (0.794)            (0.750)           (0.083)          (0.843)
                                                    Panel B: Females with lifetime disorder
                                     In labor force       Employed         Work hours       Log earnings
                                       n = 1,514          n = 1,514         n = 1,051          n = 976
                                    OLS         IV     OLS         IV    OLS         IV     OLS       IV
                                   -0.065 -0.224 -0.044 -0.163 43.39 236.6 0.018 -0.589
                                   (-3.34) (-1.58) (-2.35) (-1.16) (0.90) (1.03) (0.20) (-1.27)
                R2                   0.18      0.15     0.21      0.20    0.15      0.13    0.11     0.07
          First stage R2                       0.13               0.13              0.15             0.15
F test on identifying instruments              26.2               26.2             15.78            13.21
            (p-value)                         (0.00)             (0.00)            (0.00)           (0.00)
Over identification test statistic             5.08               3.58             0.124             2.78
            (p-value)                         (0.08)            (0.167)           (0.940)          (0.249)
   Wu-Hausman test statistic                   1.30              0.725             0.746             1.78
            (p-value)                         (0.75)            (0.605)           (0.612)          (0.817)
Notes: Table shows coefficient and T-statistic (in parentheses) for the recent mental disorder measure only – other coefficients not shown. Each
column in each panel comes from a separate model. IV coefficient estimates generated from 2SLS models adjusted for complex survey design.
Employment equations include controls listed in notes to Table 2. Psychiatric disorder equation omits county level poverty and employment. The
variables identifying the labor market equation are early onset of disorder and parental psychiatric symptoms.




                                                                                                                                             47
Appendix Table 3a: Weighted Means by Recent Psychiatric Disorder - Male Samples
                                                    I. Males (n = 1,751)             I. Males with lifetime disorder (n = 1,051)
                                              All          Recent        No recent       All         Recent        No recent
                                                          disorder        disorder                  disorder        disorder
                                          (n = 1,751)    (n = 489 )    (n = 1262 )      (n =      (n = 489 )       (n = 562 )
                                                                                       1,051)
Employment outcomes
In labor force                               0.86           0.72         0.89***        0.80         0.72           0.86***
Employed                                     0.85           0.71         0.88***        0.79         0.71           0.85***
Earnings among employed                    48,952        45,515.7       49,560.0      44,731      45,515.7         44,216.5
                                          (2,130.7)      (2,542.1)      (2,526.8)    (1,315.3)    (2,542.1)        (1,605.8)
Work hours among employed                   2,280         2204.7         2,294.2      2,243.7      2,204.7          2,269.3
                                            (25.0)         (43.2)         (29.2)       (25.8)       (43.2)           (31.3)
Psychiatric disorders
Any disorder in past 12 months               0.18           1.00         0.00***       0.43          1.00           0.00***
Affective disorder in past 12 months         0.07           0.41         0.00***       0.18          0.41           0.00***
Anxiety disorder in past 12 months           0.12           0.68         0.00***       0.30          0.68           0.00***
Substance disorder in past 12 months         0.05           0.26         0.00***       0.11          0.26           0.00***
Any lifetime disorder                        0.41           1.00         0.28***       1.00          1.00            1.00
Number of disorders with onset prior to      0.37           1.30         0.17***       0.90          1.30           0.59***
age 18                                      (0.02)         (0.08)        (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.08)          (0.04)
Mother anxious and/or depressed              0.07           0.15         0.05***       0.12          0.15           0.09***
Father anxious and/or depressed              0.03           0.08         0.02***       0.06          0.05           0.08**
Chronic physical illnesses
Arthritis                                    0.22          0.28          0.21***       0.27          0.29            0.25
Stroke                                       0.02          0.04          0.02**        0.02          0.04           0.01***
Heart attack                                 0.03          0.06          0.03**        0.05          0.06            0.04
Diabetes                                     0.07          0.09           0.06         0.07          0.09            0.06
Ulcer                                        0.10          0.16          0.09***       0.13          0.16           0.11**
Cancer                                       0.04          0.03           0.04         0.04          0.03            0.04
Demographic, SES, and family




                                                                                                                               48
background characteristics
Latino                                                    0.11              0.12            0.11             0.11            0.12              0.10
African-American                                          0.12              0.09            0.12*            0.09            0.09              0.09
Asian                                                     0.02              0.02            0.02             0.02            0.02              0.02
US Citizen                                                0.92              0.98            0.97             0.98            0.98              0.98
Immigrant                                                 0.14              0.05           0.09**            0.05            0.05              0.05
Age                                                       43.2              42.0            43.4*            43.5            42.0             44.7***
                                                         (.400)            (0.53)          (0.47)            (.35)          (0.53)             (.38)
Midwest                                                   0.25              0.27            0.24             0.26            0.27              0.25
South                                                     0.35              0.28           0.36***           0.30            0.28              0.32
West                                                      0.22              0.21            0.24*            0.25            0.24              0.26
Married                                                   0.68              0.55           0.71***           0.61            0.55             0.66***
Divorced or widowed                                       0.16              0.22           0.15***           0.22            0.22              0.22
Number of children aged under 5 years                     0.20              0.18            0.21             0.19            0.18              0.19
                                                         (.015)            (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)            (0.03)
Number of children aged 5-12 years                        0.44              0.46            0.43             0.41            0.46             0.36**
                                                          (.03)            (0.05)          (0.04)           (0.03)          (0.05)            (0.03)
Number of children aged 13-17 years                       0.32              0.32            0.33             0.35            0.32              0.39
                                                          (.02)            (0.05)          (0.02)           (0.03)          (0.05)            (0.04)
12 years of education                                     0.32              0.35            0.31             0.33            0.35              0.30
13-15 years of education                                  0.27              0.28            0.27             0.29            0.28              0.29
16+ years of education                                    0.27              0.22            0.28             0.24            0.22              0.25*
Lived with both parents until age 16                      0.70              0.67            0.71             0.69            0.66              0.70
Number of geographic moves during                          2.2              2.3              2.1              2.3             2.3               2.3
childhood                                                (0.11)            (0.16)          (0.13)           (0.13)          (0.16)            (0.18)
Family received welfare during childhood                  0.10              0.15            0.09             0.11            0.15              0.08

Smoker                                                    0.29              0.44           0.25***           0.40            0.44             0.36**
Attends religious services frequently                     0.33              0.22           0.35***           0.27            0.22             0.30***
Notes: All statistics shown adjusted for complex survey design. * indicates difference by psychiatric disorder status is statistically significant at the
.10 level; ** indicates difference is statistically significant at the .05 level; *** indicates difference is statistically significant at the .01 level. For
brevity, the occupational categories and the county-level unemployment and poverty measures are not shown in the table.




                                                                                                                                                          49
Appendix Table 3b: Weighted Means by Recent Psychiatric Disorder - Female Samples
                                                    I. Females (n = 2,386)                 I. Females with lifetime disorder
                                                                                                     (n = 1,514 )
                                              All          Recent       No recent         All       Recent          No recent
                                                           disorder      disorder        (n =       disorder         disorder
                                          (n = 2,386)     (n = 869 )   (n = 1,517 )     1,514)     (n = 869 )       (n = 645 )
Employment outcomes
In labor force                                0.77           0.73         0.79***         0.77         0.73          0.82***
Employed                                      0.71           0.67          0.72**         0.71         0.67          0.75***
Earnings among employed                    28,482.6       28,330.9       28,532.5      29,133.7     28,330.9        30,085.3
                                            (641.7)        (875.2)        (729.1)       (785.0)      (875.2)        (1,021.5)
Hours among employed                         1,909        1,908.9        1,910.0       1,892.6      1,908.9          1,873.3
                                            (17.06)         (34.2)         (22.9)        (21.2)       (34.2)          (32.6)
Psychiatric disorders
Any disorder in past 12 months               0.25            1.00            0.00***     0.56         1.00           0.00***
Affective disorder in past 12 months         0.12            0.47            0.00***     0.26         0.47           0.00***
Anxiety disorder in past 12 months           0.19            0.76            0.00***     0.42         0.76           0.00***
Substance disorder in past 12 months         0.02            0.08            0.00***     0.04         0.08           0.00***
Any lifetime disorder                        0.45            1.00            0.27***     1.00         1.00            1.00
Number of disorders with onset prior to      0.41            1.17            0.15***     0.90         1.17           0.55***
age 18                                                      (0.04)           (0.01)     (0.03)       (0.04)          (0.04)
Mother anxious and/or depressed              0.11            0.21            0.08***     0.18         0.21           0.13***
Father anxious and/or depressed              0.05            0.09            0.04***     0.07         0.09           0.05**
Chronic physical illnesses
Arthritis                                    0.28           0.33             0.26***     0.31         0.33            0.29
Stroke                                       0.02           0.03             0.01**      0.03         0.03            0.02
Heart attack                                 0.01           0.02              0.01       0.02         0.02            0.02
Diabetes                                     0.07           0.06              0.07       0.06         0.06            0.06
Ulcer                                        0.10           0.16             0.07***     0.14         0.17           0.11***
Cancer                                       0.06           0.09             0.04***     0.07         0.09           0.06**
Demographic, SES, and family




                                                                                                                                 50
background characteristics
Latino                                                    0.11              0.11             0.11            0.09            0.08              0.11*
African-American                                          0.13              0.11             0.13            0.10            0.08             0.11**
Asian                                                     0.01              0.01             0.01            0.01            0.01               0.02
US Citizen                                                0.97              0.98             0.97            0.98            0.98               0.98
Immigrant                                                 0.09              0.06           0.10***           0.06            0.06               0.05
Age                                                       43.4              41.8           44.0***           42.8            42.0             44.2***
                                                          (.34)            (0.36)          (0.42)           (0.29)          (0.36)             (.41)
Midwest                                                   0.23              0.22             0.23            0.24            0.22               0.25
South                                                     0.36              0.33           0.37***           0.32            0.33               0.31
West                                                      0.23              0.22            0.24*            0.24            0.25               0.24
Married                                                   0.63              0.54           0.66***           0.59            0.55             0.64***
Divorced or widowed                                       0.22              0.29           0.20***           0.27            0.29             0.24**
Number of children aged under 5 years                     0.19              0.17             0.20            0.17            0.17               0.16
                                                         (.013)            (0.17)          (0.16)           (0.01)          (0.02)            (0.02)
Number of children aged 5-12 years                        0.42              0.47             0.40            0.43            0.47              0.38*
                                                          (.02)            (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.02)          (0.03)            (0.04)
Number of children aged 13-17 years                       0.30              0.33             0.28            0.35            0.33               0.38
                                                          (.02)            (0.02)          (0.02)           (0.02)          (0.02)            (0.05)
12 years of education                                     0.31              0.30             0.32            0.30            0.30               0.30
13-15 years of education                                  0.29              0.31             0.28            0.31            0.31               0.31
16+ years of education                                    0.28              0.23           0.29***           0.27            0.24              0.30*
Lived with both parents until age 16                      0.70              0.65           0.72**            0.69            0.65             0.74***
Number of geographic moves during                          2.0              2.8             1.7***            2.4             2.8              1.8***
childhood                                                (0.08)            (0.22)          (0.09)           (0.13)          (0.22)            (0.12)
Family received welfare during childhood                  0.09              0.12           0.08**            0.11            0.12               0.11

Smoker                                                    0.25              0.34           0.22***           0.32            0.34             0.28**
Attends religious services frequently                     0.40              0.31           0.43***           0.35            0.31             0.39**
Notes: All statistics shown adjusted for complex survey design. * indicates difference by psychiatric disorder status is statistically significant at the
.10 level; ** indicates difference is statistically significant at the .05 level; *** indicates difference is statistically significant at the .01 level. For
brevity, the occupational categories and the county-level unemployment and poverty measures are not shown in the table.




                                                                                                                                                          51
                    Appendix Table 4: Baseline Probit and OLS Models – Male and Female Samples
Coeff on Recent          (1)                   (2)                    (3)           (4)                (5)                 (6)
   Disorder          No controls           Race, age,             Full set of   No controls        Race, age,          Full set of
    (T-stat)                                 region                controls                          region             controls
[Marginal effect]
                                      I. All males (N = 1,751)                       II. Males with lifetime disorder (N=1,051)
In labor force          -0.645                  -0.765              -0.635        -0.502                 -0.649            -0.561
(Probit)                (-6.85)                 (-8.64)             (-6.58)       (-5.33)                (-7.49)           (-5.63)
                       [-0.167]                [-0.187]            [-0.132]      [-0.140]               [-0.167]          [-0.128]
Employed                -0.617                  -0.745              -0.605        -0.491                 -0.639            -0.558
(Probit)                (-7.02)                 (-9.10)             (-6.74)       (-5.72)                (-7.78)           (-5.87)
                       [-0.168]                [-0.188]            [-0.132]      [-0.141]               [-0.170]          [-0.133]
Work hours              -81.50                  -79.23              -48.31        -50.60                 -41.86            -63.00
(OLS)                   (-1.54)                 (-1.55)             (-1.06)       (-1.01)                (-0.85)           (-1.49)
                      n = 1,423               n = 1,423           n = 1,422      n = 827                n = 827           n = 827
Log earnings            -0.015                  -0.016               0.044         0.108                  0.144             0.134
(OLS)                   (-0.18)                 (-0.18)             (0.83)        (1.32)                  (1.75)            (2.07)
                      n = 1,339               n = 1,339           n = 1,339      n = 773                n = 773           n = 773
                                   III. All females (N = 2,386)                  IV. Females with lifetime disorder (N = 1,514)
In labor force          -0.187                  -0.250              -0.181        -0.294                 -0.345            -0.277
(Probit)                (-2.72)                 (-3.27)             (-2.64)       (-4.32)                (-4.54)           (-3.41)
                       [-0.058]                [-0.075]            [-0.048]      [-0.038]               [-0.099]          [-0.069]
Employed                -0.058                  -0.208              -0.160        -0.230                 -0.264            -0.177
(Probit)                (-1.35)                 (-3.10)             (-2.94)       (-3.34)                (-3.69)           (-2.56)
                       [-0.047]                [-0.068]            [-0.046]      [-0.078]               [-0.086]          [-0.069]
Work hours               11.04                   23.79                -3.30        53.11                  63.42             43.39
(OLS)                   (0.26)                  (0.53)              (-0.08)       (1.09)                  (1.21)            (0.90)
                      n = 1,679               n = 1,679           n = 1,679     n = 1,051              n = 1,051         n = 1.051
Log earnings              0.06                    0.05               0.103        -0.063                 -0.059             0.018
(OLS)                   (0.76)                   (0.67)              (1.28)       (-0.78)                (-0.76)            (0.20)
                      n = 1,551               n = 1,551           n = 1,551      n = 976                n = 976           n = 976




                                                                                                                                     52
Notes: Table shows coefficient, T-statistic (in parentheses), and average marginal effect (in brackets for probit models only) for the recent mental
disorder measure only – other coefficients not shown. Each cell in the tables comes from a separate model. Results generated from probit and
OLS models that take into account the complex survey design. Models of work hours and earnings are limited to employed individuals with
available data on outcome. Full set of controls includes: race, age, age squared, region, education, marital status, number of children under age
5, number of children 5-12, number of children 13-17, citizen, immigrant, smoker, chronic physical illness indicators, county unemployment and
poverty rates, 11 occupational categories, number of moves during childhood, received welfare during childhood, lived with both parents until age
16, and frequent religious attendance.




                                                                                                                                                  53
Appendix Table 5: Summary of first stage results
                                                            Males        Males        Females       Females with
                                                                         with                       lifetime
                                                                         lifetime                   disorder
                                                                         disorder
Number of disorders with onset prior to age 18              0.18         0.09         0.20          0.08
                                                            (13.24)      (6.06)       (21.63)       (9.79)
Mother was sad or anxious during respondent’s               0.09         0.07         0.08          0.05
childhood                                                   (1.57)       (1.05)       (2.72)        (1.42)
Father was sad or anxious during respondent’s               0.04         0.01         0.03          0.09
childhood                                                   (0.70)       (0.09)       (0.79)        (1.92)
Notes: The dependent variable in each model is “any disorder in past 12 months.” Table shows coefficients and T-statistics (in
parentheses) for the identifying instruments only – other coefficients not shown. Models include set of controls listed in Table 2.




                                                                                                                                      54
