NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WILL THE U.S. BANK RECAPITALIZATION SUCCEED? EIGHT LESSONS FROM
JAPAN
Takeo Hoshi
Anil K Kashyap
Working Paper 14401
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14401

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008
Hoshi is affiliated with the School of International Relations and Pacific Studies at the University of
California San Diego, National Bureau of Economic Research, and Tokyo Center for Economic Research.
Kashyap is affiliated with the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research. Kashyap thanks the Initiative on Global Markets
at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for research support. Earlier drafts of this paper
circulated under the titles “Will the TARP Succeed? Lessons from Japan” and “Will the U.S. Recapitalization
Succeed? Lessons from Japan.” We thank Kanako Hotta, Yian Liu and Ashish Shenoy for excellent
research assistance and Peggy Eppink for help preparing the document. We thank Mitsuhiro Fukao,
Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, David Greenlaw, Beverly Hirtle, Takatoshi Ito, Hiroshi Osano, Kevin Stiroh
and seminar participants at the 2009 ASSA Meeting, the Banque de France, the Bank of Japan, Doshisha
University, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Harvard Law School, Indiana University, the International
Monetary Fund, the Ohio State University, NBER 2009 Summer Institute, Princeton University, Tsinghua
University, University of Illinois, Chicago and the Yale Law School for useful comments. The views
in this paper are those of the authors alone and not the institutions with which we are affiliated, all
mistakes are our own.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Takeo Hoshi and Anil K Kashyap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Will the U.S. Bank Recapitalization Succeed? Eight Lessons from Japan
Takeo Hoshi and Anil K Kashyap
NBER Working Paper No. 14401
October 2008, Revised September 2009
JEL No. E44,G18,G28,G38
ABSTRACT
During the financial crisis that started in 2007, the U.S. government has used a variety of tools to try
to rehabilitate the U.S. banking industry. Many of those strategies were used also in Japan to combat
its banking problems in the 1990s. There are also a surprising number of other similarities between
the current U.S. crisis and the recent Japanese crisis. The Japanese policies were only partially successful
in recapitalizing the banks until the economy finally started to recover in 2003. From these unsuccessful
attempts, we derive eight lessons. In light of these eight lessons, we assess the policies the U.S. has
pursued. The U.S. has ignored three of the lessons and it is too early to evaluate the U.S. policies with
respect to four of the others. So far the U.S. has avoided Japan’s problem of having impaired banks
prop up zombie firms.

Takeo Hoshi
School of International Relations and Pacific Stud
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
thoshi@ucsd.edu
Anil K Kashyap
Booth School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
anil.kashyap@chicagobooth.edu

1. Introduction
The U.S. government has taken a schizophrenic policy approach to the ongoing credit
crisis that began in August 2007. For the first year of crisis, there were no significant legislative
changes. Instead, the existing toolkit was stretched to combat problems as they appeared. By
October 2008, in the midst of the panic that ensued after the failure of Lehman Brothers, the
Treasury went to Congress proposing the idea of purchasing troubled assets to stabilize the
financial system. Thus, the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) became the central part of
the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. But within a week of passing the legislation,
attention shifted to buying equity in financial institutions. Subsequently, the Capital Purchase
Program (CPP) within the TARP was unveiled and within weeks $145 billion was allocated to
nine major banks. Asset purchases were delayed.
By November, one of the recipients of the CPP, Citigroup, had received a second round
of government assistance and in January 2009, Bank of America also was given additional
government support. The Obama administration, upon assuming office, changed course again
and called for a set of “stress tests” to determine the capital adequacy of major banks and a new
program for asset purchases was unveiled. Upon conclusion of the stress tests banks were given
target levels of capital that they were required to achieve. Some banks that initially received
capital assistance were allowed to repay the government, while others began selling assets and
issuing equity to meet the terms of the tests. The asset purchase programs through the middle of
2009 remained a minor component of the actual policies that were undertaken.
For anyone familiar with Japanese financial crisis from a decade ago these events would
seem familiar. 1 Almost all of the policy options deployed in the U.S. were attempted in Japan.
Because the Japanese episode is now complete, it seems useful to look at how the programs in
Japan fared. The goal of this paper is to assemble the evidence on these programs, offer an
assessment of their effectiveness, and reflect on the U.S. policy choices in light of the Japanese
experience.
1

Udell (2008) points out further similarities in the evolution of the governments’ responses in Japan and the U.S.
He summarizes by saying “More generally, as new events unfolded in Japan, regulators…had to use a combination
of existing tools, new tools that stretched the regulatory limits of existing institutions, and go to the legislature for
new authority and funding. We witnessed the same combination in the evolution of the response of U.S. authorities.”

3

In retrospect, there were in fact three phases of the Japanese saga. The first part is from
the early 1990s until November of 1997 when asset prices crashed and Japan’s slow growth
period began. The first set of government interventions in the financial system occurred during
this period. But we argue that the most important lasting effect was from the political dynamics
that developed over this period.
The second phase in Japan was from November of 1997 to March of 1999. We show that
there were many very close parallels between this period in Japan and the developments in the
U.S. from 2008 through mid-2009. This part of the Japanese slowdown was associated with
exceptionally tight credit and a sharp growth contraction.
The third phase of the Japanese crisis, from 1999 through 2003, saw a resumption of
lending. But the lending was misdirected and the economy under-performed. The lending
problems during this period were no longer tied to the initial asset price declines that were
important in the first phase of the crisis. Instead, they were a product of changes in lending that
came in part from the policies adopted in phase two.
To be sure, the shocks hitting the Japanese and U.S. economies were not identical. There
are some similarities that we identify, but there are some important differences too. Nonetheless,
we identify eight lessons that emerge from Japan’s many policies and use these lessons to inform
discussions about the risks associated with various U.S. policies.
Overall, this paper makes three contributions. First, it provides a concise summary of the
Japanese experience. While there are numerous studies of the Japanese financial crisis, we are
not aware of any retrospectives looking across the whole 20 years of Japan’s problems and
focusing on the policy responses. Second, we provide new analysis of the main Japanese
interventions that sheds light on the variation in success. This leads to the eight key lessons that
we see from Japan for other countries. Third, we offer a brief comparison of the different U.S.
policies through the lens of Japanese experience. A contemporaneous assessment is bound to be
incomplete, and perhaps once all the events have concluded, may prove to be of limited use. But,
at the very least documenting things that were knowable when choices were being made should
be useful for future accounts.
4

To lay a common background for the policy evaluation, we start with a brief description
of the key facts about U.S. events and policies. Next, Section 3 provides more details on the
three phases of the Japanese crisis. Section 4 analyzes the success and failure of the various
Japanese programs, so as to deliver some lessons for other countries. Section 5 reviews the U.S.
policy responses in light of the lessons from Japan. Section 6 concludes.
2. The U.S. Financial Crisis, 2007 to mid-2009
Given ever expanding set of surveys of this financial crisis, we do not attempt to provide
a full account of it. 2 Instead we focus on the facts needed to put the major policy choices in
context.
The problems for the U.S. financial system started with increased defaults of subprime
and other nontraditional mortgage loans as the housing boom came to an end. During the
housing boom of the 2000s, risky mortgage loans were securitized, structured into various types
of financial products, and distributed to investors all around the world. But the risk
diversification was far from complete and many financial institutions increased their ownership
of real estate related assets. For example, Udell (2008) points out that large U.S. commercial
banks increased the proportion of real estate loans in their portfolio from 44% in 2003 to 53% by
2007. As the underlying mortgages become non-performing, the values of their derivative
securities declined, and the financial institutions that held the securities started to suffer losses.
Given the leverage in the financial system these losses were significant relative to the equity of
these firms (Greenlaw et al., 2008).
By early 2008, the losses started to jeopardize the viability of large financial institutions.
In March 2008, the Bear Stearns nearly failed and was rescued by JP Morgan with financial
assistance from the Federal Reserve System.
By September, more financial institutions encountered serious funding problems and
asked for government assistance. First, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the two government
sponsored mortgage giants, were rescued by the government. Shortly afterwards, Lehman
2

A detailed list of prominent events in the United Sates is available at http://timeline.stlouisfed.org/
and http://www.ny.frb.org/research/global_economy/Crisis_Timeline.pdf . For a lengthy discussion and analysis of
crisis, including global aspects, see Bank for International Settlements (2009).

5

Brothers, a major investment bank, also sought help. The government was reluctant to provide
financial assistance to Lehman and encouraged other financial institutions to rescue it. No
financial institutions were willing to step up without government help. Running out of
alternatives, Lehman filed for bankruptcy on September 15.
Financial market conditions shifted notably in the week that followed. The cost of
insuring the debt of many other financial institutions jumped noticeably (Veronesi and Zingales
(2009)). Stock markets around the world dropped sharply. A money market mutual fund
informed investors that it would not be able to redeem claims at par value. Press reports
described credit markets as frozen. Financial firms’ ability to issue commercial paper for more
than a week seems to have disappeared: the average maturity of newly issued commercial paper
dropped from over one month to less than 5 days. Another troubled investment bank, Merrill
Lynch, was acquired by Bank of America. The U.S. government rescued the largest U.S.
insurance company, AIG Insurance. The deal to support AIG had to be renegotiated multiple
times over the coming months.
Toward the end of that week, the regulators announced several measures aimed at
calming the markets. The Federal Reserve decided to insure investments in money market funds.
The Treasury announced the idea of setting up a facility to buy non-performing assets from
financial institutions. The Securities Exchange Commission imposed a temporary ban on short
sales of financial stocks.
Nonetheless, the banking turmoil continued. On September 25, Washington Mutual and
Wachovia, two financial intermediaries which had assets of more than $300 billion and $800
billion respectively, were taken over by the authorities. WaMu was subsequently sold to JP
Morgan Chase, while Wachovia eventually was acquired by Wells Fargo.
The Treasury’s interest in purchasing non-performing assets from major financial
institutions was formalized as the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) which was included in
the bill for the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act. Many politicians worried about
committing $700 billion to a program that would be run by the Treasury without much oversight,
and the bill was initially voted down by the Congress. The government quickly revised the bill,
adding various measures unrelated to financial firms, and the revised bill passed the Congress on
October 3. The TARP, the central part of the bill, did not change very much in the revision.
6

Within a week, the Treasury started to shift the focus from the original idea of buying
troubled assets to buying bank shares to increase the bank capital. On October 14, the Treasury
announced that it would use $125 billion to inject capital into nine large financial institutions by
buying preferred shares that came with warrants to buy common shares. The Republicans lost
the Presidential election on November 4. On November 12, the Treasury announced that the
original TARP plan of buying troubled assets would be postponed indefinitely.
Over the following week, rumors of problems at Citigroup emerged. On November 21,
the Treasury, Federal Reserve, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) acted
collectively to provide assistance to Citigroup. The joint press release by the agencies described
the package as a combination of guarantees, liquidity access, and capital.
On November 25, the Federal Reserve announced the creation of its Term Asset-Backed
Securities Lending Facility (TALF). The TALF allowed holders of AAA-rated asset-backed
securities, backed by recently originated consumer and small business loans, to qualify for a nonrecourse loan from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Fed takes the collateral at a prespecified haircut and receives credit protection from the TARP. This program was intended to
jump start securitization which had ground to a halt after the Lehman failure.
By December, the proposed merger between Merrill Lynch and Bank of America seemed
to have encountered an impasse and Bank of America was privately telling the government that
it was hesitant to proceed. The merger was ultimately consummated on January 1st, but by the
time it was completed the government had agreed to provide additional assistance. On January
16, the Treasury, FDIC, and the Federal Reserve announced a package of guarantees, liquidity
access and capital for Bank of America.
During December 2008, TARP funds were also offered to non-financial firms for the first
time. General Motors and Chrysler, two of the three major auto manufacturers, were given loans
on December 19th totaling $17.4 billion. General Motors subsequently received additional
TARP assistance for its former financing subsidiary, General Motors Acceptance Corporation.
As the change in administrations was approaching in January 2009, press reports
indicated that the Obama administration was set to announce the creation of an “aggregator bank”
that would buy bad assets so that they could be removed from the balance sheets of banks.
When the first plans of the administration were announced, the aggregator bank idea was
dropped, in part reportedly because the funding requirements would have been huge.
7

Instead, the Treasury’s Financial Stability Plan had three components designed to
revitalize the financial system. The first component was a series of bank inspections intended to
gauge the capital levels of banks under different economic scenarios over the next two years.
These stress tests were intended to force the banks to use common economic assumptions about
the path of the economy and similar rules to estimate losses expected from hard to value assets.
The banks were required to have sufficient equity capital to meet the expected losses under an
“adverse” economic scenario in two years (2009 and 2010) and to still clear the minimum capital
level at the end of 2010. Essentially, the analysis boiled down to taking starting levels of capital,
adding profits over the two years and subtracting losses to derive a final level of capital that
would be compared to the benchmark established by the regulators. This exercise was proposed
for the 19 largest bank holding companies in the U.S.
The second component was an extension of the TALF. The Fed would be prepared to
lend up to $1 trillion under the program and the Treasury would offer $100 billion in TARP
funds to protect the Fed from credit losses.
The third component was the Public-Private Investment Program (PPIP) aimed at
removing troubled assets from the banks’ balance sheets. The details on this aspect of the plan
were initially quite vague and seem to have been interpreted as showing that the government had
no clear plan, so the market reaction to the announcement was quite negative: the stock market
dropped over 8% on the day of the announcement. When the details were revealed 6 weeks
later, it was announced that the PPIP would allow private sector investors to borrow money from
the FDIC and then have the equity investment matched by the Treasury in order to buy
mortgages. In principle, the investors could leverage their capital by more than a factor of 12 for
each dollar they contributed.
Between the initial announcement of the Treasury plan on February 10 and when the
details were provided on March 23, the deadline for the payment of $165 million in bonuses for
certain employees at AIG passed. The bonuses had been promised several times and Secretary
Geithner had concluded that there was no legal basis for voiding the payments. But the public
and political outrage was remarkable. The House of Representatives went so far as to pass a bill
calling for 90% tax on any executive bonus payments made to employees of firms that had
received more than $5 billion in TARP assistance.
8

In early May the results of the stress tests were announced and it was concluded that 10
of the 19 major institutions had sufficient capital to withstand even the adverse simulations. The
remaining 9 organization were deemed to have insufficient common equity; although all were
deemed to have other forms of capital that keep them above the legal minimums for total capital
as required by current regulations. These banks were ordered to raise $185 billion in common
equity. Accounting for planned asset sales and profits in the first quarter of 2009 that exceeded
the levels assumed by the regulators, the actual amount of capital to be raised fell to $75 billion.
Part of the recapitalization was accomplished by converting preferred shares (including the ones
the government purchased using TARP funds) to common shares. The banks were given until
November to come up with the equity or they would need to seek equity from the government.
Among the 10 banks that were already sufficiently capitalized, many had taken TARP
funds in the autumn of 2008. Several began the process of repaying the TARP funds so that they
could operate without any restrictions on pay, dividends or other activities.
In contrast to the relatively favorable market reaction regarding the process surrounding
the stress tests, the response to the PPIP was much less enthusiastic. It took the Treasury several
months to work out the details for how the program would operate and the interest of many
potential investors seems to have waned. As of August 1, 2009, no transactions had taken place.
Finally, Chrysler and General Motors both filed for bankruptcy. Each emerged from the
court supervision quite quickly and was operating with a restructured set of labor agreements and
capital structure. Chrysler exited the bankruptcy in June 2009 and most of the assets were
merged with Fiat. General Motors exited the bankruptcy in July 2009. AIG was reorganized
outside of bankruptcy.

3. Japan’s Crisis
In reviewing the Japanese experience, it is helpful to distinguish three somewhat separate
phases. 3 The initial stage runs from the early 1990s until November of 1997. Asset prices
crashed and Japan’s stagnation began. The government’s initial policy interventions, including
3

Contemporaneous descriptions and analysis of the Japanese banking crisis can be found in Cargill, Hutchison, and
Ito (2001), Hoshi and Kashyap (2001, Chapter 8), and Nakaso (2001).

9

establishing asset management companies and extending deposit guarantees, occurred during this
period. The government policy was overall characterized by regulatory forbearance with the
notable exceptions occurring for clearly insolvent financial institutions.
The second, acute phase of the crisis runs from November 1997 to March 1999. The
period started with unexpected failures of major financial institutions including Yamaichi
Securities and Hokkaido Takushoku Bank in November 1997. This period was marked by
exceptionally tight credit. As we show below, there were many very close parallels between this
period in Japan and the developments in the U.S. from late 2007 through 2009 especially in
terms of the policy responses.
The third phase is from April 1999 to early 2003 when the economy finally bottomed out.
The bank recapitalization of March 1999 succeeded in restoring the credit flows. The lending,
however, was often misdirected to poorly performing firms, sometimes with explicit guidance
from the government. After short-lived recovery in 2000, the economy reverted to stagnation,
non-performing loans continued to accumulate, and banks eroded their capital once again. The
non-performing loans during this period were no longer tied so much to the initial asset price
declines that were important in the first phase of the crisis. Loans to loss-making companies,
especially small and medium enterprises, became a more important problem.
This section reviews Japan’s experience during the three phases of the financial crisis.
We review the policy responses as well, but the full analysis of the policies is saved for the next
section.
3.1. Phase One: 1991-1997
When asset prices collapsed in the early 1990s, Japanese banks were highly exposed to
real estate price shocks, directly, through loans to real estate developers and indirectly, through
loans to commercial and industrial firms that were secured by real estate. Many Japanese banks
also owned and lent money to the jusen, financial institutions which were originally created as
niche housing loan companies in the 1970s.
In the 1980s, as the financial markets were deregulated and the lines of separation
between various financial institutions in Japan blurred, the jusen faced increased competition in
the home mortgage market from banks. The jusen began lending in other markets, notably to
10

real estate developers. The land price boom in the late 1980s intensified this trend. The founder
banks of the jusen also “introduced” high-risk loans that they themselves would not make, but
instead would steer to the jusen for a “finder’s fee.”
Thus, it was no surprise that the jusen got into trouble as soon as the land prices started to
decline. By 1991, the non-performing loans at the jusen amounted ¥4.6 trillion, or 38% of their
total loans. 4 The founder banks and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) put together a rescue plan
including loan concessions and interest rate reductions by the founder banks, new loan support
from non-founders, and cost-cutting measures at the jusen. The rescue plan failed to improve the
financial condition of the jusen and the non-performing loans continued to increase.
In 1993, the MOF put together a second rescue plan. Under this plan, the founder banks
reduced their interest rates to the jusen to zero. Non-founder banks reduced the interest rate to
2.5%. Agricultural co-ops, which also heavily lent to the jusen, were required to reduce their
rates to 4.5%. The plan was based on a presumed economic recovery that was expected to
include a 25% increase in real estate values in the following 10 years.
The economy did not recover as quickly as the MOF hoped. By 1995, 75% of jusen
loans were non-performing and 60% were considered unrecoverable. The MOF finally decided
to abandon the jusen companies. After a lengthy deliberation in the Diet, the total loan losses of
¥6.41 trillion was born by the founder institutions (¥3.50 trillion), agricultural co-ops (¥0.53
trillion), other lenders (¥1.70 trillion), and taxpayers (¥0.68 trillion). The remaining assets that
were thought to be possibly recoverable (¥6.6 trillion in book value) were transferred to the
newly created Housing Loan and Administration Corporation (HLAC).
The size of the jusen problem was substantially smaller than the non-performing loan
problem of banks that would subsequently emerge. The MOF repeatedly orchestrated jusen
rescues (mainly by founder banks), but the restructuring plans were often based on overly
optimistic forecasts. Eventually, despite repeated promises that no taxpayer assistance would be
needed, the government had to ask taxpayers to share the losses. Although the amount of public
funds used was tiny (¥0.68 trillion), the public outrage over repudiation of the promise meant
that passing the legislation was contentious and the opposition harnessed this anger to nearly
4

Over the course of the Japanese crisis, the yen/dollar exchange rate fluctuated between 80 and 125, but for order of
magnitude purposes that are relevant for this analysis, the yen figures we quote can be divided by 100 to get a rough
dollar estimate.

11

cripple the government (Miller and Milhaupt, 2000). The legacy of this experience was long
lasting because it made the government very reluctant to ask for the much larger sums that would
be needed once the troubles of the commercial banks became evident.
The collapse of the jusen was the most spectacular example of the financial failures in the
early 1990s, but some non-jusen financial institutions also suffered from the declining real estate
places and failed. The failures during this period were usually resolved by the MOF asking a
healthy bank to absorb the failing bank often with assistance from the Deposit Insurance
Corporation (DIC). For example, Toho Sogo Bank failed in 1991 and was absorbed by Iyo Bank
with assistance from the DIC. Toyo Shinkin Bank failed in 1992 and absorbed by Sanwa Bank
with assistance from the DIC, Industrial Bank of Japan (IBJ) and Zenshinren.
The instability of the banking system peaked in the summer of 1995. Two large credit
unions, Cosmo Credit Union and Kizu Credit Union failed in July and August respectively. In
the Kizu failure depositors ran to the branches as soon as they heard a rumor (which was later
confirmed) that Kizu was closing down. In August, Hyogo Bank, one of the Tier II regional
banks, failed. It was later reorganized as Midori Bank with financial assistance from the DIC,
city banks, and the Bank of Japan (BOJ). The crisis in August 1995 led to the emergence of
“Japan premium,” a premium on the interbank loans that major Japanese banks were asked to
pay compared with their counterparts in the U.S. and Europe.
In the same Diet session as the one that passed the law to liquidate jusen companies, the
Deposit Insurance Act was revised to allow the DIC to offer financial assistance that exceeded
the cost of paying off insured depositors (that is, up to ¥10 million per depositor). Thus, by 1996
Japan had a de facto policy of guaranteeing all deposits.
Throughout this period, the MOF was reluctant to force the banks to disclose the true
extent of the non-performing loan problem. Before March of 1993, the banks did not disclose
any numbers on non-performing loans. When the banks started to disclose the non-performing
loans for the first time, only major banks published any estimates and the definition of nonperforming loans was limited to loans to failed enterprises and loans on which payments were
suspended for more than six months. Only in March 1998 did all the banks finally start to
disclose the non-performing loans on a consistent basis. The definition of non-performing loans
then included loans to failed enterprises, loans on which payments were suspended for more than
three months, and loans with relaxed conditions (restructured loans). Thus, during this first
12

phase of the crisis, the Japanese regulators hoped that banks could work off the non-performing
loans quietly and gradually without disclosing the true extent of the problem to the public. Such
regulatory forbearance seemed to be working when the economy showed signs of recovery in the
mid-1990s.
Although the non-performing loans at banks continued to rise and a few small banks
failed, the economy seemed to have entered a recovery phase. 1996 was a boom year, with real
GDP growth now estimated to have been 5.1%.
However, the recovery did not last long. By the mid-1997, the Japanese economy was
back in recession and financial instability reemerged. The Deposit Insurance Act was changed
again to allow the DIC to provide financial assistance for mergers that did not involve failing
banks, as well as mergers between failed banks. In October 1997, exploiting this change, the
DIC provided funds to facilitate a pair of mergers involving four very weak banks in the Kansai
area: Fukutoku with Naniwa and Kofuku with Kyoto Kyoei.

3.2. The Acute Phase: 1997-1999
The acute phase of the crisis began when a mid-sized securities firm, Sanyo Securities,
declared bankruptcy in early November 1997. This resulted in Japan’s first interbank loan
default. Two weeks later a major bank, Hokkaido Tokushoku, lost the ability to borrow in the
interbank market and was forced to declare bankruptcy. This was the first major bank failure in
postwar Japan. A week later one of the four major securities dealers, Yamaichi Securities, failed
after rumors (subsequently shown to be true) that it had accumulated massive off balance sheet
losses through an illegal tobashi scheme. 5 Finally, before the month ended, Tokuyo City Bank, a
regional bank, also failed.
Figure 1 shows the Japan premium calculated as the difference between 3-month
Eurodollar Tokyo Interbank Borrowing Rate (TIBOR) and the 3-month Eurodollar London
5

In a tobashi scheme, a security company hides capital losses of one corporate customer by selling a part of the
portfolio at an inflated price to another customer (whose accounting period is different from the first customer’s so
that they did not have to disclose the losses at the same time). When the second customer’s accounting year end
arrives, the portfolio is sold to another customer (who may be the same as the first) to hide losses again. Barring a
reversal of market prices, the cycle cannot continue forever and the securities company ends up shouldering the
losses eventually.

13

Interbank Borrowing Rate (LIBOR). 6 Relative borrowing costs for both banks jumped
immediately on the news of Sanyo’s demise (November 3, 1997).
The stress was evident in the domestic interbank loan market (call market) as well.
Figure 2 shows the difference between the maximum and the minimum of the overnight call rate
(uncollateralized) for each day from November 1997 to April 1999.7 As Fukuda (2008) points
out, the difference reflects not only the range of intraday fluctuations of the call rate but also the
difference between the rates for the most creditworthy bank and the least creditworthy bank. The
figure shows that the spread jumped in November 1997 and stayed high for the next 16 months,
suggesting some banks had extreme trouble borrowing even for just one night.
In December 1997, the government decided that public funds would be needed to deal
with the financial crisis and announced that it planned to earmark ¥10 trillion to put into the
banking sector. While the discussion of how to use the public funds was underway, the
government approved a pair of accounting changes that were designed to allow the banks to
make their public financial statements look better than was truly warranted. These rules allowed
the banks to choose to use either market or book values for the banks’ holdings of stocks in other
firms and for the banks’ real estate holdings.
Virtually all the banks’ real estate assets were on their books at the historical acquisition
prices (typically decades old), so even though land prices were well below peak values, a switch
to market values instantly raised the value of the banks’ assets. Conversely, the banks were
harvesting capital gains on their stock holdings in order to report positive earnings. By early
1998 the banks had about ¥24 trillion of stockholdings on their books. Typically upon selling
the shares to collect the capital gains the banks would quickly buy back the shares to retain the
relationships with their clients.

By 1998, the market price for many of the shares that had been

6

We thank Kimie Harada and Takatoshi Ito for providing the data for the figure. Eurodollar TIBOR is calculated by
QUICK, a financial information company, as the average interbank rate of the middle 9 of 13 reference banks (the
highest two and the lowest two banks are excluded). The 13 banks include two non-Japanese banks, but their rates
were almost always excluded as the two lowest, making TIBOR effectively the average rate for Japanese banks.
Eurodollar LIBOR is calculated by the British Bankers Association as the average interbank rate of the middle 8 of
16 reference banks. Three Japanese banks are included in the 16 reference banks, but their rates were almost always
excluded as three of the four highest rates, making LIBOR effectively the average rate for non-Japanese banks. See
Ito and Harada (2005).

7

We thank Shin-ichi Fukuda for providing the data for the figure.

14

sold and re-purchased was below the book value for these shares. Hence, the banks could further
inflate the value of the assets by recording value of the shareholdings at book value.
On February 16, 1998, the Diet passed the Financial Function Stabilization Act, which
allowed the government to use ¥30 trillion of public funds (¥17 trillion for protecting depositors
of failed banks and ¥13 trillion for bank recapitalization). As we describe below, the
government used ¥1.8 trillion out of the ¥13 trillion to recapitalize major banks in March of 1998,
but it was unsuccessful in stabilizing the situation. Public dissatisfaction with the government’s
response continued to build through the spring and in June, the Liberal Democratic Party, the
dominant partner in the ruling government coalition, lost 17 of its 61 seats in the Upper House
election. The Hashimoto government resigned and a new government led by Keizo Obuchi
assumed power.
The new government immediately began formulating further plans for dealing with the
banking problems. By October, another major bank, Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB),
was on the brink of failure. The legislature at that point reached agreement on two pieces of
compromise legislation (between the government and the leading opposition party) to deal with
both insolvent institutions, which was the focus of the opposition, and to help solvent, but undercapitalized banks, which the LDP’s concern. 8 In October, LTCB was nationalized using the new
framework. In December, Nippon Credit Bank, NCB, was nationalized.
As noted earlier, from 1996 onward an unlimited deposit guarantee was already in place
in Japan. In November of 1997, following the default of Sanyo Securities, the BOJ informed
market participants that interbank loans were also protected (Kin’yu Business, February 1998,
p.7). For both LTCB and NCB, all the creditors (including subordinated debt holders) of the
banks were fully paid, although the existing equity holders saw their stakes eliminated.
The second major recapitalization of the banks using mostly preferred share purchases by
the government was undertaken in March 1999. From Figure 1, we can see that the Japan
premium declined after this injection. At that time, some observers thought this would prove to
be a turning point in the Japanese crisis.

8

The Financial Revitalization Act set up the framework to restructure failing systemically important banks through
nationalization, and the Prompt Recapitalization Act allowed the government to inject capital into healthy banks.
See Fukao (2000) for more details on these laws.

15

One noteworthy aspect of this entire period was the divergence between the
government’s characterization of the condition of the banking industry and that of outsiders. For
example, in the August 1998 IMF Article 4 consultation, the IMF’s Executive Directors were
very frank in calling for much more aggressive action by the government:
Rigorous enforcement of the self-assessment framework is needed so that banks
recognize and provision against the full extent of bad loans. Several Directors
suggested that these results be published for individual banks to increase
transparency.
In contrast, on February 2, 1999 as the second capital injection was being debated, Eisuke
Sakikabara, the Vice Minister of Finance, declared that the banking crisis would be over within 2
weeks. By the end of the month the U.S. Deputy Treasury Secretary, Lawrence Summers, gave
a speech asserting that even with the capital infusion anticipated by Sakakibara, the Japanese
banks remained significantly undercapitalized.
3.3. Phase Three: 1999-2003
The 1999 recapitalization calmed the financial markets. The Japan premium disappeared
quickly and the credit started to flow (Peek and Rosengren, 2001). However, the problem of
non-performing loans remained and the capital shortage soon re-emerged. Kashyap (2002)
reports, for example, estimates from six private-sector bank analysts on the health of the banking
system showing that each analyst estimated that the system was insolvent as of August 2002. So
the capital shortage was universally acknowledged by all parties except the government.
To give a rough benchmark of the size of the problems, Table 1 shows data from Fukao
(2008) on the condition of capital in the banks. At the end of March, 2002, for example,
Japanese banks collectively had ¥30.2 trillion of core capital (equity capital and capital reserves)
to buffer the risks associated with assets of ¥756.1 trillion, meaning that stated capital was equal
to 4.0% of the assets. However, ¥10.6 trillion of core capital was in the form of deferred tax
assets, which are tax deductions coming from past loan losses that the banks would be able to
claim in the future if they became profitable. If the banks did not regain their profitability within
five years, these tax credits disappear.
16

In addition to relying on questionable tax credits to boost capital, the banks provisioning
practices were questioned. Fukao (2003) estimated the amount of under-reserving, which should
be really written off from the current capital. This deficit represents a failure to set aside
“adequate” reserves. To calculate adequate reserves, the amount of classified bad loans is
multiplied by one minus the expected recovery rate for each class of loans, which is estimated
using the data from the 1990s. This leads to two potential biases. On the one hand, because the
recovery rate from bad loans improved after the late 1990s this procedure is likely to
overestimate the level of adequate reserves (and hence under-reserving) during the 2000s. On
the other hand, because many outside observers believed that the banks were consistently
overstating the quality of their loans the estimates for the level of adequate reserves would have
been too low. As of March 2002, Fuako concludes that banks reserves were ¥6.8 trillion too
low.
To give a rough sense of the capital deficit, we subtract the deferred tax assets and underreserving from the official capital to arrive at what we call “modified capital.” As of March
2002, modified capital was just ¥12.8 trillion, of which ¥7.2 trillion had been contributed by the
government, so the Japanese banking sector had hardly any private capital.
As a point of reference, we can compare the modified capital to the capital that the banks
would have if they had equity equal to three percent of assets. We call the difference between
modified capital and this lower bound the capital gap. As shown in the last column of Table 1,
this gap was consistently positive between 1997 and 2005. The gap declined after the 1999
recapitalization, suggesting the policy had a favorable impact, but grew again soon afterwards.
The nature of the non-performing loans seems to have changed during this period. Up to
the acute phase of the crisis, the non-performing loans were most closely tied to real estate
related lending. Using panel regression analysis, both Ueda (2000) and Hoshi (2001) found that
the more a bank had exposure to the real estate industry the higher was its non-performing loan
ratio. From 2000 onward problems associated with small and medium enterprise lending became
important. The government required the banks that received public capital to increase lending to
these businesses. This forced lending to poorly performing firms seems to have led to new set of
non-performing loans.
Table 2 reports a series of cross-section regression analysis of non-performing loan ratios
of Japanese banks. The specification of regressions is very similar to those in Ueda (2000) and
17

Hoshi (2001): the ratio of the reported amount of non-performing loans to total loans is regressed
on the proportion of loans to the real estate developers and the proportion of loans to small and
medium enterprises. Dummy variables to distinguish five types of banks (city banks, long-term
credit banks, trust banks, tier I regional banks, and tier II regional banks) are also included in the
regression, although we do not report the coefficient estimates on those dummies. To conserve
degrees of freedom, we allowed for a single lag of the past loan percentages to affect bad loans,
but we experimented with different lag lengths. So each column header in the table describes a
different regression specification. For example, “lag 1” means that the non-performing loan ratio
of this year is regressed on the proportions of real estate loans and small and medium enterprise
loans in the last year.
Each cell shows the coefficient estimates on the proportion of loans to the real estate
developers and the proportion of loans to the small and medium enterprises with their standard
error estimates in the parentheses. From 1997 to 2000, we see that the coefficient estimate on
the proportion of loans to the real estate developers is statistically significant. but that on the
proportion of loans to the small and medium enterprises it is not significant. Starting in 2001,
the small and medium enterprise loans started to become the more important determinant of the
overall non-performing loans ratio with real estate loans often losing their statistical significance.
This is especially clear for 2004 and 2005: the small and medium enterprise loan ratio is highly
significant and the real estate loan is not. The results do not seem too sensitive to the assumed
lag length in the specification.
Though simple, our regression analysis suggests the nature of the non-performing loan
problem in Japan shifted in the early 2000s. The problem ceased to be tied to the collapse of
land prices in the early 1990s and instead became more dependent on the exposure of small and
medium enterprises. That lending to the latter set of borrowers was explicitly encouraged as a
condition of receiving public capital suggests that the conditionality did not seem to have helped
the banks.
The aggressive closure policy for failing banks that began with the nationalization of the
two long-term credit banks continued for about a year. The Financial Reconstruction
Commission (FRC), which was in charge of resolving troubled banks under the Financial
Revitalization Act (FRA), closed down several regional banks and put them under the
receivership. After the first chair of FRC, Hakuo Yanagisawa, was replaced in October 1999,
18

the policy turned more accommodative. The FRA expired in 2001 and the FRC was subsumed
into the Financial Services Agency (FSA).
Yanagisawa was brought back as the Minister in charge of the FSA and he called for a
“final resolution” of non-performing loans. Yanagisawa’s FSA conducted “special inspections”
of major banks focusing on loans to large customers. The inspections were completed in April
2002 and added to the published non-performing loan numbers, but the FSA also announced that
all banks were well capitalized. Yanagisawa appeared unwilling to admit the capital gaps were
growing again.
In September 2002, Yanagisawa was replaced by Heizo Takenaka, who finally started to
address the non-performing loans problem seriously. Within a month of his appointment,
Takenaka announced the Financial Revival Program (Kin’yū Saisei Program) that called for (1)
more rigorous evaluation of bank assets, (2) increasing bank capital, and (3) strengthening
governance for recapitalized banks (Omura, Mizukami, and Kawaguchi, 2006, p.4).
The FSA followed the “Takenaka Plan” and became tougher in its audits of the banks. In
the early part of 2003, this pressure led many of the largest banks to issue shares (typically
through private placements) to improve their capital ratios. Resona Bank’s capital ratio for
March 2003 fell below 4% after it was not allowed to count five years worth of tax deferred
assets as capital. The FSA used the Deposit Insurance Act (Section 102-1) and injected capital
into Resona Bank.
In August 2003, the FSA also issued business improvement orders to fifteen recapitalized
banks and financial groups, including five major ones (Mizuho, UFJ, Mitsui Sumitomo, Mitsui
Trust, and Sumitomo Trust) for failing to meet their profit goals for March 2003. They were
required to file business improvement plans and report their progress each quarter to the FSA.
UFJ Holdings was found to have failed to comply with its revised plan in March 2004
and received another business improvement order. The CEOs of UFJ Holdings, UFJ Bank, and
UFJ Trust were forced to resign, and the salaries for the new top management were suspended.
The dividend payments (including those on preferred shares) were stopped. Salaries for the
other directors were cut by 50%, their bonus had already been suspended, and the retirement

19

contributions for the management were also suspended. The number of regular employees was
reduced and their bonuses were cut by 80%. 9
Finally, there was a shift in the government’s policy regarding distressed borrowers. The
Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan (IRCJ) was created in April 2003 as the
government institution to buy non-performing loans from non-main banks and work with their
main banks to reorganize the poorly performing customers to restore their health. The
Resolution and Collection Corporation (RCC), a government asset management company that
already existed, also shifted their activities to put much more emphasis on reorganizing troubled
borrowers. Figure 3 shows that the origination of new Non-Performing Loans (shown in the top
half of the graph) began to slow from 2003 onwards. Perhaps more importantly, from 2003 to
2005, a substantial number of bad loans were removed from the banks’ balance sheets,
suggesting the powerful effect of government’s increased emphasis on reorganizing troubled
borrowers.
Following Takenaka’s reform, the Japanese banks finally started to rebuild their capital.
Table 3 offers a closer look at the evolution of capital between 2003 and 2007. Over this period
the banks’ official capital grew by ¥15 trillion. There were two big sources of gains. The first
was improved operating performance that led to higher retained earnings. This is consistent with
the improved loan loss performance indicated in Figure 3. The second major contributor was
capital gains on the stock portfolio.
Table 4 gives some annual figures on the nature of the gains. We see two important
patterns in this table. First, the operating performance improves sharply in 2006 and 2007. The
profitability in the prior two years is unremarkable. This is particularly interesting because GDP
growth was respectable from 2003 onwards. So there was a lag between the macroeconomic
improvement and the performance of the banks. Looking more closely at the income and
expense data shows that 2006 was time when the banks were able to substantially raise revenue
and cut costs.
The second, hardly surprising, observation is that the capital gains tracked the
movements in aggregate stock prices. As shown in the bottom of the table, the Nikkei 225
9

UFJ Holdings, 2004, Keiei no Kenzenka no tame no Keikaku no Gaiyo (Management Revitalization Plan:
Abstract). (http://www.fsa.go.jp/kenzenka/k_h160924/ufj_a.pdf)

20

average showed two big jumps during this period, one between March 2003 and March 2004 and
then a second between March 2005 and March 2006. Combining these two observations
suggests that in Japan, the performance of the aggregate economy was paramount in the recovery
of bank capital.
Finally, we would be remiss if we did not note that the main cost of allowing the banks to
operate with a capital shortage was not a prolonged credit crunch. Rather the undercapitalization limited the banks willingness to recognize losses and they took extraordinary steps
to cover up their condition and in doing so retarded growth in Japan (Caballero, Hoshi and
Kashyap, 2008 and Peek and Rosengren, 2005). 10 More specifically, the slowdown in
productivity that extended the slump was concentrated in the parts of the economy where zombie
firms were most prominently being supported by weak banks.
4. Japan’s policy responses
We continue by examining the major responses by the Japanese government to the
financial crisis and deriving some general lessons. We group the policy responses into four
categories: (1) asset management companies, (2) recapitalization programs, (3) resolution
mechanisms of failed banks introduced by the Financial Revitalization Act of 1998, and (4) the
Takenaka plan of 2002. After reviewing the various programs, we offer our conclusions about
the strengths and weaknesses of the different options.
4.1. Asset Management Companies
Assessing the asset purchase plans is complicated because this was done in a piecemeal
fashion over more than a decade. The full list of entities spawned during the crisis is presented
in Table 5.
The first asset management company (AMC) in Japan was the Cooperative Credit
Purchasing Company (CCPC) established in December 1992. The CCPC, described best by
10

See Peek (2008) for a survey of the evidence on the behavior of the banks in the 1980s and 1990s. He also
presents new analysis showing that bank assistance to distressed firms during the 1990s was different (and less
effective) than the aid in the 1980s.

21

Packer (2000), was a private entity. The government was not involved because of the vigorous
public resistance to proposals to use of taxpayer funds to rescue banks. Failing to get direct
government help, the private sector banks then created the CCPC, presumably with
encouragement from the government.
The CCPC used funds loaned by the founding banks to buy bad loans. The loan sales to
the CCPC generated tax benefits for the banks because upon the transfer to the CCPC the selling
banks could recognize losses immediately that reduced their taxes. The CCPC was also
supposed to collect on or sell the purchased loans, but this process was extremely slow. In the
first five years, the CCPC sold only a third of the loans it bought. Its loan disposal became
somewhat faster after 1998. The CCPC was liquidated in 2004. Over the 12 years of its
existence, the CCPC bought the bad loans of only ¥15.4 trillion in face value and ¥5.8 trillion in
appraised value.
A second asset management company, Tokyo Kyodo Bank was set up in January 1995
using a combination of government and private funds. The Bank of Japan financed more than
90% of its capital. The rest of the capital came from private-sector banks. Tokyo Kyodo was
originally formed to manage the assets held by two failed credit unions in Tokyo, Tokyo Kyowa
Credit Union and Anzen Credit Union. Later, Tokyo Kyodo absorbed assets of other failed
credit unions and was renamed the Resolution and Collection Bank (RCB).
A third asset management company, the Housing Loan and Administration Corporation
(HLAC), was established in 1996 to manage loans of failed jusen that were taken over by the
government and wound down in 1996. The HLAC was financed by both private banks and
public funds. Both the RCB and HLAC dealt with assets of failed institutions and did not buy
loans from supposedly solvent banks. Because the regulators were not able to put banks into
receivership until the passage of the Financial Revitalization Act in 1998, the scope and
effectiveness of these entities was necessarily limited.
The RCB and the HLAC were merged to create the Resolution and Collection
Corporation (RCC) in 1999. This new institution was allowed to buy bad loans from solvent
banks (though solvent banks were not compelled to sell anything) and was charged with
managing the assets of failed financial institutions. From 1999 until the RCC stopped buying
assets in June 2005, the RCC spent a mere ¥353 billion to purchase 858 loans with a face value
of ¥4.0 trillion from solvent banks.
22

Starting in 2001, the RCC also started to reorganize the borrowers behind the nonperforming loans. From 2001 to 2008, the RCC restructured 127 borrowers. The RCC also
participated in the reorganization of 450 borrowers in its role as a major creditor. In total (for
these 577 borrowers), ¥6.2 trillion of debt was restructured.
The RCC also started selling and collecting the loans aggressively. From March 2001 to
March 2008, the amount of loans on the RCC balance sheet declined by ¥4.7 trillion (from ¥5.8
trillion to ¥1.1 trillion). 11 Most of those loans were sold at prices above the RCC acquisition
prices: from 2001 to 2008, the total revenue from disposing of these loans amounted to ¥6.2
trillion.
The final AMC, the Industrial Revitalization Corporation of Japan (IRCJ), was
established in 2003 with the purpose of restructuring the bad loans they purchased and turning
around the borrowers. The IRCJ was set up as a joint stock company almost exclusively owned
by the Deposit Insurance Corporation and its debt was guaranteed by the government. The IRCJ
had two years to buy non-performing loans and an additional three years to finish restructuring
them. IRCJ bought and successfully restructured non-performing loans for 41 borrowers of the
total face value of ¥4.0 trillion, which included several notable companies like Daiei and Kanebo,
and finished all the restructuring by April 2007, one year earlier than the initial deadline.
4.2. Bank Capital Injections in Japan
To attack the undercapitalization more directly, the Japanese government eventually
opted for a series of public re-capitalization programs. A list of the programs is shown in Table 6.
As mentioned previously, the Financial Function Stabilization Act made ¥13 trillion of
government money available to buy subordinated debt (or preferred shares in a few cases) in
undercapitalized, but supposedly solvent banks. Subordinated debt can be counted as a part of
regulatory capital (as long as it does not exceed Tier I capital) and would give the purchasing
bank a buffer to absorb losses without having to default on promises to depositors.
This program was initially shunned by the banks. There are two reasons why the banks
might not have wanted the assistance. One explanation is that the banks feared applying for the
11

The accounting figures are from the RCC web site: http://www.kaisyukikou.co.jp.

23

funds would be admitting to larger future losses than had been previously disclosed (or that their
ability to raise funds elsewhere would be missing). This negative signal would push down the
value of existing equity.
A second logical possibility is that the banks balked because new securities would be
senior to the existing equity claims. Were the banks to recover, the existing owners would not be
able to reap the benefits until after the government’s claims were paid. This type of debt
overhang problem would be particularly likely if the bank had long-term debt that was trading at
a deep discount, in which case the value of the debt would appreciate from the additional
financing. As a legacy of the Japan’s past banking restrictions, up until 1998, only long-term
credit banks could issue long term debt. Hence, as a practical matter, debt overhang
considerations do not seem to have been important in Japan. Nonetheless, accounting for the
incentives of the existing equity holders may be important in designing recapitalization schemes.
After some cajoling by the government, each of the major banks applied for almost an
identical amount of public funds. Table 7a, compiled from the data on the Deposit Insurance
Corporation web site (http://www.dic.go.jp/english/e_katsudou/e_katsudou3-2.pdf) shows the
amount and type of public funds each bank received. Eight of nine received ¥100 billion in the
form of subordinated debt or loans, although the interest rate on subordinated debt was different,
presumably reflecting the perceived health of the institution. The other one (Dai-ichi Kangyo)
received almost the same amount (¥99 billion) in return for preferred shares which included an
option to convert them into common shares. The focal amount of ¥100 billion was set at the
level that the healthiest bank, Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi, was willing to ask for, so for most of
the banks, the amount was far less than they needed to restore their capital. In total, only ¥1.8
trillion was distributed to 21 banks in the spring of 1998.
Nippon Credit Bank (NCB) and Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB), the two banks
that would fail later in the year, each received funding under this program in the form of
preferred shares. For both banks, the government also acquired the option to convert the
preferred shares into common shares starting on October 1, 1998. The conversion period was 9.5
years for the LTCB and 19.5 years for the NCB. Thus, the NCB, which was considered to be
weaker of the two, was subject to a longer threat of (partial) government takeover. NCB also
applied for a ¥230 billion subordinated loan, but the loan was not approved (Kin’yu Business,
May 1998, p.8). Ultimately the preferred shares of these two banks were converted into common
24

shares when each was nationalized (October 28, 1998 for LTCB and December 17, 1998 for
NCB).
The second recapitalization, briefly mentioned earlier, took place on the heels of these
failures in the spring of 1999. The size of the second program was larger, with ¥25 trillion
available for recapitalization. 12 All the major banks except for the healthiest one (Bank of
Tokyo Mitsubishi) applied. This time, the government (specifically, the Financial Reconstruction
Commission: FRC) evaluated the applications using the inspection information provided by the
FSA and the BOJ. Perhaps most importantly, the FRC checked whether the amount of capital
each bank requested would be sufficient to cover the under-reserving for non-performing loans
once they applied reasonable provision rates (70% for doubtful loans and 15% for loans
requiring special attention, for example).
Although the FRC did not turn down any applications, this time, the capital injections
after the bank inspections were better conceived than the ones in 1998. The government
ultimately put ¥7.5 trillion into the 15 banks in the form of preferred shares and subordinated
debt with various terms and conversion options into common shares. Nakaso (2001) argues that
this amount was sufficient to cover the under-reserving and unrealized capital losses of
shareholdings at these 15 banks.
Table 7b, created from the data published by the Deposit Insurance Corporation
(http://www.dic.go.jp/english/e_katsudou/e_katsudou3-1.pdf) shows the deals for each bank.
Most banks sold multiple instruments to the government. As with the previous year’s plan, most
of the preferred shares gave the government an option to convert them into common equity over
a certain interval. If the government still held any preferred shares at the end of the interval, the
government was required to convert all of these shares into common shares. This requirement
implies that the government would suffer a capital loss if the conversion option was out of the
money at the end of the interval.
It would have been possible to design these securities so that weak banks would face the
threat of conversion and dilution of existing shareholders sooner than healthy financial
institutions, but this is not what happened. If anything, the tables show a tendency for healthier
12

The government also set aside ¥18 trillion for nationalization of failed banks. Combined with the ¥17 trillion for
depositor protection (mentioned earlier), the total size of the financial stabilization package was ¥60 trillion.

25

financial institutions to have earlier initial conversion dates. Stronger banks would favor earlier
conversion so that they could lower the dividend rate on preferred shares.
The government did not seem to optimally exercise the conversion option. For instance,
Omura, Mizukami, and Yamazaki (2002) give an example where the fair value of the convertible
preferred shares exceeded what the government had paid early in the conversion period, but the
government failed to exercise the option before the bank stock declined. Had the government
acted, it could have recovered twice as much as was possible in 2002. They suspect that the
government never intended to exercise the options. Instead this instrument could rationalize the
low dividend rates that were intended to provide a subsidy to the banks. The use of multiple
securities with various terms also obscured the cost of the bailout.
The Prompt Recapitalization Act expired on March 2001, but capital shortages continued
to be a problem and so the government put together a couple more small scale recapitalization
programs. First, the revision of the Deposit Insurance Act allowed the government to provide
public capital to banks. Specifically, Section 102-1 of the revised Deposit Insurance Act
justified the use of public funds to help troubled (but not failed) systemically important banks.
This was used to prop up Resona Bank in June of 2003. The government bought ¥0.33 trillion of
common shares and ¥1.66 trillion of preferred shares of Resona.
Second, the Act of Strengthening Financial Functions (ASFF) was passed in June 2004.
The law allowed the government to inject public capital into banks without justifying their
systemic importance. In 2006, ¥40.5 billion was injected into two regional banks under this law.
It expired at the end of March 2008, but was revived in December 2008 so that the government
could continue to inject capital into the banking sector when it deemed it necessary. In March
2009, ¥121.0 billion was provided to three regional banks.
4.3. Nationalization of failed banks
Despite the 1998 capital injection, the financial crisis deepened over the course of that
year, leading the government to pass the Financial Revitalization Act, which allowed a
government committee to reorganize insolvent (or near insolvent) banks through temporary
nationalization or receivership. The Financial Reconstruction Commission (FRC) was created,
and it nationalized the Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan (LTCB; October 1998) and the Nippon
26

Credit Bank (NCB; December 1998). The management of nationalized banks was replaced by
new teams immediately. In evaluating the value of assets and liabilities of each bank, the FRC
concluded that both were insolvent at the time of nationalization and the fair share price (both
common and preferred) was zero.
Both LTCB and NCB were long-term credit banks, which raised funds mainly through
issuing financial debentures rather than collecting deposits. All the liabilities, including deposits,
debentures, interbank loans, and derivative transactions were protected, using financial
assistance from the DIC.
The balance sheets of nationalized banks were cleaned up by separating uncollectible
loans from collectible loans. The loans that were considered uncollectible were sold to the DIC
and then to the RCC. After selling off the non-performing loans, the government started to find
new investors to buy the nationalized banks.
After long negotiations, the LTCB was sold for ¥1 billion to a group of investors led by
Ripplewood, a U.S. fund (Tett, 2003). The new investor group added ¥120 billion for common
shares and the government added ¥240 billion in the form of preferred shares, using the
framework of the Prompt Recapitalization Act. The new bank, Shinsei Bank, eventually
recovered and was listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in February 2004.
The NCB was sold to a group of investors led by Softbank for around ¥1 billion.
Softbank group added about ¥100 billion in common shares and the government injected about
¥260 billion in preferred shares. The new bank, Aozora Bank, also came back to be listed on the
Tokyo Stock Exchange in November 2006, but suffered a loss of ¥200 billion for the accounting
year ending in March 2009, including losses associated with investments placed with Bernard
Madoff. As of this writing (August 2009), Aozora is set to merge with Shinsei in late 2010.
In both cases, the sales contract included a provision allowing the buyer to force the
Japanese government to buy back loans that have lost substantially more than expected. Both
Sinsei and Aozora used this “put option” to return impaired performing loans to the government.
4.4. Takenaka Plan
As we noted in Section 3, the capital shortage of Japanese banks continued despite the
repeated recapitalization programs. The Takenaka plan that started in late 2002 played an
27

important role in narrowing the capital gap. In September 2002, Heizo Takenaka was newly
appointed to head the government’s financial reform efforts.
Takenaka, in his memoirs, explains that he attempted to use six measures to end the nonperforming loans problem at major Japanese banks. Specifically he sought (1) to have banks
make more rigorous evaluation of assets using discounted expected cash flows or market prices
of non-performing loans, (2) to check cross-bank consistency in classifying loans to large debtors,
(3) to publicize the discrepancy between the banks’ self evaluations and the FSA's evaluations,
(4) to be prepared to inject public funds if necessary, (5) to prohibit banks from declaring
unrealistically large deferred tax assets, and (6) to impose business improvement orders for
banks that substantially underachieved the revitalization plans.
Some of these measures were actually implemented before Takenaka became the
Minister. For example, the FSA conducted special inspections of major banks from October
2001 to March 2002 and published the result in April 2002
(http://www.fsa.go.jp/news/newse/e20020412-1.html). However, the use of the discounted cash
flow method in an attempt to achieve consistent evaluation of non-performing loans to large
debtors was new, and introduced as part of Takenaka’s special inspection for March 2003. He
was successful in implementing all of these six with possible exception of (5) (which in the end
he had to leave to the discretion of banks and their accountants).
As we saw in Section 3, the FSA followed the Takenaka plan, inspected the banks’ books
more rigorously, and forced many banks to recapitalize themselves. This stopped the process of
ever growing non-performing loans and the banks started to accumulate capital through retained
earnings over the next 5 years.
4.5. Eight Lessons from the Japanese experience
The Japanese experience with various policies provides a number of useful lessons. The
most obvious is that offering government assistance means that policies may encounter political
resistance. In Japan, political backlash was at times very important. Because there are so many
ways that the political constraints can arise and we expect all policymakers to try to garner
political support, we will not dwell on this issue—even if it might be the most critical challenge
28

in a financial crisis. Instead, we will concentrate on the lessons regarding the design aspects of
the specific policies that were pursued in Japan.
First, banks may refuse public funds, as we observed for the 1998 recapitalization
program in Japan. 13 In the Japanese case, the problem was solved by all major banks asking for
the same amount of public funds, which turned out to be too small to resolve the capital shortage
for most banks.
Many programs, including the 1998 recapitalization and many asset purchase programs,
were too small. Table 8 shows the history of loan losses in Japan. Cumulatively over the years
between 1992 and 2005, Japanese banks wrote off about ¥96 trillion, roughly 19% of GDP. 14 So
the size of the problem required considerably more resources than most of the AMCs were given.
Even the most comprehensive of the recapitalization programs, under the Prompt
Recapitalization Act, injected only ¥8.7 trillion, which was about 1 percent of total bank assets
(and less than 2% of total loans). Thus, the second lesson that the Japanese experience suggests
is that programs of asset purchase and recapitalization must be big enough.
How much bigger a recapitalization would have been sufficient? To answer this question,
Table 9 shows the financial situation as of March 2002 for the major banks that received capital
injections in 1998. We calculate the modified capital and capital gap for each bank using the
same approach as the one we use for the banking sector as a whole in Table 1. The last row
shows the total for these 18 banks.
The official capital for the major banks at this point stood just below ¥19 trillion. But
deferred tax assets were over ¥8 trillion. Moreover, the level of reserves set aside against losses
appeared to be about ¥10 trillion less than required. Hence, modified capital is estimated to have
been less than ¥0.4 trillion, leaving a capital gap ¥15.4 trillion. Aside from Shinsei and Azora,
which had been already scrubbed up, all the other banks were seriously short of capital.
As with Table 1, this calculation trades off two biases. First, the estimated level of
necessary reserves may have been too high when the recovery rates on bad loans started to
improve. Since this improvement had not really started in early 2002, this bias is expected to be
small for this calculation.
13

See Diamond and Rajan (2009) for a theoretical model why this would be rational and why asset sales may not
succeed either.
14

The figures are from the web site of the Financial Services Agency: http://www.fsa.go.jp.

29

The second bias, however, can be large. Through 2002, it was widely believed that the
banks were still under-reporting their problem loans. In August 2002, just before the Takenaka
reforms began, Kashyap (2002) surveyed a number of prominent bank analysts and private sector
economists following the Japanese economy and asked for “their estimate of the difference in the
market value of Japanese banks’ assets and liabilities.” The lowest estimate reported was ¥19
trillion. Keeping in mind that this would leave the banks with zero equity value, it seems like the
estimate in Table 9 is exceptionally conservative. Given that the these banks received slightly
less than ¥8 trillion in the 1999 recapitalization, our calculation suggests that a recapitalization
that was at least two and a half times bigger in 1999 was needed; put differently, this extremely
conservative estimate of the Japanese capital shortage would suggest that another three percent
of GDP was needed. 15
While three percent of GDP is a large amount under normal conditions, it is useful to
keep in mind that Japanese debt grew by more 60 percent of GDP during the crisis, with little
discernible effect on interest rates. We think there is no doubt that the government could have
marshaled more resources to combat the problem if it had wanted to do it. Indeed, Paul Sheard,
Chief Economist for Japan at Lehman Brothers at that time, in estimating the degree of banking
system insolvency stated “To restore the health and credibility of banking system would
probably require ¥30 to ¥50 trillion.” He explicitly went on to say “the deposit insurance fund
has ¥49 trillion of untapped capacity. Thus, the infrastructure and budgeting are in place if there
were political will to act.” So, even contemporaneous accounts indicate that lack of resources
was not the problem.
A third, more fundamental lesson is that buying troubled assets alone is not likely to solve
the capital shortage. It is possible that a much bigger, comprehensive program might have
eliminated the uncertainty of the value of assets that remained on banks’ balance sheets and
allowed them to find willing investors to contribute new capital. But, because none of the
Japanese AMCs were designed to overpay for the bad loans, just removing some of the assets did
not rebuild capital. The Japanese experience suggests that a recapitalization program is
necessary in addition to an assets purchase program in order to solve the capital shortage.
15

Another reason why this is a lower bound is that this figure does not count the public fund used to clean up the
balance sheets of two nationalized banks,

30

Fourth, recapitalization programs must be preceded by rigorous inspection to determine
the size of the problem. The 1998 recapitalization program just distributed capital to major
banks without any inspections, in part to induce the banks to accept the public capital without
stigma. As a result of the banks’ hesitation to appear needy, the size of the program ended up too
small. The 1999 recapitalization was better in that it followed inspections of those banks, but the
regulators did not force the banks to clean up their non-performing loans. Instead they were
allowed to operate even with huge amounts of non-performing loans on their books. The amount
of non-performing loans (disclosed by banks) actually increased from ¥29.6 trillion (March
1999) to ¥42.0 trillion (March 2002), and started to decline only after rigorous inspections under
the Takenaka plan.
Fifth, troubled assets purchased by AMCs need to be put back into the private sector or
restructured swiftly in order to prevent further deterioration of the value of those assets.
Especially in early years, the Japanese AMCs were slow in selling off the loans they purchased
and just functioned as warehouses of bad loans. Land prices were still falling and they
presumably did not want to realize capital losses. Not until the early 2000s, did they begin
attempting to restructure the loans and rehabilitate the underlying borrowers thus addressing the
source of the bad loan problem.
Sixth, nationalization can be useful to wind down systemically important banks. It is
important to note that both LTCB and NCB had international counterparties. So the winding
down of these institutions was not just a purely domestic matter. As part of the nationalization,
the international transactions were guaranteed and the resolution process did not create much
turmoil in the financial markets.
Seventh, targeting total lending or lending to specific sectors can be counter-productive.
As we saw in Section 3, the nature of non-performing loan problem changed in the early 2000s,
and the loans to small and medium enterprises, which the government required the recapitalized
banks to increase, became the central problem rather than the real estate related loans.
Finally, recapitalization was ultimately driven by macroeconomic recovery. Since
macroeconomic recovery also depends on a healthy functioning of the financial system, the
causality runs two ways. In the Japanese case, export expansion to large and growing economies,
especially China and the U.S., contributed to the macroeconomic recovery in the mid-2000s
31

independent of the recovery of the financial system. To the extent that macroeconomic policy
can successfully stimulate the recovery that will also help recapitalization.

5. Evaluating U.S. policies

In assessing U.S. policies during the crisis it is essential to realize that there are some
noteworthy respects in which the U.S. and Japanese crises differed. Most importantly, the
problems in the U.S. regarding the breakdown of securitization and the collapse of the “shadow
banking system” were not an issue in Japan. Hence, many of the bold and most controversial
programs instituted in the U.S. have no parallels in Japan. Accordingly, we limit our evaluation
to the areas where Japan’s experience could be informative. As we point out, in some cases the
solutions suggested from Japan might help with the unique aspects of the U.S. crisis. For
example, Diamond and Rajan (2009) show that cleaning up of the balance sheets of financial
institutions and recapitalization could help with the credit crunch problem. To organize the
discussion, we focus on the eight lessons from Japan that were just described and ask whether
they informed the U.S. choices.
5.1. Lessons Not Learned
There are at least three of the eight Japanese lessons that were either not heeded or had to
be relearned. Most obvious was the hesitation of the banks to admit publicly their need for
government assistance. Some of the original TARP 9 institutions were adamant in their
insistence that they did not need public support. Soon after receiving TARP money in October,
both Citigroup and Bank of America ended up needing much more assistance. Though the case
of Bank of America may be explained by surprisingly large capital shortage caused by the
acquisition of Merrill Lynch, Merrill was also one of the TARP 9 and it was not transparent
about its capital needs.
The initial TARP capital purchases were also done without rigorous audits and
inspections. It is an interesting counter-factual to think about how the AIG, Citigroup and Bank

32

of America bailouts would have been structured if more accurate information had been available
at the time the funds were committed.
The third area where the Japanese history seems to have been ignored regards the
willingness to nationalize an institution and wind it down. At least at the time of the second
Citigroup intervention, the government could have tried to buy a controlling stake in the firm and
pushed the company into bankruptcy. The government has discussed a longer term plan to split
Citigroup into two parts. Even if this eventually happens, however, this will not force the longterm debtholders of Citigroup to bear losses, whereas a bankruptcy would have.
A major constraint on the government throughout the crisis has been the lack of a
resolution procedure that could work for a complex financial holding company. To take one
example, existing law makes it impossible for the government to take over a company and
continue to run its swap contracts. This makes the resolution costs much higher than if the
government could assume the contracts and continue making and receiving payments, rather than
having to close them out. Had the U.S. tried to buy Citigroup and push it through bankruptcy
using the existing law it would have been operating in uncharted territory.
In contrast, in Japan a major piece of the legislation was enacted during the crisis
precisely to make it possible to fail major financial institutions. The Japanese government also
used this authority in at least two very visible cases. Federal Reserve and Treasury officials have
repeatedly asked Congress to pass a bill creating the authority to resolve a large, complex
financial institution. With two years having passed since the start of the crisis, the lack of any
movement on this front suggests that the Japanese experience was ignored.
5.2. The Ambiguous Cases
Ultimately, the U.S. did pursue the stress tests and the initial market reactions once the
results were announced were quite favorable. It is too early to tell whether they will be deemed a
long run success. There are two open questions that must be resolved to reach a longer term
judgment.
At its core the stress test amounted to a comparison of impending losses with the
resources available to buffer the losses. The technical document, Board of Governors of the
33

Federal Reserve (2009), released in conjunction with the tests was very transparent about the
assumed loss rates for various types of assets. For instance, the loss assumptions used by the Fed
can be easily compared to those used by the International Monetary Fund, IMF, (2009)—see
Tables 1 and 1.3 respectively—and show the Fed’s estimates are quite reasonable. 16 Indeed, the
commentary we have seen on these assumptions and our own judgment leads us to conclude that
these estimates were credible.
This stands in clear contrast to the assumptions regarding future earnings prospects for
the banks. There is no recent history that can be used to judge how profits will evolve if the
unemployment rate rises and continues to stay high (say above 10 percent) through 2010. Some
banks are insistent that they can generate substantial profits. In fact, at least one firm, Wells
Fargo, has publicly announced that it does not intend to raise as much capital as the stress test
suggests is necessary because during first three quarters of 2009; they expect to earn more than
the regulators assumed in the stress test.
Alternative forecasts of even near term earnings for the banks show considerable
heterogeneity. 17 For instance, the IMF assumes that the entire banking system in the U.S. will
have $300 billion in net retained earnings over 2009 and 2010, while the Fed’s estimates for just
the 19 organizations in the stress test assumes $362 billion in resources available to absorb losses.
The IMF numbers suggest extremely low earnings, and many industry forecasts for earnings are
much higher than those used in the stress tests. For instance, Goldberg (2009) notes that even if
pre-provision operating income were forecast to decline by 7% in 2009 and another 7% in 2010,
yielding the worst performance for the banking industry since 1938, then earnings available as a
buffer would still be $343 billion. Grasek (2009), writing before any 2009 performance data was
available, estimates that over 2009 and 2010 the banking industry could earn roughly $570
16

For a very detailed description of worst case loss assumptions, see Mattu and Subramanian (2009). The Fed’s
total two year loss assumptions were $599 billion for the top 19 bank holding companies, while the IMF’s were
$550 for the industry. Mattu and Subramanian’s range with their extreme loss rates range from $1.1trillion to $1.4
trillion for the industry.
17

One challenge in comparing estimates is that until the Fed released its findings, the details of how the calculations
would be conducted were not known, so other analyses differ in the exact definitions of the various inputs to the
calculations. A further challenge is that pre-provision net revenues is not an accounting number that analysts
typically concentrate upon.

34

billion. Given the unusual macroeconomic environment any forecast is bound to be fraught with
error, so we see no convincing way to judge whether the earnings numbers assumed in the stress
test were unreasonably high or low.
The second major question is whether the threshold level of capital that is mandated in
the stress tests is high enough. The banks are being asked to have more common equity than the
regulatory minimum, and to meet the minimum level of capital after absorbing the losses
foreseen in the stress test. Presumably this would be enough to prevent insolvency if any
subsequent interventions are done promptly.
But the larger motivation for the government’s intervention was to prevent a meltdown of
the financial system from crushing economic growth—the two-way causality problem. The
amount of capital that banks may need to expand their balance sheets and support a recovery
could be much higher than the minimum. Thus, it is unclear whether the resources that have
been marshaled to combat the crisis will prove adequate.
Two of the major lessons from Japan involved the use and design of asset management
companies. The U.S. record in this regard is mixed. The U.S. has avoided the Japanese mistake
of trying to do small asset purchases to solve a serious capital shortage problem.
The ambiguity comes because even though essentially no money has been spent, the U.S.
government has spent a lot time trying to design asset purchase plans and made various public
announcements suggesting that asset purchases were impending. The two publicly discussed
cases involve the original TARP plan, which was abandoned, and the PPIP which has been very
slow to start and appears destined to be only a small part of the overall U.S. spending on the
crisis. In addition, many press reports suggest that during the period between President Obama’s
election and his inauguration, considerable planning to create an aggregator bank was undertaken.
These efforts have been costly in tying up Treasury and Federal Reserve staff and
management on programs which were not critical. More importantly, they have created some
confusion with the public and politicians over the intended government response. The various
stops and starts have left doubts about the government’s commitment to remove non-performing

35

assets from the financial system. This in turn has left doubts about why so much emphasis was
placed on asset purchases if they are not needed.
In the meantime, the troubled assets still remain on most institutions’ balance sheets.
This leads to three ongoing problems. First, the management of the banks must continue to
devote effort and capital to monitoring the risks associated with holding these assets. Some
commentary from regulators suggests that this diversion of attention is costly.
Second, to the extent that any of the major banks are still seriously undercapitalized, the
presence of the assets creates an incentive to gamble for reclamation. For a clearly solvent bank,
the decision to hang on or dispose of the assets would be based on a profit-maximizing motive.
For a bank that is close to insolvent, the incentive to remove the risk is much lower. If the assets
lose value and drive the bank into insolvency then the inability to resolve such an institution
could create a zombie bank.
Lastly, the presence of the impaired banks that are filled with hard to value securities can
distort the incentives of other healthy institutions. As modeled by Diamond and Rajan (2009), if
the troubled banks could wind up being forced to sell the assets quickly so that prices are
depressed below fundamentals, other potential buyers of the assets (i.e. the healthy banks) would
choose to avoid making loans that tie up their capital. The presence of the banks that they dub
the “walking wounded” can, therefore, create a credit crunch.
Collectively these three considerations suggest that there are costs to leaving the toxic
assets on the balance sheets. But notice that the costs are greatly reduced if the banks are wellcapitalized. Well-capitalized banks have no incentive to gamble for reclamation. A wellcapitalized bank that finds that the assets are diverting attention can afford to sell them, and if
many banks are clearly solvent there would be plenty of potential buyers so that the fire-sale
would be much less likely. Hence, we see the uncertainty over asset quality being intimately tied
to the size of the capital shortage.
Finally, on the big question of how much sustained macroeconomic growth will help the
bank recapitalization, it is too early to tell. On the one hand, in Japan export growth was a driver
of macroeconomic growth in the mid-2000s. Yorulmazer (2009) suggests that same was true in
36

the Swedish banking crisis in the early 1990s. Given the size of the exports in the U.S. economy,
it is unlikely that a pure export boom would enough to lift bank profitability on a sustained basis
if the domestic economy remains weak.
On the other hand, U.S. macroeconomic policy has also been very different than in Japan.
The Federal Reserve cut the policy rate almost down to zero and has been trying various nontraditional means to stimulate the economy. Massive fiscal stimulus package was also applied
within 18 months of the onset of the crisis. If these policies deliver growth, the prospects for
bank recapitalization in the U.S. will be much brighter.
5.3. The Good News
Finally, the U.S. scores well on avoiding policies that force the banks to have lending
targets either in aggregate or to specific sectors. Perhaps the closest policy in this respect is the
funding to the auto industry. The support given to General Motors Acceptance Corporation is at
risk for being used to support purchases that might temporarily prop up one of the troubled auto
companies. But thus far the banking problems have not spilled over to create a set of nonfinancial zombie companies.
6. Conclusions
The U.S. financial system remains in fragile condition. It is too early to tell how the
crisis will play out. As the events unfold it may be helpful to judge them against two very
extreme alternatives. The both scenarios turn on three crucial dimensions: growth, exit from
current programs, and regulatory reform.
In the optimistic outcome, the macro recovery proceeds smoothly. This alone will help
the banks rebuild their capital. Stabilizing the economy and financial system were the goals
behind many of the policy actions. The confidence boost from a growing economy will lend
support to the other policy actions needed to complete the rest of the recovery.
The second dimension would be a successful wind down of many of the extraordinary
guarantee and liquidity programs. Growth could continue without sustained government support

37

for the financial system. The best case would include minimal losses to the taxpayer for the
assistance that has been provided in the course of the crisis.
The third element of the favorable ending is that policies are put in place to limit the
likelihood of another crisis or at least give the government authorities a full set of tools to
manage better in another crisis. There are many aspects of the crisis that extend beyond the bank
recapitalization that has been the focus of our analysis. Reforms to address many of the
weaknesses described by the U.S. Department of Treasury (2009) would occur. Within the
confines of the banking problems, the obvious missing tool is a resolution procedure that could
have been used for the large financial firms including bank holding companies.
Perhaps the most daunting task in the optimistic outcome is to undo the moral hazard that
has been created through the myriad of government interventions. It would take a whole another
paper to thoroughly discuss this challenge and the potential ways to address it. But the issue is
likely to be important well after a recovery takes hold.
The pessimistic scenario is made up of the opposite outcomes on the three key
dimensions. The starting point would be an anemic recovery that involves very little growth.
The weak macroeconomic environment would weaken the banks and renew the negative
feedback between the condition of the economy and the health of the banks. The fiscal position
of the government would constrain additional policy options. If another bout of panic similar to
the fall of 2008 erupts, political paralysis would be likely and the adverse effects may go on for
some time.
In this scenario, the exit strategy from the various guarantees and liquidity programs
would be complicated. They may be extended because the financial system is so impaired that it
cannot operate without them. The eventual taxpayer losses from the programs would be
substantial.
Furthermore, the moral hazard from the various rescue packages would have created even
more distortions in the financial system. The Federal Reserve would be under siege for its
decisions that will have turned out badly. Regulatory reform will have been sidetracked due to
the finger pointing from the failed rescues.
38

Neither of these extreme scenarios is particularly likely. The actual outcome will be
somewhere between those, depending on how growth, the exit strategy, and general regulatory
reform proceed.

39

References
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2009, “The Supervisory Capital Assessment
Program: Overview of the Results”, mimeo.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K Kashyap, 2008, “Zombie Lending and
Depressed Restructuring in Japan”, American Economic Review, December 2008, vol.
98(5): 1943–77.
Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan, 2009, “Fear of Fire Sales and The Credit
Freeze”, mimeo, University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Fukao, Mistushiro, 2000, “Recapitalizing Japan’s Banks: The functions and problems of
Financial Revitalization Act and Bank Recapitalization Act”, Keio Business Review, 38,
pp. 1-16.
Fukao, Mitsuhiro, 2003, “Financial sector profitability and double gearing,” in Structural
Impediments to Growth in Japan, Magnus Blomstrom, Jenny Corbett, Fumio Hayashi,
and Anil Kashyap (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 9-35.
Fukao, Mitsuhiro, 2008, “Beikoku-hatsu Kin’yu Kiki to Nihon no Kin’yu System (Global
Financial Crisis and Japanese Financial System)”, Japan Center for Economic Research,
Financial Study No. 19, October 2008.
Fukuda, Shin-ichi, 2008, “The Role of Monetary Policy under Financial Turbulence: What Role
did the Quantitative Easing Policy Play in Japan?” CIRJE Discussion Paper, J-205.
Goldberg, Jason M., 2009, “Large-Cap Banks: Industry Overview, Stress Test Results on the
Horizon”, Barclays Capital Equity Research, April 23, 2009.
Grasek,, Betsy, 2009, “US Banks: Aggregator Bank Proposal Would Accelerate Return to
Growth”, Morgan Stanley Strategy Forum, January 26, 2009.
Greenlaw, David, Hatzius, Jan, Kashyap, Anil K, and Hyun Song Shin, 2008, “Leveraged
Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown”, Proceedings of the U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum No. 2, Rosenberg Institute, Brandeis International Business
School and Initiative on Global Markets, University of Chicago Booth School of
Business.
Hoshi, Takeo, 2001, “What Happened to Japanese Banks”, Monetary and Economic Studies,
19(1), pp. 1-29.
Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil K Kashyap, 2000, “The Japanese Banking Crisis: Where did it come
from and how will it end?” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1999, pp.129-201.

40

Hoshi, Takeo and Anil K Kashyap, 2001, Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The
Road to the Future, MIT Press, Cambridge: MA.
International Monetary Fund, 2009, Global Financial Stability Report: Responding to the
Financial Crisis and Measuring Systemic Risks, International Monetary Fund:
Washington DC.
Ito, Takatoshi, and Kimie Harada, 2005, “Japan Premium and Stock Prices: Two Mirrors of
Japanese Banking Crises,” International Journal of Finance and Economics, 10, 195-211.
Kashyap, Anil K, 2002, “Sorting out the Japan’s Financial Crisis”, Economic Perspectives,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2002/Q4, pp. 42-256.
Mattu, Ravi K. and Prasanth Subramanian, 2009, “Capital Adequacy of the U.S. Banking
System: Results of the Stress Test,” Fixed Income Newsletter March 2009, Citadel
Investment Group, LLC.
Milhaput, Curtis, and Geoffrey Miller, 2000, “Regulatory Failure and the Collapse of Japan's
Home Mortgage Lending Industry: A Legal and Economic Analysis”, Law & Policy,
22(3/4), pp. 245-290.
Nakaso, Hiroshi, 2001, “The Financial Crisis in Japan during the 1990s: How the Bank of Japan
Responded and the Lessons Learned,” BIS Papers No.6.
Omura, Keiichi, Shinji Mizukami, and Yoichi Yamazaki, 2002, “Kōteki Shikin ni yoru Shihon
Chūnyū Hōshiki ni tuite (On the Method of Capital Injection using Public Funds),”
Director General for Economic Assessment and Policy Analysis, Cabinet Office,
Discussion Paper 02-1.
Omura, Keiichi, Shinji Muzukami, and Ken-ichi Kawaguchi, 2006, “Kin’yū System Antei-ka
Seisaku no Kenshō (Evaluation of the Financial System Stabilization Policy),” Waseda
University Institute of Finance, Working Paper 06-005.
Packer, Frank, 2000, “The Disposal of Bad Loans in Japan: The Case of CCPC,” in Crisis and
Change in the Japanese Financial System. Takeo Hoshi and Hugh Patrick, eds. Boston,
Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 137–57.
Peek, Joe, and Eric S. Rosengren, 2001, “Determinants of the Japan Premium: Actions Speak
Louder than Words,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 53, No. 2, pp. 283-305.
Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren, 2005, “Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the
Misallocation of Credit in Japan”, American Economic Review, 95(4), pp. 1144-1166.
Peek, Joe, 2008, “The Contribution of Bank Lending to the Long-Term Stagnation in Japan”,
mimeo, University of Kentucky.
41

Takenaka, Heizo, 2006, Kōzō Kaikaku no Shinjitsu: Takenaka Heizo Daijin Nisshi (True Story
on Structural Reform: Diary of Minister Heizo Takenaka. Tokyo, Japan: Nihon Keizai
Shimbun Shuppan.
Tett, Gillian, 2003, Saving the Sun: A Wall Street Gamble to Rescue Japan from its TrillionDollar Meltdown, Harper-Collins: New York, NY.
Udell, Gregory F., 2008, “Wall Street, Main Street and a Credit Crunch: Some Thoughts on the
Current Financial Crisis,” Business Horizons, forthcoming.
Ueda, Kazuo, 2000, “Causes of Japan’s Banking Problems in the 1990s,” in Takeo Hoshi and
Hugh Patrick, eds. Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial System, Boston,
Massachusetts: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 59–81.
United States Department of Treasury, 2009, Financial Regulatory Reform. A New Foundation:
Rebuilding Financial Supervision and Regulation, Washington, DC.
Veronesi, Pietro and Luigi Zingales, 2008, “Paulson’s Gift”, mimeo, University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
Yorulmazer, Tanju, 2009, “Lessons from the Resolution of the Swedish Crisis”, mimeo, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.

42

Figure 1: Difference in Inter-bank Borrowing Costs for Japanese and Non-Japanese Banks, 1995-1999
(Basis Points)
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
‐20
10/1999

7/1999

4/1999

1/1999

10/1998

7/1998

4/1998

1/1998

10/1997

7/1997

4/1997

1/1997

10/1996

7/1996

4/1996

1/1996

10/1995

7/1995

4/1995

1/1995

Source: Ito, Takatoshi, and Kimie Harada, 2005, “Japan Premium and Stock Prices: Two Mirrors of Japanese Banking Crises,” International Journal of
Finance and Economics, 10, 195-211.

43

1999/04/22

1999/04/06

1999/03/18

1999/03/02

1999/02/12

1999/01/26

1999/01/07

1998/12/17

1998/12/01

1998/11/12

1998/10/26

1998/10/08

1998/09/21

1998/09/02

1998/08/17

1998/07/30

1998/07/13

1998/06/25

1998/06/09

1998/05/22

1998/05/06

1998/04/15

1998/03/30

1998/03/12

1998/02/24

1998/02/05

1998/01/19

1997/12/26

1997/12/09

1997/11/20

1997/11/04

Percent

Figure 2: Difference Between the Daily Maximum and Minimum Overnight Call Rate

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Date

Source: Fukuda, Shin-ichi, 2008, “The Role of Monetary Policy under Financial Turbulence: What Role did the Quantitative Easing
Policy Play in Japan?” CIRJE Discussion Paper, J-205.

44

Figure 3: Changes in Non Performing Loans
(¥ Trillion)
+ 10.0

+ 5.0

+ 0.0

‐ 5.0

‐ 10.0

‐ 15.0

‐ 20.0
March‐03
New NPL

March‐04

March‐05

March‐06

Repayment, improvement to normal

March‐07

March‐08

Removal from B/S

Source: Financial Services Agency (http://www.fsa.go.jp/en/regulated/npl/20090807.html), Table 2.

45

Table 1: Capital in the Japanese Banking System
(¥ Trillion)
Official
Deferred
Estimated
Date
Core capital Tax Assets Under-reserving

Modified
Capital

Capital held Bank Capital Gap
by the
Assets
government
A
B
C
D≡A-B-C
E
F
G≡0.03*F-D
Mar-96
27.9
0.0
NA
27.9
0.0
846.5
-2.5
Mar-97
28.5
0.0
15.0
13.5
0.0
856.0
12.2
Mar-98
24.3
0.0
4.9
19.4
0.3
848.0
6.0
Mar-99
33.7
8.4
4.0
21.3
6.3
759.7
1.5
Mar-00
35.6
8.2
5.8
21.6
6.9
737.2
0.5
Mar-01
37.6
7.1
7.5
23.0
7.1
804.3
1.1
Mar-02
30.2
10.6
6.8
12.8
7.2
756.1
9.9
Mar-03
24.8
10.6
5.4
8.8
7.3
746.3
13.6
Mar-04
29.0
7.2
5.7
16.1
8.9
746.7
6.3
Mar-05
31.4
5.7
6.9
18.8
8.1
745.9
3.6
Mar-06
37.3
2.3
8.3
26.7
5.2
766.9
-3.7
Mar-07
40.0
1.3
9.4
29.4
3.5
761.1
-6.5
Mar-08
34.8
3.6
10.2
21.0
3.1
780.7
2.4
Source: Assets and core capital are from the Bank of Japan for all domestically licensed banks. Deferred tax and
under-reserving estimates are from Fukao (2008) based on "Analysis of Bank Financial Statements," various issues
and securities reports for individual banks.
Note: Core capital, sometimes referred to as Tier I capital, includes equity capital, capital reserves and other items
shown in Table 3. Deferred Tax Assets are credits against future taxes that are counted in core capital. As described
in the text, Estimated Under-reserving is the difference between adequate reserves for losses estimated by Fukao
and actual loan loss reserves. Fukao estimates the adequate reserves as the sum of 100% of Category IV
(uncollectible) loans, 70% of Category III (doubtful) loans, 20% of Category II (special attention) loans, and 1% of
Category I (normal) loans. Capital held by the government is the value of equity owned by the government. Bank
assets are total assets. Modified capital and the capital gap are computed as indicated. Fukao also estimates that
prior to 2001 there were substantial unrealized portfolio gains that could have been available as capital. The after
tax amounts he reports from 1996 to 2000 are 12.8, 6.7, 3.1, 2.6 and 6.1 trillion yen respectively.
46

Table 2. Changes in the Determinants of Non-Performing Loans over Time
Year

Independent variable

1997

Real estate loan
SME loan

1998

Real estate loan
SME loan

1999

Real estate loan
SME loan

2000

Real estate loan
SME loan

2001

Real estate loan
SME loan

2002

Real estate loan
SME loan

2003

Real estate loan
SME loan

2004

Real estate loan
SME loan

2005

Real estate loan
SME loan

Lag 1
.221
(.058)
.040
(.025)
.348
(.083)
.038
(.026)
.653
(.174)
-.021
(.041)
1.534
(.573)
-.082
(.114)
.430
(.164)
.201
(.083)
.242
(.079)
.111
(.024)
.141
(.056)
.108
(.018)
.009
(.044)
.101
(.014)
.006
(.054)
.066
(.017)

Lag 2
.215
(.045)
.057
(.024)
.359
(.081)
.028
(.027)
.687
(.176)
-.036
(.047)
1.042
(.537)
-.010
(.102)
.374
(.240)
.067
(.035)
.308
(.108)
.081
(.026)
.148
(.060)
.090
(.019)
.038
(.046)
.107
(.016)
-.015
(.052)
.075
(.015)

Lag 3
.225
(.041)
.036
(.017)
.317
(.063)
.053
(.020)
.687
(.171)
-.049
(.050)
1.136
(.549)
-.025
(.106)
.330
(.220)
.083
(.036)
.307
(.103)
.054
(.045)
.172
(.061)
.086
(.020)
.032
(.049)
.103
(.017)
-.024
(.054)
.085
(.017)

Lag 4
.242
(.045)
.037
(.022)
.312
(.065)
.027
(.021)
.684
(.165)
-.051
(.053)
1.132
(.553)
-.029
(.108)
.388
(.233)
.075
(.041)
.213
(.069)
.062
(.032)
.134
(.059)
.083
(.019)
.045
(.048)
.097
(.017)
-.039
(.054)
.085
(.018)

Note: The dependent variable is the amount of non-performing loans divided by total assets. The columns labeled
“Lag” show different regression specifications. In each case one independent variable is the ratio of real estate loans
divided by total assets and another is small and medium enterprise loans divided by total assets. The independent
variables are lagged by the number of years indicated at the top of the column. Separate regressions are estimated
for each year (specified as row). Each regression also includes the constant term and four bank type dummies (longterm credit bank, trust bank, tier I regional bank, or tier II regional bank). The numbers in the parentheses are
standard errors, corrected for potential heteroskedasticity.

47

Table 3: Capital Evolution for Japanese Banks 2003-2007
(¥Trillion and percent)

Official Core Capital
Capital stock and surplus
Retained earnings
Net unrealized gains on stocks and other securities
Revaluation reserve for land
Net deferred gains on hedging instruments

March-07
40.0
18.0
13.4
8.2
1.0
-0.3

March-03
24.8
18.8
4.4
0.1
1.5
0

Change
15.2
-0.8
9.0
8.1
-0.6
-0.3

Percent contribution
to change
100.00%
-5.26%
59.07%
53.25%
-3.70%
-2.07%

Source: Japanese Bankers Association, Financial Statements of All Banks (http://www.zenginkyo.or.jp/en/stats/year2_01/index.html)..
Note: Official Core Capital includes all the other items listed in the table, plus some other very small components that have been omitted to save space. Capital
stock and surplus correspond to the book value of common equity. Retained earnings are the year’s unappropriated profits that have been added to capital. Net
unrealized gain on stocks and other securities include gains or losses on non-trading securities available for sale, net of taxes . Revaluation reserve for land is the
increase in capital resulted from the revaluation of land that was allowed under the Act on Land Revaluation enacted in 1998. Net deferred gains on hedging
instruments are the unrealized gains on hedging instruments that will be recognized when the hedged asset is disposed of. Because some small components of
capital have been omitted, and because of rounding, components may not sum to totals.

48

Table 4: Profit Decomposition for Japanese Banks 2004-2007
(¥ Trillion, except Nikkei and GDP growth)
Cumulative
Difference
March-07 March-06 March-05 March-04 March-03
(3/04-7/03)
(3/07-3/04)
Net income
8.1
3.4
4.2
1.3
-0.8
4.2
Operating profits
Extraordinary profits - Extraordinary losses

11.5
2.8

4.3
0.4

4.8
1.2

1.9
0.7

0.5
0.5

3.8
-0.1

Operating income
Operating expenses

19.2
14.9

18.0
13.3

16.9
15.0

17.6
17.0

1.6
-2.2

Unrealized capital gains
Nikkei 225
Real GDP growth (percent change from one year earlier)

8.2
17,287
2.3

6.8
17,059
2.3

3.7
11,688
2.0

3.1
11,715
2.1

5.1
7,973
1.1

Source: Japanese Bankers Association, Financial Statements of All Banks (http://www.zenginkyo.or.jp/en/stats/year2_01/index.html). GDP

growth rates are from Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI), Cabinet Office, Government of Japan
(http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/sna/qe091-2/gdemenuea.html).
Note: Operating profits are the difference between operating income and operating expenses. Operating income is the sum of interest income, fees and
commissions, trading income, and gains on foreign exchange transactions, gains of sales of bonds and gains on the redemption of bonds. Operating expenses are
the sum of interest expenses, fees and commissions, losses on foreign exchange transactions, losses on sales of bonds and losses on the redemption of bonds,
losses on devaluation of bonds, transfer allowances for possible loan losses, debenture expenses and general and administrative expenses. Extraordinary profits
and losses are profits and losses resulting from transactions that are not considered to be routine, and typically include profits and losses from sales of land and
other assets. Net income is the sum of operating profits and extraordinary profits less extraordinary losses less taxes.

49

Table 5: Asset Management Companies in Japan
(¥ Trillion)
Name
Dates
Target Purchases
(purchases)
Cooperative Credit
Purchasing Co.

12/19923/2001

Tokyo Kyodo Bank

1/19954/1999

Housing Loan and
Administration Corp.
(HLAC)
Resolution and
Collection Corp.

7/19964/1999

Industrial Revitalization
Corp. of Japan

5/20033/2005

4/19996/2005

Non-performing loans with
land collateral of
contributing banks
Initially assets of failed
credit unions, later assets
of any failed banks
Loans of failed jusen
(specialty housing loan
companies)
Combined RCB and
HLAC, mandate extended
to allow purchases of assets
from solvent banks
Buy non-performing loans
through 2005, restructure
them within 3 years

Actual
Amount Spent
[book value]
5.8
[15.4]

Amount
Collected

Comments

NA

Bank financed, created tax
benefits by buying loans
Liquidated in 3/2004
Reorganized as Resolution
and Collection Bank (RCB)
in 9/1996
Financed with mix of public
and private money

4.718
[NA]

5.362

4.656
[NA]

3.233

0.356
[4.046]

0.649

0.53
[0.97]

NA
[0.094
surplus as
of 5/2007]

Starting in 2001 also
reorganized loans, ultimately
involved in restructuring 577
borrowers
Restructured 41 borrowers
with 4 trillion total debt
Closed in 5/2007

Source: Authors’ calculations.
Notes: “Target purchases” describe the set of assets and set of institutions permitted to sell the assets to the asset management
company. The amount spent includes the undiscounted total amounts spent by the asset management company, along with the
original value of the purchased assets where available. The amount collected is the total amount realized over time from asset sales
and loan collection.

50

Table 6: Capital Injection Programs in Japan
(¥ Trillion)

Legislation
Financial Function
Stabilization Act
Prompt
Recapitalization Act
Financial
Reorganization
Promotion Act
Deposit Insurance Act
(Article 102-1)
Act for Strengthening
Financial Functions

Date of
Injection
3/1998
3/1999 3/2002
9/2003

Securities Used
Preferred shares,
subordinated debt
Preferred shares,
subordinated debt
Subordinated debt

6/2003
11/20063/2009

Common shares,
preferred shares
Preferred shares

Number of financial institutions
(# with nonzero
outstanding balance)
21
(2)
32
(10)
1
(0)
1
(1)
5
(5)

Amount
Injected
1.816
8.605

Amount Sold or
Collected to date (as of
July 2009)
1.653
[1.626 (book)]
8.820
[7.817 (book)]

0.006

0.006
[0.006 (book)]

1.960

0.111
[0.035 (book)]

0.162

0.000

Sources: Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan (DIC). http://www.dic.go.jp/english/e_katsudou/e_katsudou3.html
Notes: Securities used describe the types of securities obtained by the government in exchange for the capital it contributed. Number
of financial institutions reports the total number of institutions that actually sold securities to the government in the program. The
outstanding balance shows the number of participating institutions with securities that were still outstanding as of July 2009. Amount
injected is the total amount spent by the government. Amount sold is the total proceeds collected by selling the securities owned by
the government through July 2009.

51

Table 7a March 1998 Capital Injection Terms
(¥ billion)

City banks
Dai-ichi Kangyo
Fuji
Sakura
Sanwa
Sumitomo
Tokyo Mitsubishi
Asahi
Daiwa
Tokai
Long-term Credit bank
Industrial Bank of Japan
LTCB of Japan
Nippon Credit Bank
Trust banks
Mitsubishi Trust
Sumitomo Trust
Mitsui Trust
Chuo Trust
Toyo Trust
Regional Bank
Bank of Yokohama
Hokuriku Bank
Ashikaga Bank

S&P
Rating

Total
Funds

BBB+
BBB+
BBB
AAA
BBB+
BBBBBB+

99
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

ABBBNR

100
177.6
60

AABBB+
NR
NR

50
100
100
60
50

BBB
NR
NR

20
20
30

Preferred shares
Type
Amount

CPS

CPS
CPS

CPS

99

130
60

32

dividend
rate

Conversion
start date

Forced
conversion
date

0.75

7/1/1998

8/1/2005

1.00
1.00

2.50

10/1/1998
10/1/1998

7/1/1998

4/1/2008
4/1/2018

8/1/2018

Subordinated debt/loans
Type
Amount yield for
5 years

yield after
6th year

SDP
SDP
SD10
SDP
SDP
SLP
SLP
SDP

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

L+1.10
L+1.20
L+0.55
L+0.90
L+0.90
L+1.00
L+2.70
L+0.90

L+2.60
L+2.70
L+1.25
L+2.40
L+2.40
L+2.50
L+2.70
L+2.40

SD10
SLP

100
46.6

L+0.55
L+2.45

L+1.25
L+3.95

SDP
SDP
SDP
SLP
SDP

50
100
100
28
50

L+1.10
L+1.10
L+1.45
L+2.45
L+1.10

L+2.60
L+2.60
L+2.95
L+3.95
L+2.60

SLP
SLP
SDP

20
20
30

L+1.10
L+2.45
L+2.95

L+2.60
L+3.95
L+4.45

Notes. S&P Rating shows the rating of the bank’s long-term debt given by Standard & Poor’s as of March 1998. We thank Kaoru Hosono for sharing the rating
data. Total Funds show the total amount of public capital injected into each bank. If preferred shares were used for injection, the type of preferred shares
(convertible or not), the amount purchased, the dividend rate, the date when the government can start converting preferred shares into common shares (if
convertible), and the date after which the government has to convert the preferred shares into common shares (if convertible), under the columns beneath the
heading “Preferred shares.” If subordinated debt or a subordinated loan was used, the type of subordinated debt (bond or loan and maturity), the amount
purchased, the interest rate for the first five years, and the interest rate after the first five years, under the columns beneath the heading “Subordinated debt/loans.”
L: 6-month yen LIBOR, CPS: Convertible Preferred Shares, SDP: Perpetual Subordinated Debt, SLP: Perpetual Subordinated Loan, SD10: 10-year Subordinated
Debt.

52

Table 7b March 1999 Capital Injection Terms

(¥ billion)
S&P
Rating

Total
Funds

City banks
Dai-ichi Kangyo

BBB

900

Fuji

BBB+

1,000

Preferred shares
Type
Amount

dividend
rate

Conversion
start date

Forced
conversion
date

Subordinated debt/loans
Type Amount yield

yield
after
step-up

step-up
date

CPS
CPS
NCPS
CPS

200
200
300
250

0.41
0.70
2.38
0.40

8/1/2004
8/1/2005

8/1/2006
8/1/2008

SD10
SD11

100
100

L+0.75
L+0.75

L+1.25
L+1.25

4/1/2004
4/1/2005

10/1/2004

2/1/2009

SDP

200

L+0.65

L+1.35
L+2.15

4/1/2004
4/1/2009

CPS
NCPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS

250
300
800
600
201
300
300
100
408
300
300

0.55
2.10
1.37
0.53
0.35
0.95
1.15
1.48
1.06
0.93
0.97

10/1/2006

2/1/2011

10/1/2002
7/1/2001
5/1/2002
8/1/2005
7/1/2002
7/1/2003
6/30/1999
7/1/2002
7/1/2003

10/1/2009
8/1/2008
2/27/2009
2/27/2009
12/1/2009
12/1/2014
4/1/2009
3/31/2009
3/31/2009

SDP

100

L+0.34

L+1.34

10/1/2004

SLP

100

L+1.04

L+2.54

4/1/2009

Sakura
Sanwa
Sumitomo

BBB
BBB+
BBB+

800
700
501

Asahi

BBB+

500

Daiwa
Tokai

BB+
BBB-

408
600

Long-Term Credit
Industrial Bank of Japan

BBB+

600

CPS
CPS

175
175

0.43
1.40

7/1/2003
9/1/2003

9/1/2009
9/1/2009

SDP

250

L+0.98

L+1.48

4/1/2004

BBB
BBB
BBBNR
NR

300
200
400
150
200

CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS
CPS

200
100
250.3
150
200

0.81
0.76
1.25
0.90
1.15

7/31/2003
4/1/2001
7/1/1999
7/1/1999
7/1/1999

8/1/2008
3/31/2009
8/1/2009
8/1/2009
8/1/2009

SDP
SD12
SLP

100
100
150

L+1.75
L+1.53
L+1.49

L+2.25
L+2.03
L+1.99

4/1/2004
4/1/2006
3/31/2004

BBB

200

Trust banks
Mitsubishi Trust
Sumitomo Trust
Mitsui Trust
Chuo Trust
Toyo Trust
Regional Bank
Bank of Yokohama

CPS
70
1.13
8/1/2001
7/31/2009 SDP
50
L+1.65
L+2.15 4/1/2004
CPS
30
1.89
8/1/2004
7/31/2009 SL10 50
L+1.07
L+1.57 4/1/2004
Notes. S&P Rating shows the rating of the bank’s long-term debt given by Standard & Poor’s as of March 1999. We thank Kaoru Hosono for sharing the rating
data. Total Funds show the total amount of public capital injected into each bank. If preferred shares were used for injection, the type of preferred shares
(convertible or not), the amount purchased, the dividend rate, the date when the government can start converting preferred shares into common shares (if
convertible), and the date after which the government has to convert the preferred shares into common shares (if convertible), under the columns beneath the

53

heading “Preferred shares.” If subordinated debt or a subordinated loan was used, the type of subordinated debt (bond or loan and maturity), the amount
purchased, the interest rate before the step-up date, the interest rate after the step-up date, and the step-up date, under the columns beneath the heading
“Subordinated debt/loans.” L: 6-month yen LIBOR, CPS: Convertible Preferred Shares, NCPS: Non-convertible preferred shares, SDP: Perpetual Subordinated
Debt, SLP: Perpetual Subordinated Loan, SDn: n-year Subordinated Debt.

54

Table 8: Loan Losses in Japan
(¥ Trillion)
Loan
Date
Losses
3/1994
3.872
3/1995
5.232
3/1996
13.369
3/1997
7.763
3/1998
13.258
3/1999
13.631
3/2000
6.944
3/2001
6.108
3/2002
9.722
3/2003
6.658
3/2004
5.374
3/2005
2.848
3/2006
0.363
3/2007
1.046
3/2008
1.124
3/2009
3.094

Cumulative Loan Losses since 4/1992
5.512
10.744
24.113
31.877
45.135
58.766
65.710
71.818
81.540
88.198
93.572
96.420
96.783
97.829
98.953
102.046

Number of
Major Banks
21
21
20
20
20
17
18
18
15
13
13
13
11
11
11
11

Source: Financial Services Agency (http://www.fsa.go.jp/en/regulated/npl/20090807.html). Loan losses and cumulative loan losses
come from Table 5. Major banks are city banks, former long-term credit banks, and trust banks that are reported in Table 6.

55

Table 9. Capital Gaps of Major Banks: March 2002 (Unit: ¥Billion)
(A)
(B)
(C)
Bank name
Core
Deferred
Loan loss
capital
tax assets
reserves
Industrial Bank of Japan
Shinsei Bank
Aozora Bank
Daiichi Kangyo Bank
Fuji Bank
Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi
Asahi Bank
UFJ Bank
Sumitomo Mitsui Banking
Daiwa Bank
Ashikaga Bank
Bank of Yokohama
Hokuriku Bank
Mitsubishi Trust & Banking
Mizuho Trust & Banking
UFJ Trust Bank
Chuo Mitsui Trust & Banking
Sumitomo Trust & Banking
Total

(D)
Adequate
reserves

1,091
617
476
1,924
2,063
2,450
752
2,452
3,196
418
130
448
179
741
268
374
527
652

632
18
10
901
763
746
424
1,218
1,741
285
166
142
103
255
141
24382
247

359
371
293
853
477
1,036
533
1,376
1,972
397
99
105
157
397
132
127
177
217

852
727
298
1,789
1,102
2,023
985
3,297
3,666
901
357
363
348
614
290
381
552
494

(E)
Modified
capital ≡
(A-B+C-D)
-34
244
461
87
675
717
-124
-688
-238
-370
-295
48
-116
269
-31
-119
-229
128

18,758

8,414

9,077

19,038

384

(F)
3% of total
assets

(G)
Capital gap
≡ (F-E)

1,172
251
171
1,560
1,497
2,207
751
2,064
3,062
442
159
320
179
610
189
222
390
503

1,206
7
-291
1,474
823
1,490
876
2,752
3,301
812
454
272
295
341
219
341
619
375

15,749

15,365

Source: Authors’ calculation. The original bank balance sheet data are taken from Nikkei Financial Database for Financial Institutions. Core capital includes
equity capital, capital reserves and other items shown in Table 3. Deferred tax assets are credits against future taxes that are counted in core capital. Loan loss
reserves are what each bank reports on the balance sheet. Following Fukao (2003), we estimate the adequate reserves as the sum of 100% of Category IV
(uncollectible) loans, 70% of Category III (doubtful) loans, 20% of Category II (special attention) loans, and 1% of Category I (normal) loans. Capital held by
the government is the value of equity owned by the government. Bank assets are total assets. Modified capital and the capital gap are computed as indicated.

56

