                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RAILROADS AND THE RISE OF THE FACTORY:
                      EVIDENCE FOR THE UNITED STATES, 1850-70

                                         Jeremy Atack
                                        Michael R. Haines
                                        Robert A. Margo

                                       Working Paper 14410
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14410


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2008




This paper was written for the conference in honor of Gavin Wright held at Stanford University on
September 27, 2008. Comments from Latika Chaudhury, and from workshop participants at the National
Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute and the Wright conference are gratefully acknowledged.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jeremy Atack, Michael R. Haines, and Robert A. Margo. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: Evidence for the United States, 1850-70
Jeremy Atack, Michael R. Haines, and Robert A. Margo
NBER Working Paper No. 14410
October 2008
JEL No. N61,N71

                                             ABSTRACT

Over the course of the nineteenth century manufacturing in the United States shifted from artisan shop
to factory production. At the same time United States experienced a "transportation revolution", a
key component of which was the building of extensive railroad network. Using a newly created data
set of manufacturing establishments linked to county level data on rail access from 1850-70, we ask
whether the coming of the railroad increased establishment size in manufacturing. Difference-in-difference
and instrument variable estimates suggest that the railroad had a positive effect on factory status. In
other words, Adam Smith was right -- the division of labor in nineteenth century American manufacturing
was limited by the extent of the market.


Jeremy Atack                                        Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University                               Boston University
VU Station B #351819                                270 Bay State Road
2301 Vanderbilt Place                               Boston, MA 02215
Nashville, TN 37235-1819                            and NBER
and NBER                                            margora@bu.edu
jeremy.atack@vanderbilt.edu

Michael R. Haines
Department of Economics, 217 Persson Hall
Colgate University
13 Oak Drive
Hamilton, NY 13346
and NBER
MHAINES@MAIL.COLGATE.EDU
       In the early years of the nineteenth century manufacturing production in the United

States took place in artisan shops where a highly skilled worker – the artisan – crafted a good

from start to finish perhaps with the help of an assistant or two. Such craftsmen used

comparatively little in the way of physical capital – a building, hand tools, and not much else—

and their operations were to be found everywhere in the country.

       While artisan shops still constituted the majority of manufacturing establishments at

mid century a new organizational form – the factory – had emerged in the preceding decades.

Factories differed from artisan shops in several dimensions. The typical factory employed many

more workers who specialized in production tasks rather than responsible for manufacturing

output from start to finish as in the artisan shop. To facilitate the “division of labor” factory

goods tended to be standardized in design rather than customized to meet the needs of

particular consumers. Factories were also more likely to adopt inanimate sources of power such

as water or steam (Atack, Bateman, and Margo 2008a). A fundamental consequence of these

differences in organization and technology is that factories had higher labor productivity than

artisan shops (Sokoloff 1984). As Andrew Ure (1835, p. 13) summarized, “[t]he term Factory, in

technology, designates the combined operation of many orders of work‐people, adult and

young, in tending with assiduous skill a system of productive machines continuously impelled

by a central power.”

       Over the second half of the nineteenth century resources in manufacturing – labor,

capital, and raw materials – continued to shift towards the factory and away from the artisan

shop. Overall, the manufacturing sector grew rapidly and country became the dominant player



                                                  2
in many industries worldwide by the end of the century (Wright 1990; Broadberry and Irwin

2006).

         What were the causes of the shift towards factory production? One classic answer

invokes the role played by the “transportation revolution” (Clark 1916, p. 351; Taylor 1951).

According to this argument, the market for artisan goods early on was generally limited to the

immediate surrounding area because transport costs were very high relative to the value of the

good at the point of production. Over time, transportation infrastructure spread and improved

dramatically, lowering the costs of shipping goods domestically and internationally. Market size

expanded thereby eroding local monopoly power. The increased competition compelled firms

to raise productivity through division of labor‐cum‐mechanization. “The division of labor,” said

Adam Smith in one of the most famous passages in The Wealth of Nations “is limited by the

extent of the market”.

         Adam Smith’s reputation alone guarantees that the transportation revolution would

make every economic historian’s laundry list of the causes of the diffusion of the factory

system. However, this laundry list would also include many other potential causes. Some of

the earliest factories in America made use of water power. But available sites were limited,

especially outside of New England, and often in locations that were distant from markets. The

development of cheap, reliable steam power after 1850 offered budding factory owners an

economically attractive “footloose” alternative to water power. Recent work has shown that

steam power was adopted more quickly by larger‐scale enterprises arguably because the

positive impact of steam on labor productivity (relative to water or hand power) was increasing




                                                3
in establishment size (see Atack, Bateman and Margo 2008a)1. All else equal, factories would

be more profitable if the wage of unskilled labor was low relative to skilled labor. Early

factories in the Northeast, for example, made extensive use of the labor of young women and

children, whose productivity in agriculture relative to the adult males was low due to the

region’s crop mix (Goldin and Sokoloff 1982). As the century progressed waves of immigration

from Europe expanded the relative supply of unskilled labor, arguably fueling the growth of

factories (Rosenbloom 2002).2


         Assessing the relative importance of the transportation revolution as a causal factor in

the diffusion of the factory has been hampered by a lack of suitable data potentially connecting

the two along with a defensible identification strategy for establishing causality. In this paper

we report on our preliminary efforts to bridge this gap using repeated cross‐sections of

establishments drawn from the 1850, 1860 and 1870 federal censuses of manufacturing that

are linked to county‐level information on transportation access derived from contemporary

maps. Because the manufacturing data begins in 1850 we focus our attention on the impact of

the diffusion of the railroad rather than other forms of man‐made transportation such as

canals, which was largely complete by 1850.3


1
  Note that an improved transportation network would make it cheaper to transport steam engines and coal,
lowered the costs of adopting steam. In this case the transportation revolution makes the factory more likely but
not for the reason suggested by the Smith quotation.
2
  The factors in the paragraph hardly exhaust the laundry list of causes of the factory system; others include the
development of financial markets (Rousseau and Sylla 2005) and legal changes in business organization
(Lamoreaux 2006; Hilt 2008).
3
 Sokoloff’s (1984) samples from the 1820 Census and from the 1832 McLane Report offer an earlier window into
the American industrialization but neither is a representative random sample. Rather, each focuses on a narrow
range of specific locations where manufacturing activities were particularly important and where reporting was

                                                          4
         Following previous work (Craig, Palmquist, Weiss 1996; Haines and Margo 2008) we

measure rail access as a dummy variable indicating whether a railroad passed through the

boundaries of a particular county in a given census year. Some counties already had rail access

in this sense in 1850 while others did not. Among the counties that did not have access in

1850, a subset gained access in the 1850s or in the 1860s. We adopt two identification

strategies to assess causality. Our first strategy is to use a difference‐in‐differences (DID)

estimator. This estimator measures whether factory status increased on average in counties

that gained rail access over the course of the 1850s or 1860s – the “treatment” sample – as

compared with a control sample (counties that did not gain access or already had access at the

start of the decade).


         By design, the difference‐in‐differences estimator eliminates any “fixed effect” at the

county level that, in a cross section, would have been correlated with rail access. However, the

legitimacy of DID rests on the presumption that gaining access occurred through the equivalent

of random assignment. One does not need to read very deeply in the literature of the

transportation revolution to conclude that, at the margin, railroads were built purposefully

rather than haphazardly. Consequently, we have supplemented our DID estimator with an

instrumental variable (IV) estimator whose goal is to isolate exogenous variation in rail access.


         Our instrumental variable derives from “straight lines” drawn between urban areas as of

1820 and the closest major coastal port. The presumption is that a county would have been

more complete. However, while the non‐random sample design suited Sokoloff’s purposes it makes it more
difficult to use to study the impact of transportation improvements. In particular, while none of the counties in
Sokoloff’s sample had rail access in 1820 but virtually all did in 1850. As a result, there is essentially no way to
construct a control group of counties necessary for a difference‐in‐difference analysis.


                                                           5
more likely to gain rail access by 1850 if it lay on the straight line than if it did not. Judging by

our first stage regression, this logic is correct: our “port” IV positively and significantly predicts

rail access in the 1850 cross section of counties.


       Our empirical findings suggest that that the coming of the railroad was a causal factor in

the rise of factories. Both the DID and IV estimates are positive indicating that gaining access to

a railroad was associated with an increase in establishment size. While the instrumental

variable estimates are largely invariant to variations in sample definition, both the magnitude

and statistical significance of the DID estimator is sensitive in this sense. If, however, we

restrict attention to counties for which our rail access variable is likely to reflect true geographic

proximity to a rail line then the two approaches yield estimates of causal impacts that are

similar in magnitude.


   1. The Division of Labor and the Extent of the Market


       In this section we discuss the economics underlying the “Smithian” hypothesis that we

are testing. Firms have access to a technology that incorporates division of labor as more

workers are hired, at least up to some level of output. If markets are “small” or local in nature

relative to this level of output, the number of firms serving the market will be small – possibly

only one ‐‐ and division of labor limited. If transport costs fall the number of firms in the

“market” will increase. Initially this number may be higher than can be supported in long‐run

equilibrium; how there will be more competition than in the initial equilibrium, “flattening” the

demand curves facing each firm, leading them to produce more output. Given our assumption




                                                   6
on costs, this will be achieved through an increase in division of labor and, therefore, in firm

size.4


         We begin by positing a long run cost curve of the form


                                                 C = F – aq + bq2, q>0


We think of F as a (quasi)‐fixed cost that is incurred provided output is positive – for example,

the owner of the establishment has to be present when production starts in the morning and

when it ends at night and this entails an opportunity cost that is independent of q. If we divide

C by q, we get average cost,


                                                  AC = F/q – a + 2bq


This is minimized when qmin = √F/2b. Note that for values of q < qmin average cost is decreasing

in q.


         We think of division of labor as the primary reason why average cost is decreasing over

a range of output up to minimum average cost. To justify this, assume that one unit of the

product is produced when (and only when) a set of T “tasks” is completed. There exists a

reference technology called the “artisan technology” in which owner can hire a single worker

(possibly himself) to perform each task. The artisan technology could be replicated for each unit

of output to be produced during the production period – thus, for example, if completing all of




4
 Our model bears a close resemblance to the analysis in Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) who investigate how
equilibrium market structure varies with market size but who do not emphasize the connection to division of labor
as we do.


                                                        7
the tasks requires a full production period and two units of output are desired, two artisans

would be hired.


        Alternatively, the owner could hire two workers and assign each to a subset of tasks. We

might imagine this being done on the basis of comparative advantage or after an initial period

of “training” but in either case requires an additional cost that is embodied in F. The benefit of

doing so, however, is that average cost is lower under division of labor than under the

reference technology beyond some level of q > q*(artisan). Further division of labor continues

to reduce average cost up to the point where minimum AC is reached, as above.


        Under what conditions will division of labor occur? Suppose that each market is so small

that, in long run equilibrium, only a single establishment can survive at the margin. By

definition, “survive at the margin” means that, price, p, must equal AC in the long run.

However, if the firm is a monopolist, it must also be the case that p > MC (marginal cost). This

can only happen if the firm produces less output than qmin. If the firm is a local monopolist and

is producing less than minimum average cost output, it will either be using the reference

(artisan) technology – in which case there is no division of labor ‐‐ or it will utilize division of

labor to some extent, but not the extent that would be the case under perfect competition.


        Next, we imagine that the N local markets are still completely segmented by high

transport costs but that local demand for q increases. The increase in demand creates the

potential for entry. In general, as entry occurs the demand curve facing each firm will “flatten”

(become more price elastic at any given quantity) and cannot, if the equilibrium number of

firms is greater than one, be below the long run average cost curve. This can only happen if, in


                                                   8
equilibrium the quantity of output produced by each firm increases. For increase in demand

that are sufficiently small it is possible that this could simply mean more artisans serving the

market but eventually, output per firm will increase so that there is additional division of labor.

In the limit, of course, if local demand increases enough, the equilibrium will converge to the

competitive outcome (Bresnahan and Reiss 1991).


        Thus, even in the absence of a transportation improvement that lowers transport costs

between markets, it is possible for the separate markets to grow sufficiently in size such that

each embraces the “factory” technology. That is, if markets vary in size, some may be served

by factories, even in a world in which no trade occurs between markets.


        What happens in this framework if there is a reduction in transport costs? As a point of

departure imagine the extreme case where transport costs fall to zero from the initial

equilibrium in which each market is served by a single firm. In the short run (that is,

immediately after the reduction in transport costs) there will still be N firms, but now there is

only one market. Under any reasonable theory of strategic interaction, because competition

has increased, price will fall and the aggregate quantity demanded will increase. As above, the

demand curve facing each firm will flatten; if the firm remains in business, output will

necessarily be higher. 5 But if per‐firm output is higher in the new equilibrium, there must be

more division of labor than in the initial equilibrium.




5
  The number of firms in the new equilibrium may be less than N; that is, there may be some consolidation – fewer
firms serve the (now) larger market, but each firm produces more output than before.


                                                        9
       To summarize, our framework predicts that, at the margin, a reduction in transport

costs provides an incentive for firms that are efficient enough to survive to engage in greater

division of labor. This occurs because the demand facing each (surviving) firm is flatter than

before and therefore at the point where entry is no longer profitable (zero economic profits)

output is closer to minimum average cost. In the remainder of the paper we test this idea by

examining whether the coming of the railroad in the antebellum United States led to an

increase in establishment size in manufacturing.


   2. Railroads and the Transportation Revolution


       The United States experienced a “transportation revolution” in the nineteenth century

(Taylor 1951; Goodrich 1961; Haites, Mak, and Walton 1975). The elements of the revolution

are all well known: dredging and other improvements to harbors and natural inland waterways;

improved all‐weather roads for travel by wagon; the building of canals; the marine application

of steam, and last, and perhaps of greatest importance, the diffusion of the railroad. In

principle all of the features of this revolution could have affected the growth of manufacturing

– and, undoubtedly did, in many different ways. For the purposes of this paper, however, we

focus on the railroads because, as a practical matter, the timing of the manufacturing data used

in this paper, beginning as it does with the 1850 federal census, overlaps only with a significant

portion of the timing of the diffusion of the steam railroad. By then other forms of

transportation improvements, such as canals and the western river steamboat, had largely

been completed.




                                                10
       Although plans for railroads were first discussed in the United States in the early 1800s,

it was not until the late 1820s that any steam railroads were actually built. The first American

railroads were tramways used in mining and quarrying, such as the so‐called “Granite Railroad”

that commenced operations in Quincy, Massachusetts in 1826. But railroads in the modern

sense really originate with the struggles of port cities like Baltimore, Boston, and Charleston

that lacked adequate inland waterway connections that would enable greater volume of trade

with the hinterland in competition with New York and its Erie Canal. By 1840 some 3,300 miles

of track had been laid (of which about 2,800 miles were in operation), the majority of it in New

England, the mid‐Atlantic, and South Atlantic states, and almost all of it involving trips of short

duration (“short line”). Further expansion in mileage took place in the 1840s, much of it again

in New England, and also in New York. The South and Midwest were largely bypassed during

this decade, except for the completion of a rail line linking Savannah and Chattanooga, and a

rail line through Ohio from Sandusky to Cincinnati. By 1850, about 10,000 miles of railroad

track were in operation but split between different gauges, several of which were incompatible

with one another thus preventing through‐haulage.


       The 1850s witnessed a substantial wave of rail expansion (Stover 1978). Approximately

22,000 miles of track were laid between 1850 and 1860 such that, on the eve of the Civil War,

total rail mileage exceeded over 30,000. Although the federal government had been involved

in railroad expansion prior to 1850 in an indirect way by providing land surveys free of charge

(from 1824, when the General Survey Bill was passed and immediately signed into law by

President Monroe to 1838, when the law authorizing the surveys was repealed), direct

subsidies in the form of land grants were first voted in 1850, and later extended several times

                                                 11
during the decade (United States 1940). By 1860, in addition to substantial coverage in the

Northeast, rail lines crossed Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio, with significant mileage in operation in

Wisconsin and Iowa. The South was less well served, but it too experienced substantial growth

in rail access in the 1850s and, later, in the aftermath of the Civil War (Wright 1986).


       Economic historians have devoted considerable attention to measuring the impact of

railroads on total output, or what Fogel (1964; see also Fishlow 1965, Williamson 1974, and

Kahn 1988) called the “social savings” of the railroad. Attention has also been paid to the

“backward linkages” that railroad expansion created with other manufacturing sectors (Fogel

1964); whether railroads were “built ahead of demand” (Fishlow 1965); and the impact of

transportation improvements on regional economic development (Williamson 1974). Our goal

in this paper is to add to this literature by examining another “treatment effect” of the railroad,

that on factory status in manufacturing. To measure this treatment effect requires a data set

linking the diffusion of railroads to the distribution of establishment sizes in manufacturing. We

describe such a data set and our estimation strategy in the next section.


   3. Data and Estimation


       Our empirical analysis relies upon the modified Bateman‐Weiss national samples of

manufacturing establishments (Atack and Bateman 1999) which have been linked to a newly

created database of transportation infrastructure for the nineteenth century United States. We

briefly describe first the transportation database and then the linked sample.


       The transportation database was created in two stages. In the first stage, we combined

information from Goodrich (1961) and various nineteenth century sources to produce a county

                                                 12
level dataset indicating whether a county had “access” to water transportation from 1850

onwards. Access here means a set of dummy variables indicating if a canal or navigable river

passed through the county boundaries (or was, in the case of a river, the county boundary) or if

the county bordered on one of the Great Lakes or had ocean frontage. For this purpose county

boundaries were fixed as of a given census year (for example, 1850 or 1870) and the tracing of

the water routes from the digitized maps is overlaid upon a geographic information system

(GIS) boundary file (or “shapefile” in the language of GIS) of navigable waterways at specific

dates (Figure 1).6


        The second stage was to create similar access variables for railroad transportation. For

this stage we assembled extant railroad maps from the nineteenth century that have been

digitized, and can therefore be overlaid on shape‐files of the historical county boundaries

(Figure 2). This differs from the approach used by other scholars (for example, Craig, Palmquist,

and Weiss 1996) who visually compared historical maps to county boundaries (which generally

did not appear on the historical maps) and tried to integrate often contradictory maps into a

single measure.




6
 Determination of what constituted a navigable waterway was subject to some interpretation. For example,
Fogel’s (1964) map of navigable waterways includes a number of East coast and Gulf rivers: the Coosa, the
Conecuh and the Escambia in Alabama, the Edisto in South Carolina, the Black and the Northeast rivers in North
Carolina and the Dan and Staunton rivers in Virginia. Nineteenth century traffic on most of these rivers, however,
seems to have been by bateaux, carrying small amounts of cargo at relatively high cost, rather than by steamboat
or barge. We have defined a navigable waterway as one which accommodated steamboats or canal barges on a
regular basis. For this reason, we treat Shreveport as the practical head on navigation on the Red River and ignore
navigation on rivers such as the Licking and Big Sandy Rivers in Kentucky where, according to Hunter, “small
steamboats occasionally ran for short distances.”


                                                        13
       Regardless of the approach used, errors arise from multiple sources. First, the dates on

the maps tend to be ambiguous. Most list their copyright date rather than the date

represented by the data on the map. Mapmakers were attempting to capture a flow—railroad

construction—as a snapshot. Moreover, few of the mapmakers had personal knowledge of all

of the rail systems they were drawing. Surveys were imperfect (albeit improving), map

projections were inaccurate. Last, and certainly not least, rail lines were not accurately and

consistently drawn on maps with the result that railroads seemed to shift location from year to

year. While a few railroads may have been realigned and re‐graded, in most cases, once a

railroad was built in a specific location, it stayed where it was because the bulk of the railroad’s

investment was not just fixed but also sunk (literally). For example, according to the 1880

Census, over 80 percent of railroad investment went into construction costs, of which only one

or two percent represented the cost of the land itself; the rest went in surveying, grading,

removing or bridging obstacles and laying the track. While ties, ballast and the rails might be

reused and the land itself could be resold, the grading, cuttings, embankments, bridges, and

drainage ditches had few alternative uses—especially in the nineteenth century.


       Once a digitized railroad map has been overlaid upon a county boundary file, GIS

methods can be used to create various indicators of transportation access. Following previous

work (Craig, Palmquist and Weiss 1996; Haines and Margo 2008) we created a rail access

dummy variable equal to one if a railroad passed through the county, and zero otherwise. For

additional details on the transportation data base and its construction, see Atack, Bateman, and

Margo (2008b).




                                                 14
        The end result of the data collection process just described is a county‐level data set

showing if a county had rail (and/or) water access as of a particular date. The transportation

data have been linked (at the county level) to samples of manufacturing establishments that

were drawn from the 1850‐70 manuscript censuses of manufacturing by Bateman and Weiss

and modified and extended by Atack and Bateman.7 Because of the timing of the census this

linkage occurs at census year frequencies (1850, 1860 and 1870). The censuses of

manufacturing recorded outputs and inputs along with other firm level characteristics and

identified the location of each plant, including the county. For additional details on the

manufacturing data, see Atack and Bateman (1999).


        For the purposes of this paper we have chosen to follow the previous literature

(Sokoloff 1984) and have defined a “factory” as an establishment with 16 or more workers.8

Table 1 shows the fraction of establishments located in counties with rail transportation in each

of the sample years and the distribution of factories. In 1850, slightly more than two‐thirds of

the sample establishments were located in counties with rail access. Rail access increased

sharply in the 1850s, to 85 percent of the sample firms, and again in the 1860s, to 95 percent.

In 1850 and 1860, the number of workers is the sum of male and female employees. In 1870,

the number of workers is the sum of adult males, adult females, and child employees. We have

7
  Although data on manufacturing establishment in 1880 are also available, these are not used here as they
undercount the number of factories which are a key component of our analysis here. The problem with the 1880
data is that the collection of data for certain key industries, including iron and steel, textiles and glass, was
delegated to special agents rather than being a part of the regular census and these enumerations have since been
lost. The 1880 data require special reweighting to be representative and we have yet to integrate the weights into
the linked manufacturing‐transportation sample.
8
 Our definition does not separately distinguish mechanized establishments because mechanized power, in
principle, was a complement to division of labor (see Atack, Bateman, and Margo 2008a).


                                                       15
experimented with the adjustment of entrepreneurial labor suggested by Sokoloff (1984) which

involves adding one person to the count of workers but as our substantive findings were not

affected, we only report results using the unmodified census counts. Similarly, no adjustment

has been made to render the number of employees comparable across establishments in terms

of adult‐male equivalents because at least some of the process of division of labor involved the

substitution of women and children for adult men (Goldin and Sokoloff 1982).


       As can be seen in Table 1, factories as we have defined them grew more common over

time, garnering an ever larger share of the total manufacturing labor force. Indeed, even by

1850, fully 60 percent of all workers in our sample were employed in establishments with 16 or

more workers; by 1870 the share was up to 72 percent. It is also clear that factories were

common in counties that had rail access by from 5.9 to 9.4 percentage points, depending on the

census year. The weighted average of these differences (the weights are the sample sizes in

each year) produces an average “treatment effect” of 7.2 percentage points.


       If we were to take this estimate seriously, then the diffusion of the railroad from 1850 to

1870 can explain all of the increase in the proportion of establishments that were factories. To

see this, note that the proportion of counties with rail access grew by 27.8 percentage points

from 1850 to 1870 (from 67.5% to 95.3%). If the treatment effect of rail access is 7.2

percentage points, the predicted increase in the proportion factory is 2.1 percentage points

(=0.072 x 0.278 x 100%) compared with an actual increase in the proportion factory of 1.9

percentage points (see Table 1).




                                               16
        Alternatively, we can assess the explanatory power of railroads by assuming that no

counties had access in 1820 and compute the impact of the diffusion of rail access from 1820 to

1850, and compare the predicted change in the percent factory to the 1850 level shown in the

table. The predicted change in percent factory from this calculation is 4.9 percentage points

(=0.072 x 0.675 x 100%). This accounts for 58.3 percent of the proportion factory in 1850 ( =

0.049/0.084 x 100%) but it underestimates the explanatory power since some establishments in

existence in 1820 would have met our factory definition (see Sokoloff 1984) and therefore the

increase in factory status between 1820 and 1850 was less than the 1850 level of 8.4 percent.9


        This simple calculation suggests that the diffusion of the railroad could have been a

major driving force behind the rise of the factory. But the calculation, of course, presumes that

the cross‐sectional difference in percent factory between counties with and without rail access

in Table 1 is an unbiased estimate of the true treatment effect. It is easy to think of reasons

why the difference in factory status by rail access shown in Table 1 merely reflects a correlation

with other factors that influenced factory status – for example, urbanization, or characteristics

of the local labor supply. Or there could have been reverse causality – places with a higher

proportion of factories in 1850 may have had more factories before the railroad came, and

because there were more factories, the railroad came. To address this problem, we have taken

two different approaches to circumventing any endogeneity bias.


Difference‐in‐Differences Analysis

9
 In the 46 industrialized counties in his sample from the 1820 census of manufacturing, Sokoloff reports that 237
of the 1,457 firms in his sample (16.3%) had a workforce of 16 or more persons. Because of the specialized nature
of the Sokoloff sample and the fact that the 1820 census undercounted small establishments (see Sokoloff 1984)
the true percentage of factories in 1820 is far lower than this but obviously greater than zero.


                                                       17
       One way to approach this is through a difference‐in‐differences (DID) analysis.

Specifically, we examine whether counties that were “treated” with a railroad in either the

1850s or the 1860s witnessed an increase in the proportion of manufacturing establishments

that were factories, according to our definition, relative to a control group of counties. This

control group consists of those counties that already had rail access in place at the start of both

decades and those which never gained rail access. This analysis, in effect, includes county and

year fixed effects and therefore sweeps away many factors that made it more likely that a

county got a railroad and also influenced (independently) the likelihood that manufacturing

establishments were factories. In all of the various results that follow, the standard errors have

been corrected for clustering at the county level.


       The results of the DID analysis are shown in Table 2. In the first row we allow for a

treatment effect to occur if the county received a railroad after 1850. If no establishment level

controls are included in this regression, the estimated treatment effect is far smaller (β = 0.027)

than the estimate derived from Table 1 and is statistically insignificant. However, if we allow

the treatment effect to vary by decade, the DID estimate for the 1860s is only slightly smaller in

magnitude than the average of the two cross‐sectional treatment effects (1860 and 1870)

shown in Table 1.


       The remaining columns in Table 2 either include establishment level controls (urban

status and two‐digit SIC industry code) or else restrict the sample in various ways. Adding

urban status and industry controls, for example, slightly lowers the estimated coefficient of rail

access (column 5) but the coefficient remains statistically significant. Perhaps the most



                                                18
interesting estimate appears in the last column in which we restrict the sample to just urban

establishments located in counties that had water access in 1850. Although we have not

mapped the precise locations of the firms in the Atack‐Bateman samples, the fact that the

county had access to water transportation may have produced positive network externalities

for running a rail line into the county, and the rail depots would have been situated in urban

locations. In other words, firms in such counties would not likely have had to move goods very

far in order to gain direct access to a rail depot – a major factor when hauling costs by wagon

were very high, as was the case in 1850 (Fogel 1964).


Instrumental Variable Estimates


       An alternative way of dealing with endogenity bias is to construct an instrumental

variable for rail access. We have applied this approach to the 1850 cross section. The idea

behind the IV approach is to find a variable that predicts rail access in 1850 but which otherwise

does not have a direct effect the probability that an establishment was a factory.


       To construct our instrumental variable we first identify all cities and towns of population

2,500 or more in the 1820 census (these are named in Figure 3). Next we identified nine major

ports in 1820 from customs information. These ports were Baltimore, Boston, Charleston, New

Orleans, New York, Norfolk, Philadelphia, Portland (ME), and Savannah. We then drew straight

lines from each interior city/town to the nearest port. If a county lay along a straight line as

drawn, our instrument takes the value one and zero otherwise (Figure 3).


       The idea behind this IV is that costs mattered in the construction of a railroad.

Specifically, all other factors held constant, (i) a lower cost rail network is preferable to a higher

                                                  19
cost network (ii) a shorter line is less costly to build than a longer line and (iii) the shortest

distance between two points is a straight line. Connecting interior places that had already

established some level of economic activity in 1820 to the wider world (via ports in existence in

1820) clearly would make economic sense – if the transportation infrastructure were

economically feasible. Places that happened to be on a straight line as just described would be

at greater risk of gaining rail access earlier rather than later.


        Table 3 shows the IV results for various sample specifications. The first stage

coefficients are uniformly positive and highly significant, indicating that our IV does predict rail

access in 1850 as hypothesized. The second stage estimates are all positive and significant and

quantitatively large. In the first column, we use the full sample of establishments in 1850.

According to the IV estimate, rail access increases the likelihood that an establishment is a

factory by nearly 19 percentage points, a very large impact relative to the sample mean.


        Although the IV results suggest a large positive effect of gaining rail access, the

estimated effect will be biased upwards if the IV fails the exclusion test. It can be argued, for

example, that our straight line IV captures access to any “line of communication” between the

inland city and the nearest port and such counties might have developed larger markets (and

large firm sizes) anyway (see Bannerjee, Duflo, and Qian 2008). In this regard, it is worth

keeping in mind that our IV specification includes urban status and water transportation access,

so we are already controlling, at least in part, for these alternative factors. In an effort to

address this possible source of bias further, Column 2 exclude all observations located in the

counties containing a major port. If this alternative hypothesis were valid we should see a



                                                   20
smaller second‐stage IV coefficient, and we do – however, the difference in magnitude

between the column 2 and column 1 estimates is very small. As a further robustness check, in

column 3 we exclude observations in states for which the instrument has a value of zero for all

counties in the sample, to be sure that it is the set of set of states for which the IV was truly

relevant geographically (that it, states where it was possible at all for our IV to predict rail

access) matters. Again, this change slightly lowers the coefficient, but it remains large, positive,

and statistically significant.


        While these robustness checks do not rule out the possibility that our IV might not be

excludable, they do suggest that any such bias is arguably small. If we take the column 3 IV

coefficient to be the true treatment effect of being in geographic proximity to a railroad it is not

very different from our DID estimate, provided that we restrict attention to urban firms in

counties that had water access – recall that we argued that, if such a county gained rail access,

it was likely that the firms in this (restricted) sample of counties probably did benefit because

they were reasonably close to the rail depot to begin with.


        As a final robustness check we substitute a different dependent variable, the percentage

of workers who were female. Goldin and Sokoloff (1982) demonstrate that the percentage of

women (and boys) among all workers is a useful measure of the extent to which firms

substitute unskilled for skilled labor in the process of capturing economies of scale associated

with division of labor. As can be seen in Table 4, the IV estimates are again positive and highly

significant. Firms that were located in counties that gained rail access were more likely to

employ women relative to men, a sign that they were engaging in division of labor.



                                                  21
   4. Concluding Remarks


       In the nineteenth century the United States experienced a transportation revolution and

an industrial revolution. In this paper we report on a preliminary investigation of a particular

link between the two revolutions – whether improved access to transportation networks

increased the proportion of manufacturing establishments that were factories. The idea here, a

very old one in economics, is that establishments that operated in larger markets were more

likely to engage in division of labor.


       Our empirical analysis derives from a newly created and linked sample of county level

data on transportation access and establishment level data from the 1850‐70 censuses of

manufacturing. The transportation database has been created from digitized 19th century

transportation maps that have been overlaid on maps showing county boundaries, enabling us

to measure whether or not, in particular, a railroad operated in a county in a given census year.


       Using two separate identification strategies, we showed that rail access was positively

and significantly associated with the probability that an establishment was a factory, which we

identify to be establishments with sixteen or more workers. The first identification strategy is a

difference‐in‐difference analysis applied to repeated cross sections of establishments, while the

second is an instrumental variable estimation applied to the 1850 sample of firms. Although

the magnitudes of the coefficients vary, all are positive and many are large and statistically

significant ‐‐ large enough, indeed, to attribute a quantitatively significant fraction of the rise in

factory establishments to the coming of the railroad.




                                                  22
       While this paper has provided some preliminary evidence in favor of Adam Smith’s

division‐of‐labor dictum it is important not to overstate the significance of the results. Our

measure of rail access, in particular, is crude and it would be worthwhile to refine it, for

example, by measuring the actual number of rail miles in each county. It would also be a

worthwhile extension to develop additional instrumental variables, which would enable us to

compute an over‐identification test of the excludability restriction. Lastly, it would be

desirable to extend the analysis to other forms of transportation improvements, such as canals.

That said, our results do provide a prima‐facie case that the transportation revolution was an

important factor behind a key feature of America’s industrial revolution, the rise of the factory.




                                                 23
Table 1: Sample Statistics




           24
Table 2: Difference‐in‐Differences Estimates: Manufacturing Establishments, 1850‐70




                                        25
Table 3: Instrumental Variables Estimates: Factory Status in 1850




                               26
Table 4: Instrumental Variables Estimates: Percent Female in Workforce, 1850 Sample




                                        27
Figure 1: Navigable Waterways Mapped Against 1860 County Boundaries




                                28
             1850 (Base map: Phelps)




              1860 (Base map: Colton)
Figure 2: Counties with Rail Access in 1850 and 1860


                        29
Figure 3: Interior Urban Centers (Population > 2,500) in 1820 Connected to Closest Major Port City




                                               30
                                               References

Atack, Jeremy and Fred Bateman. 1999. “U.S. Historical Statistics: Nineteenth Century U.S.

        Industrial Development Through the Eyes of the Census of Manufactures,”

        Historical Methods 32: 177‐188.

Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman, and Robert A. Margo. 2008a. “Steam Power, Establishment Size,

        and Labor Productivity Growth in Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing,”

        Explorations in Economic History 45: 185‐197.

Atack, Jeremy, Fred Bateman, and Robert A. Margo. 2008b. “Revisiting the Transportation

        Revolution in America,” unpublished paper, Department of Economics, Vanderbilt

        University, Nashville TN.

Banerjee, A., Duflo, Esther, and Nancy Qian. 2008. “The Railroad to Success: The Effect of Access to

        Infrastructure on Economic Growth in China,” unpublished powerpoint presentation,

        Department of Economics, Brown University, Providence RI.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated

        Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 99: 977‐1009.

Broadberry, Steven and Douglas A. Irwin. 2006. “Labor Productivity in the United States and the

        United Kingdom During the Nineteenth Century,” Explorations in Economic History

        43: 257‐279.

Clark Victor S. 1916. History of Manufactures in the United States 1607‐1860 (Washington DC: Carnegie

        Institution)

Craig, Lee, Palmquist, R. and Thomas Weiss. 1998. “Transportation Improvements and

        Land Values in the Antebellum United States: A Hedonic Approach,” Journal of

        Real Estate Finance and Economics 16: 173‐190.

Fishlow, Albert. 1965. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante‐bellum


                                                   31
        Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Fogel, Robert. 1964. Railroads and American Economic Growth: Essays in Econometric

        History. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1982. “Women, Children, and Industrialization

        in the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses,” Journal

        of Economic History 42: 741‐774.

Goodrich, Carter. 1961. Canals and American Economic Development. New York:

        Columbia University Press.

Haines, Michael and Robert A. Margo. 2008. “Railroads and Local Economic Development:

        The United States in the 1850s,” in J. Rosenbloom, ed. Quantitative Economic

        History: The Good of Counting, pp. 78‐99. New York: Routledge.

Haites, E., Mak J. and Gary Walton. 1975. Western River Transportation: The Era of

        Internal Development, 1810‐1860. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University

        Press.

Hilt, Eric. 2008. “When Did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in

        the Early Nineteenth Century,” Journal of Economic History 68 (September).

Kahn, Charles M. 1988. “The Use of Complicated Models as Explanations: A Re‐

        Examination of Williamson’s Late 19th‐Century America,” Research in

        Economic History 11: 185‐216.

Lamoreaux, Naomi. 2006. “Business Organization,” in S. B. Carter, et. al, eds. Historical

        Statistics of the United States: Millenial Edition: Volume 3, Economic Structure

        and Performance, pp. 477‐494. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Sokoloff, Kenneth. 1984. “Was the Transition from the Artisanal Shop to the Non‐Mechanized

        Factory Associated With Gains in Efficiency? Evidence from the U.S. Manufacturing


                                                    32
        Censuses of 1820 and 1850,” Explorations in Economic History 21: 351‐382.

Rosenbloom, Joshua. 2002. Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: Labor Markets

        During American Industrialization. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Rousseau, Peter and Richard Sylla. 2005. “Emerging Financial Markets and Early U.S.

        Growth,” Explorations in Economic History 42: 1‐26.

Stover, John F. 1978. Iron Roads to the West: American Railroads in the 1850s. New York:

        Columbia University Press.

Taylor, George R. 1951. The Transportation Revolution, 1815‐1860. New York: Holt,

        Rhinehart, and Winston.

Ure, Andrew. 1835. The philosophy of manufactures : or, An exposition of the scientific, moral, and

        commercial economy of the factory system of Great Britain. (The Making of the Modern World.

        Gale 2008. Gale, Cengage Learning. Vanderbilt University. 07 August 2008)

United States. Office of Federal Coordinator of Transportation. 1940. Public Aids to Transportation: Vol

        II, (Washington, DC: GPO).

Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1974. Late Nineteenth Century American Development: A General

        Equilibrium History. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Wright, Carroll D. 1883 The Factory System of the United States in U.S. Department of the Interior.

        Census Office. Report on the Manufactures of the United States at the Tenth Census.

        (Washington DC: GPO)

Wright, Gavin. 1986. Old South, New South. New York: Basic Books.

Wright, Gavin. 1990. “The Origins of American Industrial Success, 1879‐1940,” American

        Economic Review 80: 651‐668.




                                                   33
