                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     URBAN INEQUALITY

                                        Edward L. Glaeser
                                       Matthew G. Resseger
                                         Kristina Tobio

                                       Working Paper 14419
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14419


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2008




All three authors thank the Taubman Center for State and Local Government for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Edward L. Glaeser, Matthew G. Resseger, and Kristina Tobio. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Inequality
Edward L. Glaeser, Matthew G. Resseger, and Kristina Tobio
NBER Working Paper No. 14419
October 2008
JEL No. H0,I0,J0,R0

                                               ABSTRACT

What impact does inequality have on metropolitan areas? Crime rates are higher in places with more
inequality, and people in unequal cities are more likely to say that they are unhappy. There is also
a negative association between local inequality and the growth of both income and population, once
we control for the initial distribution of skills. What determines the degree of inequality across metropolitan
areas? Twenty years ago, metropolitan inequality was strongly associated with poverty, but today,
inequality is more strongly linked to the presence of the wealthy. Inequality in skills can explain about
one third of the variation in income inequality, and that skill inequality is itself explained by historical
schooling patterns and immigration. There are also substantial differences in the returns to skill, related
to local concentrations in different industries, and these too are strongly correlated with inequality.


Edward L. Glaeser                                      Kristina Tobio
Department of Economics                                Kennedy School of Government
315A Littauer Center                                   79 JFK St- T347
Harvard University                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    kristina_tobio@ksg.harvard.edu
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Matthew G. Resseger
ENTER POSTAL ADDRESS HERE
resseger@fas.harvard.edu
   I.      Introduction


For much of the almost 2,500 years since Plato wrote that “any city however small, is in
fact divided into two, one the city of the poor, the other of the rich,” urban scholars have
been struck by the remarkable amount of income inequality within dense cities (Wheeler,
2005). While there is certainly plenty of rural inequality as well, the density of cities and
urban regions makes the contrast of rich and poor particularly striking. Figure 1 shows
the 45 percent correlation between density and income inequality, measured with the Gini
coefficient, across counties with more than one person per every two acre. The tendency
of dense places to be more unequal motivates this survey of inequality in metropolitan
areas, multi-county units containing a dense agglomeration of population.


America is, on the whole, relatively unequal for a developed country (Alesina and
Glaeser, 2004), but there are some places within the U.S. that are a lot more equal than
others. While Manhattan is the physical embodiment of big-city inequality and has a
Gini coefficient of .6, the Gini coefficient of Kendall County, Illinois is only about one-
half that amount. Kendall is a small but rapidly growing county on the outskirts of the
Chicago area that combines agriculture with a growing presence of middle-income
suburbanites. In Kendall, 9.2 percent of households earned more than 150,000 dollars in
2006, and 9.3 percent of households earned less than 25,000 dollars. In contrast, 20.4
percent of households in New York County earned more than 150,000 dollars, and 26.5
percent earned less than 25,000. In Section II of this paper, we discuss the measurement
of inequality across metropolitan areas.


Just as at the national level, inequality across metropolitan areas reflects the distribution
of human capital, the returns to human capital and governmental redistribution. A
primary difference between local and national level inequality is that local inequality is
driven to a large extent by decisions of people to live in different places. According to
2006 American Community Survey, seven percent of the U.S. population lives in a
different county or country than they did only one year ago, and twenty-one percent of



                                              2
the population lives in a different county or country than they did five years ago.
Manhattan’s inequality reflects the decisions of both rich and poor to come to the island.
Since more than fourteen percent of Kendall’s population lived outside the county one
year ago, the area’s reflects the fact it attracts homogenous people.


Paradoxically, local inequality is actually the inverse of area-level income segregation.
Holding national inequality constant, local inequality falls as people are stratified across
space so that rich live with rich and poor live with poor. A perfectly integrated society,
where rich and poor were evenly distributed across space, would have highly unequal
metropolitan areas that mirror the entire U.S. income distribution.


In Section III, we find that almost one-half of the variance in income inequality across
space can be explained by differences in the skill distribution across metropolitan areas.
Places with abundant college graduates and high school dropouts are areas that are
particularly unequal. Traditional economic models try to explain the location of skilled
and unskilled workers with differences in the returns to skill and differences in amenities
(Dahl, 2002). We agree with this framework, but empirically, we find that history and
immigration seem to be the most important determinants of inequality today.


Sixty percent of the heterogeneity in skills across larger metropolitan areas can be
explained by the share of high school dropouts in the area in 1940 and the share of the
population that is Hispanic. Long-standing historical tendencies are highly correlated
with the location of high school dropouts and the location of Hispanic immigrants today.
Historical skill patterns also play a huge role in the current location of college graduates
(Moretti, 2004), and explain much of the distribution of skills across space.


Metropolitan inequality also reflects differences returns to skill. A modified Gini
coefficient that holds the skill composition of each area constant, but allows the returns to
skill to vary, can explain 50 percent of the variation in the actual Gini coefficient across
metropolitan areas. The correlation between the raw Gini coefficient at the metropolitan
area level and the estimated returns to a college degree in that area is 73 percent.



                                              3
We do not fully understand why some places reward skill so much more strongly than
others. In our data, the most powerful correlate of the returns to having a college degree
is the share of population with college degrees, but that fact provides more confusion
than clarity. The correlation could reflect skilled people moving to areas where there are
large returns to skill. Alternatively, it might reflect human capital spillovers which cause
the returns to skill to rise. Hopefully, future research will help us better understand the
differences in the returns to skill across metropolitan areas.


In Section IV of this paper, we turn to the consequences of local inequality. We find a
significant negative correlation between local economic growth and income inequality
once we control for other initial conditions, such as the initial distribution of skills and
temperature. Places with unequal skills actually grow more quickly, but places with
more income inequality, holding skills constant, have slower income and population
growth. Inequality is related to crime at both the national and city level (Fajnzylber,
Lederman and Lloayza, 2002; Daly, Wilson and Vasdev, 2001). Our data also confirms a
robust relationship between the murder rate and inequality. Luttmer (2005) documents
that people are less happy when they live around richer people. We also find people who
live in more unequal countries report themselves to be less happy.


In Section V, we discuss the policy issues surrounding local inequality. Even if we
accept that local inequality has some unattractive consequences, the consequences of
reducing local inequality, holding national inequality fixed, are quite unclear. Reducing
local inequality, leaving the national skill distribution untouched, implies increased
segregation of the rich and the poor.


Moreover, easy migration across areas severely limits the ability of localities to reduce
income inequality through redistributive policies (Peterson, 1981). The ability to
migrate means that when localities take from the rich and give to the poor, they will
induce the rich to emigrate and attract more poor people, which in turn creates added
burdens on the city’s finances. After all, the evidence in Section III suggests that the



                                               4
location of high skilled people may be quite sensitive to the returns to skill. Decreasing
the returns to skill at the local level with higher taxes or other policies will surely induce
some skilled workers to leave.


Our final point is that America’s current schooling system puts localities at the center of
any attempts to reduce national inequality through a more equal human capital
distribution. While localities are inherently weak in their abilities to reduce inequality,
decentralized schooling means that any attempt to equalize educational opportunities
must rely heavily on localities. Not only will attempts to reduce inequality through
more equal education take many years, but they will also require a tricky partnership
between national and local governments.


    II.      Measuring Inequality Across American Metropolitan Areas


In the analysis that follows, we will use metropolitan areas as our geographic unit and the
Gini coefficient as our measure of income inequality. Metropolitan areas are defined as
multi-county agglomerations that surround a city with a “core urban area” of over 50,000
people. Metropolitan areas have the advantage of at least approximating local labor
markets, and they are large enough to provide a certain measure of statistical precision.
The disadvantage of using these areas is that they do not correspond to natural political
units, which makes them awkward units for analyzing or discussing public policy.


Much of the data for this paper comes from the five-percent Integrated Public-Use Micro-
Samples (IPUMS) for the 1980 and 2000 Censuses (Ruggles et al, 2008). In most cases,
we will restrict ourselves to total household income, which means that we are not treating
single people differently from married people. We will focus on pre-tax income
inequality.1 A particular problem with using Census data to measure income inequality is
that incomes in the 2000 Census are top-coded at 999,998 dollars and at 75,000 in 1980.



1
  Our income measures, like many in this literature, exclude non-income returns from capital ownership,
like the flow of services associated with owning a home.


                                                    5
In the case of top-coding, we use the income top-code, but recognize that this is
understating the true degree of income inequality.


We use the Gini coefficient as our measure of inequality, mainly because it is the
ubiquitous standard in the inequality literature. Many policy discussions of inequality
focus on poverty, and reducing poverty levels is a natural topic of policy attention. Yet
this essay is focused on extremes at both the upper and lower levels of the income
distribution, and the Gini coefficient captures that heterogeneity. The Gini coefficient,
                       1
defined as 1 −
                       yˆ ∫y
                             (1 − F ( y )) 2 dy , where ŷ is the mean income in the sample and F(y) is

the share of the population with income levels less than y. This measure has the
interpretation as the area between the 45 degree curve (which indicates perfect equality)
and the Lorenz curve.2


The Gini coefficient has the advantage of being invariant with respect to scale, so that
larger areas or richer areas do not necessarily have larger or smaller Gini coefficients.
Moreover, a ten percent increase in everyone’s income will not impact the Gini
coefficient. The Gini coefficient also always rises when income is transferred from a
poorer person to a richer person. One standard criticism of the Gini coefficient is that the
average Gini coefficient of a number of areas will not equal the Gini coefficient
calculated for those areas all together.


There are several plausible alternatives such as the variance of income within an area (
                                                                  1
∫ ( y − yˆ )                                                           ∫ ( y − yˆ )
               2                                                                      2
                   dF ( y ) ) or the coefficient of variation (                           dF ( y ) ). The
    y                                                             yˆ    y


coefficient of variation, unlike the variance, will not increase or decrease if all incomes
are scaled up or down by the same percentage amount. A final type of measure is the
difference in income between individuals in different places of the income distribution,
2
    If we let p denote F(y), i.e. the share of the population earning less than y, then the Lorenz curve plots the
                                                                        −1
share of national income going to individuals earning less than F            ( p) as a function of p, i.e.
1
yˆ ∫y ≤ F −1 ( p )
                   f ( y ) ydy .


                                                          6
for example the difference in income between people at the 90th and 10th, or the 75th and
25th, percentiles of the income distribution. We calculate these differences using the
logarithm of income.


Using the 2000 Census five percent micro-sample, we calculate these five different
income inequality measures at the metropolitan area level: (1) the Gini coefficient using
household income, (2) the variance of household income, (3) the coefficient of variation
of household income, (4) the income difference between the 90th and 10th percentiles of
the household income distribution, calculated as the difference in the logs of these
numbers and (5) the income difference between the log 75th and 25th percentiles of the
household income distribution. Table 1 shows the correlation between our five measures
as well as the correlation between these measures and the logarithm of both median
family income in the area and population size.


The most reassuring fact in the table is that these income measures are fairly highly
correlated. For example, the correlation coefficient between the Gini coefficient and the
coefficient of variation is 92 percent. The correlation coefficient between the Gini
coefficient and the 90-10 percentile income difference is 91 percent. The variance is less
correlated with these other measures because it is highly correlated with the mean level of
income in the area. In general, these different measures give us a similar picture of which
metropolitan areas within the U.S. are most unequal.


We are interested not only in the stability of income inequality between different
measures, but also in the stability of income inequality over time. Figure 2 graphs the
Gini coefficient for 242 metropolitan areas estimated from the 1980 Census against the
Gini coefficient from the 2006 American Community Survey, the most recent data
available. For comparison, we also plot the 45 degree line.


Overall, the correlation between the Gini coefficient in 1980 and the Gini coefficient in
2006 is .58, which suggests neither extreme permanence nor enormous change in the
rankings. Places that had an unusually high level of income inequality in 1980 revert



                                             7
slightly to mean and have relatively less inequality today. As the Gini coefficient in
1980 increases by .1, the growth in the Gini coefficient over the next 26 years falls by
.03. Some of the impermanence (and mean reversion) surely reflects measurement error
in the Gini coefficient.


The most striking fact in Figure 2 is that the points in the graph are above the line in all
but one area (Ocala, Florida), which means that for almost all the MSAs the estimated
Gini coefficient is much higher today than it was 26 years ago. Much of this surely
reflects the real increase in inequality in this country that has been extensively
documented (e.g. in Katz and Murphy, 1992, and subsequent literature). However, some
of the seeming increase in Gini coefficients may reflect changing top codes, but when we
look at other measures that are less subject to top-coding issues (i.e. the 90-10
differences) we continue to see large increases in inequality in almost all areas.


In 1980, the Gini coefficients ranged from .33 to .45. Wisconsin had the most equal
metropolitan areas 25 years ago with the Appleton-Oshkosh-Neenah MSA’s Gini
coefficient of .33, and Gainesville, Florida, was the most unequal metropolitan area with
a Gini coefficient of .45. Two very poor Texas areas (Brownsville and McAllen) had the
next highest levels of inequality. Wisconsin still has the country’s most equal
metropolitan area in 2006 (Sheboygan with coefficient of .38), but even it is substantially
less equal than the most egalitarian places were 25 years ago. New Haven-Bridgeport-
Stamford, with its combination of inner-city poverty and hedge-fund entrepreneurs, is
now the most unequal metropolitan area in the country with a Gini coefficient of .54.
While the county of Manhattan is more unequal, there are no other metropolitan areas
that are even close to that Connecticut area in income inequality. The next three most
unequal areas are Gainesville, Florida; Athens, Georgia; and Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
Inequality shows up both in America’s richest metropolitan areas, like New Haven, and
in some of its poorer areas.


Generally, there is a negative association between area inequality and average incomes.
For example, the Gini coefficient, coefficient of variation, the 90-10 percentile income



                                              8
difference and the 75-25 percentile income difference are all are negatively associated
with area income. Figure 3 shows the –14 percent correlation between the Gini
coefficient and the logarithm of median family income.


However, this connection has been declining over time. Figure 4 shows the -59 percent
correlation between the Gini coefficient and the logarithm of median family income in
1980. This correlation is far stronger than the -14 percent correlation for 2006 shown in
Figure 3. 25 years ago almost all rich places were relatively equal, given the relative
inequality of the United States. Today, some of America’s richest places are also among
the most unequal. Some of this change may reflect changing top-coding, but it surely
also reflects the enormous gains in wealth at the top end of the income distribution over
the past 25 years in wealthy cities like San Francisco.


While the link between average income and inequality is becoming weaker, the link
between area population and inequality is becoming stronger. In 1980, the raw
correlation between population and the Gini coefficient was essentially zero (-.02). In
2000, the Gini coefficient’s 15 percent correlation with area population is shown in
Figure 5. Regressions (1) and (2) in Table 2 show bivariate regressions where the Gini
coefficient is regressed on contemporaneous income and population measures in 1980
and today. Between 1980 and 2000, the connection between average income and the
Gini coefficient fell by more than 40 percent, and the connection between area population
and the Gini coefficient increased by roughly the same percentage.


Does nominal income inequality imply inequality of real incomes or of consumption?
Prices differ across metropolitan areas, but if prices were the same for every type of
person in every area, then prices should not impact inequality, at least as measured by the
coefficient of variation or the Gini coefficient. However, as suggested by Black,
Kolesnikova and Taylor (2007), prices may be quite different for people at different
places in the income distribution. New York may be much more expensive for a
relatively rich person than it is for a relatively poor person. Indeed, the very fact that




                                              9
poor people continue to live in New York suggests that the area may not be as expensive
for them as average prices would indicate.


This issue could be addressed by developing different price indices for people at different
levels of the income distribution in different metropolitan areas, but that is far beyond the
scope of this paper. Instead, we have undertaken the far simpler task of asking about the
inequality of consumption of one important good: housing. If places with more rich
people are expensive places for the rich to live, then we should expect to see less
inequality of housing consumption than inequality of income.


To calculate a housing consumption Gini coefficient, we must first calculate a measure of
housing consumption for everyone in the U.S. We start with a national housing price
regression, where the logarithm of housing price is regressed on the characteristics of
every household. Because of the limited number of housing characteristic data available
from the Census microsample, we instead use data for 46 of the largest metropolitan
areas from the American Housing Survey Metropolitan Samples for 1998, 2002, 2003
and 2004. Housing characteristics include interior square footage, exterior square
footage, the number of bathrooms, the number of bedrooms and several other features.
We then use this regression to form a predicted housing price measure for every
household. Essentially, we are using a hedonic regression to create a housing price index
that enables us to aggregate across different housing characteristics.


We use this housing consumption measure to calculate a Gini coefficient of housing
consumption for every metropolitan area. Figure 6 shows the 38 percent correlation
between this housing consumption Gini coefficient and our income Gini coefficient.
More unequal incomes also have more unequal housing consumption, but in general
housing consumption inequality is much less than income inequality and housing
consumption inequality is particularly below income inequality in places with large
amounts of income inequality.     The mean housing consumption Gini coefficient is 0.28,
much lower than 0.45, which is the mean of the household income Gini for this
subsample of metropolitan areas in 2000.



                                             10
While some of this difference can be attributed to measurement error, since our hedonic
regression omits many key housing attributes, this result still suggests that places with
highly unequal income levels have less housing consumption inequality than one might
expect. This fact does not prove that prices are largely offsetting incomes, but
heterogeneity in local prices that impact rich and poor people differently may be
important, and measuring these prices and their impact is yet another interesting topic for
future research.


     III.       The Causes of Urban Inequality


The typical economic approach to earnings is to assume that they reflect the interaction of
human capital and the returns to human capital (e.g. Katz and Murphy, 1992). Indeed,
human capital is often defined as including everything that goes into earnings, in which
case the relationship is essentially tautological. If human capital is reduced to being a
scalar, h, then the wage associated with each value of h is wi (h) where i represents each

place. If the density of population in each area with human capital level h is g i (h) , then

the average earnings in a locality is equal to ∫ wi (h) g i (h)dh . The density of income
                                                         h


will be g i ( wi−1 ( y )) where Gi ( wi−1 ( y )) denotes the cumulative distribution of income.


If wi (h) = α i + β i h , then the variance of wages within a place is equal to β i2Vari (h) ,

where Vari (h) is the variance of h within place i.             The coefficient of variation is

    βi
              Vari (h) , where ĥi is the mean of h within place i. The Gini coefficient is
α i + β i hˆi
      1
            ∫ (1 − G (w
                       −1
1−                 i   i    ( y ))) 2 dy , and if h is distributed uniformly on the interval
     yˆ i   y




[
hˆi − .5σ i , hˆi + .5σ i   ] then the Gini coefficient is 1 − 3(α(β i ) 3 σ i
                                                                         + β i ĥi   ) , which is a function of
                                                                     i

both the distribution of skills and the returns to skill.



                                                       11
The inequality of after-tax, after-redistribution earnings will then also be affected by the
progressivity of the tax rate and the state of the social safety net. We will turn to the
heterogeneity in welfare payments later, but our primary focus is on the dispersion of
before-tax earnings. We will begin by discussing the role that heterogeneous human
capital plays in explaining the differences in inequality across space and the causes of
that heterogeneous human capital. We will then turn to differential returns to human
capital and governmental after-tax redistribution.


Human Capital Heterogeneity and Income Inequality Across Areas


To assess the role that human capital plays in explaining income inequality across areas,
we will take two complementary approaches. First, we will simply regress the Gini
coefficient on measures of human capital. Second, we will create Gini coefficients for
each metropolitan area based on the observable measures of human capital and national
wage regressions. Both measures are compromised by the fact that our measures of
human capital are coarse. They capture only the years of formal schooling and years of
experience. True human capital would include many more subtle factors, such as the
quality of schooling and of experience.


In regression (3) of Table 2, we examine the relationship between the Gini coefficient in
2000 and two primary measures of human capital in the same year: the share of adults
with college degrees and the share of adults who are high school graduates. We continue
to control for area population and area income. Both of these variables are extremely
significant and they increase the amount of variance explained (i.e. r-squared) from 15
percent to 49 percent. As such, more than one-third of the heterogeneity in income
inequality across metropolitan areas can be explained by these two basic measures of
human capital.


The coefficients are also large in magnitude. As the share of college graduates increases
by 10 percent, the Gini coefficient rises by .031, a little more than one standard deviation.



                                              12
As the share of high school graduates increases by 10 percent, the Gini coefficient drops
by .018, about two-thirds of a standard deviation. While it may be unsurprising that
even such crude proxies for heterogeneity in the human capital distribution can do so well
at explaining the income distribution, this fact illustrates that much of inequality within
an area reflects the heterogeneity of skills within that area.


One concern about results such as these is that perhaps the inequality of human capital
within an area is itself an endogenous response to changes in the returns to skill. If places
that have high returns to having a college degree attract people with college degrees, then
controlling for the skill distribution in this way may also end up controlling for the
returns to skill. After all, economic theory predicts that college graduates should go to
places where the returns to being a college graduate are higher. Of course, this cannot
explain why inequality is higher where there are more high school dropouts, but it is still
worth taking the endogeneity of skills seriously.


One approach to this endogeneity is to look at long-standing historical skill patterns. We
only have data on the share of the population with high school and college degrees going
back to 1940. In regression (4), we show the results using those variables instead of
contemporaneous college and high school graduation levels. We continue to control for
contemporaneous income and population, but the results are unchanged if we remove
those controls. Human capital levels in 1940 are still strongly correlated with inequality
today. The overall r-squared declines to 32 percent, but these historical variables
incrementally explain more than fifteen percent of the variation in the Gini coefficient.


The coefficient on the high school graduation rate in 1940 is quite close to the coefficient
on 2000 high school graduation. The coefficient on the college graduation rate is more
than three times higher using the older data. However, the variation in the college
graduation rate is much smaller in 1940, so a one standard deviation increase in the
college graduation rate has about the same effect when using 1940 or 2000 data. One
way to understand why 1940 college graduation rates have such a strong impact on




                                              13
modern inequality is that they strongly predict the growth in college graduation rates after
that point.


In the fifth regression, we go back even further and look at 19th century measures of
human capital. We do not have measures of human capital in the adult population, but
we do have enrollment rates for high schools and colleges during this time period, which
are found in historical Census data.3 Unfortunately, we lose over 70 metropolitan areas
by using this historical data. The coefficients on these enrollment rates are not, therefore,
particularly comparable with the coefficients on population-based skill measures in
regressions (3) and (4). In regression (5), we find that the share of the population
enrolled in college in 1850 is a quite solid predictor of income inequality today. High
school enrollment rates also continue to negatively predict inequality.


In this case, the incremental r-squared created by those two variables when compared to
regression (2) is quite modest (five percent). Still, we are impressed by the ability of
150-year-old educational variables, measuring something quite different from modern
skill levels, to explain anything. The coefficient on college enrollment in 1850 is quite
large, but again this needs to be considered together with the extremely small level of
variation in this variable across space. These results continue to suggest to us that
historical patterns of human capital play some role in explaining income inequality today.


In the sixth regression, we add two more historical measures of human capital: (1) the
share of the population that is illiterate in 1850 and (2) the share of the population that
was enslaved in that year. We interpret both measures as proxies for human capital
deprivation. Learning to read is an obvious measure of human capital. Slaveowners
often opposed education for their slaves. Indeed, during the century after emancipation,
the former slave areas continued to provide particularly poor education for African-
Americans. Both illiteracy and slavery in 1850 help predict inequality today. Adding



3
 Haines, M.R., (2004) ICPSR study number #2896, Historical Demographic, Economic, and Social Data:
The United States, 1790-2000.


                                                14
these variables increases the r-squared of the regression to 26 percent, an additional six
percent.


Another way of looking at the impact of human capital is to ask whether human capital in
1980 is associated with growth in inequality after that year. In Table 3 we regress the
Gini coefficient in the year 2006 on the Gini coefficient in the year 1980 and other
controls. We use the 2006 measure, rather than the 2000 measure, because it increases
the time period of change by 30 percent. Regression (1) can be interpreted as a growth
regression since we are asking about the determinants of inequality today, holding past
inequality constant. The coefficient of .79 on the Gini coefficient in 1980 implies that
there is mean reversion between 1980 and today, although this could be the result of
measurement error. The result on income and population tell us that income inequality
has been rising both in bigger areas and in richer areas.


In regression (2), we include our controls for human capital in 1980. Again, there is a
strong positive association between college graduation rates in 1980 and inequality today.
Places with more highly skilled people in 1980 have become more unequal over time,
which presumably reflects both the rise in the returns to skill and the tendency of skilled
people to move to more skilled areas, which we will discus later. Places with more
college dropouts have also become more unequal over time. Not only do
contemporaneous skill levels predict inequality, but inequality of skills in 1980 predicts
an increase in income inequality since then.


We now turn to our second means of assessing the importance of skill distributions in
explaining the inequality of income. In this approach, we calculate only the income
inequality from males between the ages of 25 and 55. To keep sample sizes up, we look
only at the 102 metropolitan areas with more than 500,000 people. We use only workers
with positive earnings, and we use only labor market income. We calculate three Gini
coefficients. First, we calculate the standard Gini coefficient using the earnings from
these workers. Figure 7 shows the 74 percent correlation between this Gini coefficient
and our household income Gini coefficient among these 102 metropolitan areas.



                                               15
We then compare this Gini coefficient for male workers with Gini coefficients based
entirely on the human capital of these workers, by which we mean age and years of
schooling. To calculate these “human capital only” Gini coefficients, we use a
nationwide earning regression to predict earnings for everyone in the sample. By using
these predicted earnings rather than true earnings we can isolate the impact of the level of
human capital in an area while abstracting away from the differential returns to
schooling. We calculate the Gini coefficient based on these predicted earnings. Figure 8
shows a 57 percent correlation between the two Gini coefficients.


Our Gini coefficient based only on human capital explains about 33 percent of the
variation in overall income inequality among working-age males. This is a considerable
amount of explanatory power, but it still leaves plenty to be explained. Another way of
looking at the data is to note that the average Gini coefficient calculated with human
capital only is one half the size of the Gini coefficient calculated using true income. As
such, human capital gets you some, but far from all, of the way towards explaining the
amount of income inequality.


One reason why these human capital based measures are failing to more fully explain
actual income inequality might be that our human capital measures are so coarse.
Occupations may provide us with a richer means of measuring individual-level human
capital. As such, we created a third Gini coefficient using the same sample but including
occupation dummies in our wage regressions. These dummies are then used, along with
years of schooling and age, to predict wages, and these predicted wages are used to
calculate a local Gini coefficient. The mean of this occupation-based Gini coefficient is
about half-way between the Gini coefficient with just education and age and the Gini
coefficient of true income. If we accept that occupation is a measure of skills, then this
measure goes much more of the way towards explaining income inequality across areas.


Figure 9 shows the 86 percent correlation between this occupation-based Gini coefficient
and the true income Gini coefficient. The occupation-based index has the ability to



                                             16
explain 73 percent of the variation in the true income Gini coefficient. There are two
interpretations of this finding. First, occupation may be proxying for income more than
human capital and therefore should not be used as a control in the regression. Second,
occupation may indeed be a better measure of human capital. There is surely some truth
in both views, but we can draw the conclusion from this section that heterogeneity in
human capital across space can explain a considerable amount of the heterogeneity in
income inequality across space.


The Causes of Human Capital Inequality


Why are the levels of human capital so different in different places? One theory is that
current human capital levels reflect long-standing education policies formed over the last
200 years; Goldin and Katz (2008) provide a rich description of this history. Urban and
economists who emphasize people’s location decisions will tend to focus on differences
in economic productivity and differences in amenities that then motivate migration (e.g.
Dahl, 2002). According to this view, areas that specialize in industries which are
particularly good for low or high skill workers should then disproportionately attract
those workers. Of course, this theory just pushes the puzzle one step backward. A more
complete explanation for heterogeneity in skills would also explain why different
industries are located in different places. In some cases, like cities with ports or coal
mines, there are exogenous factors that explain industrial location, but observable
variables tend to only explain a modest amount of industrial concentration (Ellison and
Glaeser, 1999).


Alternatively, amenities may draw high-skill workers to a particular location. For
example, if there is some amenity that is particularly desirable and in particularly short
supply, then we would expect rich people to locate in places with that amenity. This can
certainly explain why there are so many rich people in Paris (Brueckner, Thisse and
Zenou, 1999) or on the Riviera. Alternatively, there can be other amenities, such as
access to public transportation, which might draw poor people disproportionately to a
given area.



                                             17
While the economic framework that emphasizes rational location choice certainly has
some ability to explain the distribution of skilled people across space, much of current
skill patterns appear to be determined by long-standing historical skill patterns, as
discussed above. For example, Figure 10 shows the 73 percent correlation between the
share of adults with college degrees in the year 2000 and the share of adults with college
degrees in the year 1940. The college share of the population in 1940 is able to explain
more than 50 percent of the variation in the college share today, which suggests the
enormous power of historical forces in shaping the skill composition of cities today.


We also run a regression that shows that skill growth is strongly predicted by the initial
skill level. As the 1940 share of the adult population with college degrees increased by 5
percent, the growth rate in the share of the population with college degrees between 1940
and 2000 increased by 10 percent. Far from there being mean reversion in this variable,
there has been a tendency of skill growth to be concentrated in places that began with
more skills (Berry and Glaeser, 2005).


The relationship between today and the past is much weaker at the bottom end of the skill
distribution. Figure 11 shows the 45 percent correlation between the share of the adult
population who did not have a high school degree in 1940 and the share of the adult
population without a high school degree in 2000. In this case, the 1940 variable can only
explain one-fifth of the variation in the high school dropout rate today. The graph shows
a number of places, such as Miami and McAllen, Texas, which have particularly large
high school dropout rates today relative to their historical levels. Older variables, such as
the percent of the population enslaved in 1850, can explain about one-tenth of the
variation in the high school dropout rate today.


These outliers suggest that immigration, particularly from Latin America, is also
associated with a heavy concentration of less skilled workers. Figure 12 shows the 57
percent correlation between the share of the population that is Hispanic and the share of
the population without a high school degree in 2000. Together, the Hispanic share today



                                             18
and the dropout rate in 1940 can explain 61 percent of the variation in the dropout rate
today. The Hispanic share is particularly high in Florida, Texas and California, which are
three states that were once part of the Spanish Empire and which are geographically close
to Mexico and other countries in Latin America. In fact, the correlation between
Hispanic share and MSAs latitude is -36 percent, which reinforces this point. Once
again, history seems to play a large role in explaining the current skill distribution.


By contrast, the evidence supporting the importance of the traditional economic
explanations of the location of talent is much weaker. For example, there is little
evidence that highly skilled people have moved to areas with particularly pleasant
temperatures. There is a no robust association between January temperature and the
share of the population with college degrees. High July temperatures are associated with
fewer college graduates, but even this effect is quite modest. July temperatures can
explain only 6.5 percent of the variation in the share of the population with college
degrees.


LeRoy and Sonstelie (1983) and Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport (2008) provide theory and
evidence supporting the view that less skilled people live in the centers of metropolitan
areas because of access to public transportation. Cars are expensive, and poorer people
prefer the time-intensive, lower-cost alternative of buses and subways. Can access to
public transportation explain the location of less-skilled people across areas? No. There
is virtually no correlation across metropolitan areas between the share of the population
without high school degrees and the share of the population that takes public
transportation. This absence of correlation is particularly surprising since the poor
generally take public transit more, which should yield a positive relationship between less
skilled people and public transit, even if the poor didn’t move across metropolitan areas
in response to public transit access.


Alternatively, people of different skill levels may be drawn to particular areas because of
skill-specific economic opportunities. Silicon Valley has a booming computer industry,
and it attracts extremely highly skilled engineers. New York City attracts smart people to



                                              19
work in finance. Certainly, there is a strong correlation between the skill level of an area
and the skill orientation of the industries in the area. Using the 2000 Census, Glaeser
and Gottlieb (2008) ranked industries by the share of the workers in that industry in the
nation with a college degree. They then calculated the share of a metropolitan area’s
employment that was in the top 25 percent industries ranked by human capital and in the
bottom 25 percent of industries ranked by human capital.


Figure 13 shows the 79 percent correlation between this measure of high skilled
industries and the share of the population with college degrees. Figure 14 shows 49
percent correlation between the share of the adult population without a college degree
and the measure of low-skill industries. Certainly, there is a robust relationship between
the skill orientation of the industries in an area and the skill distribution of the area. But
which way does the causality run? Are skilled industries moving into an area because
there are an abundance of skilled workers, or are skilled workers moving to areas because
of skill-oriented industries?


While surely both phenomena occur, we think that the evidence supports the view that
industries are responding to the area’s skill distribution more than the view that the skill
distribution is responding to the area’s industries mix. For example, the share of the
population with college degrees in 1940 can explain 35 percent of the variation in the
skill mix of industries today. By contrast, the skill composition of the industries in the
metropolitan area in 1980 can only explain seven percent of the variation in growth of the
population with college degrees since that date. The complex two-sided nature of this
relationship makes it difficult to accurately assess the direction of causality, but there are
reasons to think that much of the industrial mix in the area is actually responding to the
skill distribution.


One variable that seems more plausibly predetermined is the concentration in
manufacturing during the first half of the 20th century. The location of factories does not
seem likely to be particularly driven by the presence of highly skilled workers 100 years
ago. Yet an industrial orientation, as late as 1950, is negatively correlated with the share



                                              20
of the population with college degrees today, perhaps because those manufacturing cities
tended not to reinvent themselves as centers of idea-oriented industries or perhaps
because manufacturing employers were less disposed towards high schools earlier in the
century (Goldin and Katz, 2008). As the share of the workforce in manufacturing in
1950 increases by 10 percent, the share of the population with college degrees drops by
about 1 percent. This may explain why, as shown in Table 2, Regression (7),
manufacturing in 1950 is negatively associated with inequality today.


These industrial measures are essentially proxies for differential returns to human capital
across metropolitan areas. Using wage regressions, we are able to estimate such
differential returns directly by running regressions of the form:


(1) Log (Wage) = α MSA + β MSA
                           BA
                               * BAGrad + β MSA
                                            HS
                                                * HSGrad + Other Controls


where α MSA is an area specific intercept, β MSA
                                             BA
                                                 is an area specific return to having a

college degree and β MSA
                     HS
                         is an area specific return to having a high school diploma. This
regression estimates a differential return to different levels of schooling for each
metropolitan area. We estimate this regression only for prime age males, and include
controls for experience. We focus only on those areas with more than 500,000 people so
that the returns to schooling are estimated with reasonable precision.


Figure 15 shows the 24 percent correlation between our estimate of β MSA
                                                                     BA
                                                                         and the share of
the adult population with college degrees in the 102 metropolitan areas in our sample
with more than 500,000 people. One interpretation of this fact is that skilled people are
moving to places where the skill levels are higher. A second interpretation is that
agglomerations of skilled people raise the returns to skill. Any interpretation of this
relationship is compromised further by the fact that an abundance of skilled people would
normally reduce the returns to skill in a typical model of labor demand. Still, this does
suggest that highly skilled people are living in places where the returns to skill are higher.




                                             21
Differential Returns to Human Capital


The fact that the returns to capital differ across space can also potentially explain the
inequality that we see across metropolitan areas. As the formula discussed above
illustrates, pre-tax income inequality will reflect both differences in the distribution of
skills and differences in the returns to those skills. Certainly, the framework predicts a
strong link between places with higher returns to college and income inequality.


Figure 16 shows the 73 percent correlation between our estimated return to a college
degree and the Gini coefficient across the 102 areas with more than 500,000 people. The
measured return to a college degree is much better at explaining area inequality than the
number of people with college degrees. Of course, these returns are directly based on the
same income data that is being used to generate the Gini coefficient. Still, this finding
seems to confirm the view that heterogeneity in returns to skill can help us to explain
differences in income inequality across space.


To look at this further, we again calculate Gini coefficients for each metropolitan area
using wage regressions. However, in this case, we allow the coefficients on skills to
differ across metropolitan areas as shown in equation (1) above. We again run these
regressions only for prime aged males. We then use these regressions to predict the
amount of inequality in an area if the skill distribution of the area were the same as the
skill distribution in the country as a whole. When we calculated Gini coefficients using
wage regressions above, we were calculating local Gini coefficients based only on
differences in the skill composition, holding the returns to skill constant across space.
Now we calculate Gini coefficients holding the skill composition constant, but allowing
the returns to skill to differ across space.


Figure 17 shows the 71 percent correlation between these predicted wage Gini
coefficients and actual Gini coefficients in our sample of prime age males across
metropolitan areas with more than 500,000 people. The relationship is tighter than it was
when we looked at Gini coefficients that assumed a constant return to skill. Moreover,



                                               22
this Gini coefficient holding the skill composition constant explains 50 percent of the
variation in the actual Gini coefficient, whereas our constant return to skills Gini
explained only 33 percent of the difference. We interpret these results as suggesting that
differential measured returns to human capital can explain area-level income inequality
somewhat better than differences in measured human capital.


One potential concern with interpreting these results is that measured returns to human
capital may not be measuring higher returns to human capital, but instead measuring high
levels of true human capital associated with each coarse category of observed human
capital. For example, if people with college degrees in some areas went to higher quality
schools or have had better work experience, then this would cause the measured return to
a college education to increase, even if the true returns to human capital were constant
across space. We have no way of dealing with this hypothesis, and we will continue
referring to the measured returns to human capital as the returns to human capital,
understanding that it can also reflect other things.


While differences in the returns to skill do seem to explain a significant amount of the
differences in inequality, we do not know what explains differences in returns to skill
across space. For example, the positive correlation between the share of the population
with college degrees and returns to skill might suggest that being around other skilled
people increases the returns to being skilled. Alternatively, Beaudry, Doms and Lewis
(2006) suggest that places with abundant skilled workers invested in computerization,
which then had the effect of raising the returns to skill. While we are certainly
sympathetic to these interpretations, it is hard to distinguish between this view and the
view that more skilled people are moving to areas where the returns to skill are higher.


Moreover, the share of the population with college degrees in 1940 does little to explain
the returns to college today. If we thought that higher returns to skill reflected the power
of agglomerations of skilled people, then an abundance of skills in 1940, which predicts
skills today, should also predict higher returns to college today. This is not the case, as
we find only a 5 percent correlation between the share of the population with a college



                                             23
degree in 1940 and our measure of the return to a college degree. Instead, a higher return
to college today is strongly associated with recent growth in the share of the population
with college degrees. The correlation between our return to college measure and the
change in the proportion of the adult population with college degrees is 26 percent.
These facts support the idea that skilled people are moving to areas where the returns to
skill are higher.


Other variables also do a relatively poor job of explaining the returns to skill. For
example, our measure of skill intensive industries doesn’t explain the returns to skills.
Looking at Figure 15 shows that some of the places with the highest returns to skill are
usual suspects. The financial agglomeration in Southwestern Connecticut and the
technology agglomeration in San Francisco Bay have very high returns to human capital.
But there are also areas, like Houston and Birmingham, that are more of a surprise.4


Figure 18 illustrates the 34 percent correlation between our estimated returns to college
and the share of workers in finance among the 102 cities in our sample with more than
500,000 people.5 Figure 19 shows the 27 percent correlation between the returns to
college and the share of workers in the computer industry among the same sample of
cities.6 This seems to support the results of Beaudry, Dom and Lewis (2006) who show a
link between computerization and inequality. A related and interesting hypothesis is that
wage inequality is linked to the former concentration of low skilled workers in routine
tasks that have now been made obsolete (Autor and Dorn, 2007).


Still, we are much more confident that differences in the returns to skill can explain a
significant amount of income inequality across metropolitan areas than we are in
explaining why areas have such different returns to human capital. A number of recent
papers, like Autor and Dorn (2007); Black, Kolesnikova and Taylor (2007); and Beaudry,
4
  Like Black, Kolesnikova and Taylor (2007), we find a modest positive relationship between cost of living
and returns to college.
5
  “Finance” is defined using IPUMS 2000 Occupation Codes for the 5% sample at
http://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/00occup.shtml. Finance codes are 12, and 80-95.
6
  “Computers” is also defined using IPUMS 2000 Occupation Codes for the 5% sample at
http://usa.ipums.org/usa/volii/00occup.shtml. Computer codes are 11, 100-111, and 140.



                                                   24
Dom and Lewis (2006) have brought some understanding to this question, but it remains
a pressing topic for future research.


   IV.     The Consequences of Urban Inequality


At the national level, income inequality has been linked to low levels of economic
growth, perhaps because inequality leads to political strife (Persson and Tabellini, 1994;
Alesina and Rodrik, 1994), but local inequality is not the same thing as national
inequality. No one should be surprised if the political and economic effects of inequality
are different at the local level. After all, local political outcomes are far more constrained
by state constitutions and easy out-migration.


More generally, local inequality, as opposed to local poverty, is not necessarily a bad
thing. If people of different income levels mix throughout the country, then local
inequality will be higher than if people segregate into homogenous, stratified
communities. A large number of studies suggest economic mixing, i.e. local inequality,
benefits the less fortunate by giving them more successful role models (Wilson, 1987) or
employers (Mazzolari and Ragusa, 2007). Others suggest that the wealthy develop
empathy for the poor through spatial proximity (Glaeser, 1999). Egalitarians can
simultaneously hope for policies that would reduce inequality at the national level, such
as increasing the schooling levels for least fortunate, while opposing policies that would
reduce local income inequality by moving rich people away from poor people.


Persson and Tabellini (1994) found a strong negative relationship between national
income inequality and economic growth. Some facts about urban growth are quite
similar to facts about country growth. For example, schooling predicts growth at both the
country and the city level. Does the connection between inequality and growth carry
over to the metropolitan level?


In Table 4, we look at the relationship between inequality and growth across our sample
of metropolitan areas. We use 1980 as our start date and look at the growth of both



                                             25
income and population after that year. While country-level regressions typically look
only at income growth, city level growth regressions look at population and income (and
sometimes housing values as well), since increases in productivity should show up both
in higher wages and in more people.


The first regression of Table 4 shows that the raw relationship between income inequality
and local area growth is positive. Places with more inequality have been gaining
population. However, as the second regression in Table 4 shows, this result is not robust
to including a number of other city level controls, such as human capital variables and
January temperature. With these controls, inequality has a significant negative effect on
area population growth. The next two regressions in Table 4 show the relationship
between inequality and area income growth. After including area level controls,
inequality has a significant negative impact on income growth. The coefficients here
should be interpreted while keeping in mind the relatively low level of variation in the
1980 Gini variable. Going all the way from the bottom of the inequality distribution at
0.33, to the top of the distribution at .45, would cause population growth to fall by about
1 standard deviation.


These results do suggest that income inequality is only negatively correlated with area
growth once we control for skills. Increases in the skill distribution that make a place
more unequal by increasing the share of highly educated citizens are associated with
increased, not decreased, growth. However, growth of both income and population was
lower in places where the income distribution is particularly unequal, holding skills
constant.


A second adverse consequence of inequality at the country level is the connection
between inequality and crime (Fajnzylber, Lederman and Lloayza, 2002). These results
have also been found at the metropolitan area level (Daly, Wilson and Vasdev, 2001).
We duplicate them here.




                                             26
In regression (5) of Table 4, we show the strong positive relationship between income
inequality and murder rates across metropolitan areas. We focus on murder rates because
they are the most serious crime outcome and the outcome that is least likely to be
impacted by reporting differences across areas. The 35 percent correlation, shown in
Figure 20 is quite strong. Regression (6) of Table 4 shows that the inequality-crime
relationship is robust to a number of other controls.


Why do murder rates increase with inequality? One view is that inequality is just
proxying for poverty, but both at the country and city level, the impact of inequality on
crime survives controls for the mean income level and the poverty rate. A second
explanation is that inequality leads to less focus on providing community-wide public
goods, like policing. A third explanation is that inequality breeds resentment which then
shows up in higher murder rates.


All of these explanations remain speculation, but there is some evidence that links
unhappiness to envying richer neighbors. Luttmer (2005) looks at the self-reported
happiness of individuals as a function of the wealth of their neighbors. He finds that
people who have richer peers are more likely to say that they are unhappy. The existence
of envy can, under some conditions, suggest that sorting by income is preferable to highly
unequal areas.7


In Figure 21, we show the -47 percent correlation between the Gini coefficient and the
average self-reported happiness in the metropolitan area taken from the General Social
Survey. These happiness data span the last 25 years, and they represent the share of
people who say that they are very happy. Inequality can explain 22 percent of the
variation in this unhappiness measure, and this result is robust to a reasonable number of
other controls such as average area income and population size.


    V. Government Policy

7
 We have also looked at whether there is a correlation between income inequality and racial segregation,
using dissimilarity measures of segregation (see Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor, 1999 for details of the
measure). We find no evidence of any such connection.


                                                   27
There are two ways in which government policy interacts with the study of urban
inequality. First, government policy may itself be a cause of that inequality. Second, if
policy makers seek to reduce local inequality, then the study of that inequality may
improve the quality of decision-making. We start with a discussion of the role that
governmental actions might have on the level of inequality and then turn to a discussion
of potential policy implications.


Government Policies and Local Inequality


There are at least three channels through which government policy might impact the
degree of income inequality across space. First, education is largely a government
service, and government policies towards education could either widen or narrow the
distribution of skills within an area. Second, government policies can also impact
migration in ways that might increase or decrease the skill distribution. Third, the
government engages in taxes and redistribution, which would impact the after-tax income
distribution. Some of these policies are explicitly intended to impact inequality, and
other policies are intended to achieve different results but still could end up changing the
level of local inequality.


Investment in school certainly appears to impact the distribution of skills within an area.
For example, Moretti (2004) shows that the presence of a land-grant college in a
metropolitan area prior to 1940 is positively correlated with the skill level of the area
today. When we regress the area Gini coefficient on Moretti’s land-grant college
indicator variable, controlling for area population, income and the share of adults who are
high school dropouts, we find a positive, but statistically insignificant, impact of land
grant colleges on inequality. This effect disappears when we control for share of adults
with college degrees, which implies that this variable (weakly) increases inequality
because it increases the share of more skilled people.




                                             28
Conversely, we find a modest negative relationship between current high school
enrollment rates and inequality when we control for area income and area population.
This result may reflect the tendency of poverty to lead to low enrollment rates or the
tendency of middle income people to move to areas with fewer dropouts or the ability of
high school graduation to reduce inequality. We will not try to distinguish these
hypotheses but just point out that correlations of this form suggest that education policy
can surely impact inequality, both by its direct effect on the skill distribution and by
shifting migration patterns.


There is a long economic literature that suggests that different local level government
policies have the ability to induce selective migration. For example, Borjas (1999)
argues that heterogeneity in welfare policies across space has had a huge impact on the
location patterns of less skilled immigrants, and especially their tendency to locate in
California. Blank (1988) also found that higher welfare levels impact the location
decision of unmarried women with children. This type of effect can explain the poverty
of East St. Louis, which traditionally had higher welfare payments because it lies on the
Illinois side of the Mississippi River within the St. Louis metropolitan area.


Less work has been done on the impact of redistribution on the location decisions of the
rich, but what evidence does exist supports the view that the wealthy are quite mobile and
respond to attempts at redistribution. Certainly, within metropolitan areas, there are good
reasons to think that the rich are sensitive to local tax rates and the bundle of local public
goods. The strong tendency of richer people to live outside of city borders suggests that
they are voting with their feet within certain areas. Haughwout et al. (2004) argue that
these migration tendencies are quite strong and can mean that areas can actually lose
revenue by raising taxes. Feldstein and Wrobal (1998) argue that the migration
elasticities are so strong that states cannot effectively redistribute income at all. This type
of result supports the view that local governments can affect local inequality by moving
people more than they can by classical redistribution.




                                              29
The connection between government policies and local income inequality is in many
ways an understudied topic. We certainly know something about the impact of
education, and we know much about migration responses to local policy differences, but
we do not understand the full contribution that government has played in making some
places more or less equal. For example, local land-use controls that prevent housing for
lower income people can create less inequality within an area, but we do not know how
empirically important this might be.


Local Governments and Local Inequality


Localities do have tools with which they could reduce local income inequality, but it is
not obvious that such tools would enhance welfare. For example, the preceding analysis
suggested that much of the heterogeneity in income inequality across metropolitan areas
was associated with differences in returns to skill. Localities could equalize local
incomes by reducing the returns to skill through more redistributive taxation.
Redistribution would both directly reduce inequality, and is likely to also reduce
inequality by inducing wealthier people to leave the area. However, few localities would
actually find it attractive to increase equality by getting rid of the biggest tax-payers.
While this migration effect might reduce inequality, if it eliminated the richest people in
the city, there are many reasons to think that it would also hurt the area’s economy.


The returns to skill were not closely tied to industrial mix, so trying to attract particular
industries doesn’t seem likely to lead to significant changes in inequality. Moreover, the
historical track record of local industrial policy is decidedly mixed. A long tradition of
urban analysis suggests that localities have a very limited ability to make society more
equal (Peterson, 1981). The ability of wealthy people to flee is just too great.


Greater welfare gains would seem to be associated with policies that enhanced the skills
of the less fortunate. Improvements in school districts and reductions in the size of the
criminal sector could have two possible benefits. First, they might increase the skill
levels at the bottom end of the income distribution. Second, they might attract middle-



                                              30
income people into the area. Local policies that strengthened the bottom of the income
distribution without targeting the top of the income distribution seem most likely to
reduce income inequality without creating other problems.


However, while such policies might well be beneficial, local governments have again
only a limited ability to make the nation-wide skill distribution more equal. Areas with
many poor parents have fewer resources with which to educate their children. These
places have lower tax revenues, holding everything else constant, but they also have less
parental human capital on which to draw. The long-noted power of peers means that
places with lower initial skill distributions inevitably have difficulty creating first rate
public schools.


National Governments and Inequality


Even if one accepts egalitarian ideas that inequality is itself a bad thing, it certainly does
not follow that reducing local inequality is clearly desirable. Would it be sensible for
national government policies to artificially segregate rich people into some cities and
poor people into others? Such segregationist policies would increase equality at the
lower level, but it is hard to see how they would increase local welfare levels. Some of
our regressions have suggested that localities will grow more quickly and have less crime
if they are more equal, but even these results must be treated gingerly. National policies
that created equality by removing high skill, high earnings workers from power areas
would also be likely to reduce the economic performance of those areas. Policies that
reduce the numbers of poor people by eliminating urban attributes that attract those
people, like low-cost housing, would also have negative consequences, most notably the
destruction of a valuable asset that is providing some benefit for the least fortunate
members of society.


At the national level, egalitarianism suggests simple, non-spatial policies, such as classic
income redistribution and policies that support human capital accumulation among the
least fortunate. National policies can also reduce income inequality through



                                              31
redistributive taxation. Those policies involve costs and benefits, and their connection
with cities and localities is relatively modest, since local attempts at redistribution are
likely to create emigration of the wealthy.


Long term reductions in inequality are most likely to be achieved through a more
egalitarian distribution of human capital. Naturally, changes in the distribution of human
capital will take years, if not decades. Those changes will also involve the often
uncomfortable cooperation of national and local governments. Attempts to reduce
inequality by changing the skill distribution must considerably involve localities, given
our current decentralized schooling system. Yet, localities rarely have the resources to
significantly upgrade their schools on their own.


The current structure of local public schooling creates incentives for middle income
people to leave big cities to get better schools for their children. The poor and the very
rich, who send their children to private schools, remain. There could be welfare gains
from an education system that kept the advantages of choice and competition that are
associated with the current system but that also reduced the incentive for middle class
parents to leave big cities.


This fact is the great challenge facing attempts to reduce inequality through schooling.
Our schools are local and localities have a great deal of trouble dealing with inequality.
Poor places have fewer resources to allocate to their schools. Yet if there is going to be a
more equal education distribution, then their schools must be improved. Creating
equality in human capital requires the difficult cooperation of national level education
policy, and schools that often operate at a very local level.


    VI. Conclusion


In this essay, we have reviewed the economic causes of metropolitan-area income
inequality. Differences in income inequality across areas can be explained well by both
differences in the skill distribution and differences in the returns to skill. If anything,



                                              32
differences in the returns to skill appear to be more important in explaining the variation
in the Gini coefficient across American metropolitan areas. Differences in the skill
distribution can be well explained by historical tendencies towards having more skilled
people and by immigration patterns. Differences in the returns to skill are far more
difficult to explain, but today the returns to a college degree are highest in areas that
specialize in finance or computing.


There are some negative correlates of area-level inequality. More unequal places have
higher murder rates, and people say that they are less happy. More unequal places grow
more slowly, at least once we control for the skill distribution in an area. The raw
correlation between area-level inequality and population growth is positive.


Area-level income inequality does not create the same policy implications as national
income inequality. At the nation level, an egalitarian, Rawlsian social welfare function
implies the need to reduce income inequality. However, egalitarianism does not provide
the same implications about local inequality. Shuffling people across the country in a
way that creates more homogeneity at the local level would not seem like a natural means
of increasing social welfare given standard social welfare functions. Instead, such
functions would instead push towards a focus on policies like human capital development
that would promote equality nationwide.


We concluded by noting that localities are poorly poised to reduce inequality on their
own. Any attempt at local redistribution is likely to lead to out-migration of the wealthy.
Poor localities don’t have the resources to improve failing schools.


However, if national policies are going to try to reduce inequality by making the
distribution of human capital more equal, then inevitably localities must be involved.
Schools are run at the local level. The combination of national resources and local
operation seems most likely to improve the quality of the poorly performing schools.
Unfortunately, bringing together such different levels of government is inevitably quite
difficult. Moreover, the strong correlation between human capital today and human



                                              33
capital more than fifty years ago suggests that any change will not happen overnight.




                                           34
References
Alesina, A., Glaeser, E. L., 2004. Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A World of
   Difference. Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

Alesina, A., Rodrik, D., 1994. “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 109(2), 465-490.

Autor, D., Dorn, D., 2007. Inequality and Specialization: The Growth of Low-Skill
   Service Jobs in the United States, MIT mimeograph.

Beaudry, P., Doms, M. E., Lewis, E. G., 2006. Endogenous Skill Bias in Technology
   Adoption: City-Level Evidence from the IT Revolution. NBER working paper.

Berry, C., Glaeser, E. L., 2005. “The Divergence of Human Capital Levels Across
   Cities.” Papers in Regional Science 84(3), 407-444.

Black, D., Kolesnikova, N., Taylor, L. J., 2007. Earnings Functions When Wages and
   Prices Vary by Location. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working papers.

Blank, R. M., 1988. “The Effect of Welfare and Wage Levels on the Location Decisions
   of Female-headed Households.” Journal of Urban Economics 24(2), 186-211.

Borjas, G. J., 1999. “Immigration and Welfare Magnets.” Journal of Labor Economics
   17(4), 607-637.

Brueckner, J.K., Thisse, J-F., Zenou, Y., 1999. “Why is central Paris rich and
   downtown Detroit poor? An amenity-based theory.” European Economic
   Review 43, 91-107.

Cutler, D., Glaeser, E. L., Vigdor, J., 1999. “The Rise and Decline of the American
   Ghetto.” Journal of Political Economy 107, 455-506.

Dahl, G., 2002. “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
   Multiple Markets.” Econometrica 70(6), 2367-2420.

Daly, M., Wilson, M., Vasdev, S., 2001. “Income inequality and homicide rates in
   Canada and the United States.” Canadian Journal of Criminology, 219-236.

Ellison, G., Glaeser, E. L., 1999. “The Geographic Concentration of Industry: Does
    Natural Advantage Explain Agglomeration?” American Economic Review Papers and
    Proceedings 89(2), 311-316.

Fajnzylber, P., Lederman, D., Loayza, N., 2002. “Inequality and Violent Crime.”
   Journal of Law and Economics 45(1), 1-40.



                                            35
Feldstein, M., Wrobel, M.V., 1998. “Can State Taxes Redistribute Income?” Journal of
   Public Economics 68(3), 369-396

Glaeser, E. L., 1999. “The Future of Urban Research: Nonmarket Interactions.”
   Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 101-149.

Glaeser, E. L., Gottlieb, J. D., 2008. “The Economics of Place-Making Policies.”
   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E., Rappaport, J., 2008. “Why do the Poor Live in Cities? The
   role of Public Transportation.” Journal of Urban Economics 63(1), 1-24.

Goldin, C. and L. Katz (2008) The Race between Education and Technology.
   Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Haines, M. R., 2004. “Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United
   States, 1790-2000.” Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Data,
   http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/ICPSR/STUDY/02896.xml.

Haughwout, A., Inman, R., Craig, S., Luce, T., 2004. “Local Revenue Hills: Evidence
   from Four U.S. Cities.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 86(2), 570-585.

Katz, L., Murphy, K., 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987:
   Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 35-78.

LeRoy, S. F., Sonstelie, J., “1983. Paradise Lost and Regained: Transportation
   Innovation, Income and Residential Location.” Journal of Urban Economics 13, 67-
   89.

Luttmer, E. F. P., 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 963-1002

Mazzolari, F., Ragusa, G., 2007. “Spillovers from High-Skill Consumption to Low-Skill
  Labor Markets.” IZA Discussion Paper 3048.

Moretti, E., 2004. “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence From
  Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Data.” Journal of Econometrics 121(1-2), 175-212.

Peterson, P. 1981. City Limits. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Persson, T., Tabellini, G., 1994. “Is Inequality Harmful for Growth?” American
   Economic Review 84(3), 600-621.

Ruggles, S., Sobek, M., Alexander, T., Fitch, C. A., Goeken, R., Hall, P. K., King, M.,
   Ronnander, 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, http://usa.ipums.org/usa



                                           36
Wheeler, C., 2005. “Cities, Skills and Inequality.” Growth and Change 36(3), 329-353.

Wilson, W. J., 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
   Public Policy. Chicago University Press, Chicago, IL.




                                          37
                                                     Table 1
                        Table of Correlations Between Income Inequality Measures for 2000

                                                                   Difference of Difference of
                                                                    the Log of    the Log of
                                                   Coefficient of   Income for Income for the
                                      Variance of the Variation of the 90th and 75th and the
                          Gini        Household      Household       the 10th        25th      Log of Median     Log of
                        Coefficient    Income         Income        Percentiles   Percentiles Family Income    Population

Gini Coefficient            1

Variance of
Household Income          0.36            1

Coefficient of the
Variation of              0.92          0.20             1
Household Income


Difference of the Log
of Income for the
90th and the 10th         0.91          0.29           0.74            1
Percentiles

Difference of the Log
of Income for the
75th and the 25th         0.86          0.13           0.72          0.93            1
Percentiles

Log of Median
Family Income            -0.25          0.68          -0.44          -0.17         -0.28            1

Log of Population         0.15          0.57           0.04          0.12           0.00          0.44             1

Source: The Gini coefficient, variance of household income, the coefficient of the variation of household income,
the difference of the log of income for the 90th and 10th percentiles and the difference of the log of income for the
75th and 25th percentiles are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 2000, at
usa.ipums.org. Median family income and population are from the 2000 Census.




                                                              38
                                                                     Table 2
                                                            Causes of Urban Inequality

                                               1980 Gini Coefficient                             2000 Gini Coefficient
                                                       (1)                    (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)        (7)

Ln(1980 Population)                                     0.0055
                                                     [0.0012]**
Ln(1980 Median Family Income)                          -0.1078
                                                     [0.0084]**
Ln(2000 Population)                                                         0.0081      0.005      0.0075     0.0085    0.0078      0.008
                                                                          [0.0016]** [0.0013]** [0.0014]** [0.0019]** [0.0018]** [0.0015]**
Ln(2000 Med. Family Income)                                                 -0.0625    -0.1054    -0.0773    -0.0602    -0.0392    -0.0525
                                                                          [0.0096]** [0.0112]** [0.0091]** [0.0131]** [0.0139]** [0.0096]**
2000 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With BA                                                           0.3122
                                                                                     [0.0233]**
2000 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With HS                                                          -0.1842
                                                                                     [0.0257]**
1940 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With BA                                                                      1.1176
                                                                                                [0.1337]**
1940 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With HS                                                                     -0.1906
                                                                                                [0.0329]**
1850 Pct. Of Pop. Enrolled in College                                                                         3.0137    2.4933
                                                                                                           [0.8351]** [0.8285]**
1850 Pct. Of Pop. Enrolled in HS                                                                             -0.0499    -0.0129
                                                                                                           [0.0173]** [0.0194]
1850 Illiteracy Rate                                                                                                     0.061
                                                                                                                       [0.0327]
1850 Pct. Of Pop. Enslaved                                                                                              0.0372
                                                                                                                      [0.0102]**
Share of labor force in manufacturing, 1950                                                                                        -0.0447
                                                                                                                                 [0.0109]**
Constant                                               1.3835                1.013      1.5937     1.1751     0.9877    0.7564     0.9174
                                                     [0.0782]**           [0.0960]** [0.1045]** [0.0917]** [0.1311]** [0.1411]** [0.0960]**

Observations                                             258                  282      282         281         208       208        281
R-squared                                                0.39                 0.15     0.49        0.32        0.2       0.26       0.19

Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


Source: The Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series for 1980 and
2000, at usa.ipums.org. Other 1980 variables are from the 1980 Census, and other 2000 variables are from the
2000 Census. All other variables are from Haines, M.R., ICPSR study number 2896, Historical, Demographic,
Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000.




                                                                         39
                                         Table 3
                         Changes in Inequality over Time


                                                        2006 Gini Coefficient
                                                         (1)               (2)

1980 Gini Coefficient                                 0.7934                    0.6189
                                                   [0.0734]**               [0.0781]**
Ln(1980 Population)                                   0.0049                    0.0037
                                                   [0.0014]**               [0.0014]**
Ln(1980 Median Family Income)                         0.0293                    0.0359
                                                    [0.0126]*                [0.0143]*
1980 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With BA                                                   0.1773
                                                                            [0.0371]**
1980 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With HS                                                 -0.1366
                                                                            [0.0246]**
Constant                                              -0.2165                  -0.1352
                                                     [0.1367]                 [0.1508]

Observations                                            242                     242
R-squared                                               0.42                    0.49

Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Source: The Gini coefficient for 2006 is from the American Community Survey, 2006. The Gini
coefficient for 1980 is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS)
for 1980, at usa.ipums.org. Other 1980 variables are from the 1980 Census.




                                                   40
                                                               Table 4
                                                    Consequences of Urban Inequality

                                      Population Growth 1980-2000        Income Growth 1980-2000     Murder Rate per 100,000
                                          (1)             (2)                (3)          (4)         (5)              (6)

1980 Gini Coefficient                     1.0301           -2.0335          -0.264      -1.3893      50.3572         55.3637
                                         [0.7147]        [0.6512]**       [0.3524]    [0.3635]**   [14.5159]**    [17.1951]**
Ln(1980 Population)                       0.0329            0.017           0.0255      0.0275        1.1389         0.9193
                                        [0.0141]*         [0.0112]       [0.0069]**   [0.0062]**    [0.3450]**     [0.3282]**
Ln(1980 Median Family Income)            -0.2484           -0.6385         -0.1137      -0.4195       0.8419         8.9701
                                        [0.1228]*        [0.1141]**       [0.0606]    [0.0637]**     [2.6157]      [2.9379]**
1980 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With BA                              1.0094                       1.2358                       -12.388
                                                         [0.2995]**                   [0.1671]**                    [7.1261]
1980 Pct. Of 25+ Pop. With HS                              0.8556                       -0.0066                      -9.5897
                                                         [0.1957]**                    [0.1092]                     [4.9076]
1994 Mean Jan. Temp.                                       0.0084                       -0.0003                      0.0316
                                                         [0.0009]**                    [0.0005]                     [0.0269]
Constant                                  1.8515           6.0646           1.814       5.0625      -36.9898       -109.0205
                                         [1.3318]        [1.1903]**      [0.6567]**   [0.6644]**    [29.0251]     [31.1609]**

Observations                               258               258            258          258          120             120
R-squared                                  0.05              0.4            0.04         0.18         0.2             0.29

Notes:
Standard errors in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

Source: The Gini coefficient for 1980 is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 1980,
at usa.ipums.org. Other 1980 variables are from the 1980 Census. January temperatures are from the 1994 County and City
Data Book from the U.S. Census.




                                                             41
                                         Figure 1: Relationship Between the Gini Coefficient
                                                  and Log Population Density, 2006
                 .6
                                                                                                                 New York NY
                          .55


                                                                          Orleans LA
                                                                Fairfield CT
                                                                                      District of ColumbiaDC
   Gini Coefficient, 2006




                                     Charleston SC                 Westchester
                                                                  Fulton    GA       NY
                                                                                        Essex NJ
                                                        Clarke GA           Richmond VA
                                                   Lafayette LA Hamilton          OH
                                                                               Denver CO Suffolk MA
                  .5




                                              Marin
                                             Chatham
                                               Jefferson
                                                 New    CA  GA
                                                             Lynchburg
                                                              ALRouge
                                                         Hanover      NC     VA                  San Francisco CA NY
                                                                                                             Kings
                                        Cameron East
                                            Pulaski   TXBaton
                                                        Travis
                                                         AR   Shelby
                                                       Oklahoma   TX  OK
                                                                  Mercer
                                                           Davidson     TN
                                                                         TN LA
                                                                           Dallas
                                                                             NJ      St.Cook
                                                                                    TX  Louis  ILMO
                                                                                            Philadelphia PA
                                                                                                  Hudson NJ
                                        Cabell
                                        Hidalgo
                                             Palm
                                        Sullivan WV TX
                                                     Beach
                                                    TN          FL     Harris
                                                                     Los
                                                                     St. Louis TX
                                                                           Angeles
                                                                                 MO
                                                                          Cuyahoga    CAOH                  Bronx NY
                                         Nueces
                                       Mobile    ALElTX
                                           GreenvilleMuscogee
                                               Hamilton
                                               RichmondPasoSCTN
                                                           Tulsa
                                                               TX
                                                               GA Allegheny
                                                                LucasGAOHNC
                                                           Mecklenburg
                                                                    OK          PA       Baltimore  MD
                                           Volusia
                                         Washtenaw
                                          Leon    FL  FL
                                               Mahoning
                                               Sarasota
                                               Campbell
                                         Boulder     CO  Fayette
                                                       Knox
                                                Vanderburgh MI OH
                                                              FL
                                                              KY
                                                               TN   KY
                                                                    Hennepin
                                                                     IN              Union
                                                                              Pinellas
                                                                                 Bergen
                                                                                  MN     NJNJ
                                                                                        FL
                                               St.
                                             SantaHampden
                                                 Guilford
                                                   Bibb
                                                   Joseph
                                                        Cruz
                                                    Forsyth   Multnomah
                                                              NC
                                                           GACAIN
                                                               SanMA
                                                                 NCNorfolk
                                                               Broward
                                                     Hillsborough        FL
                                                                      Mateo
                                                                     FranklinMA
                                                                            FL OR
                                                                               CAOH      Alexandria VA
                                        Cape     May
                                         KalamazooLee    NJ
                                                         FL
                                                    DurhamMI
                                                        King   Douglas
                                                                WA Lake
                                                                  NC
                                                                   Jefferson
                                                               Oakland
                                                             Bexar    TX    NE
                                                                           IL
                                                                          Passaic
                                                                            MI
                                                                      Roanoke    KYVA
                                                                               OrangeNJMICA
                                              Ingham
                                               Arapahoe   MISanta
                                                               CO    Clara   CA
                                                                           Delaware GA PA
        .45




                                          Scott
                                     Washington   IA TN
                                                San
                                          Richland
                                              Onondaga      Hartford
                                                          Orange
                                                            Duval
                                                           Contra
                                                       Newport
                                                           Erie
                                                        Diego
                                                        SC        NY
                                                                 CA
                                                              Summit
                                                               NY    FL
                                                                      FL
                                                                  Essex  CT
                                                                     CostaMA
                                                                  Middlesex
                                                                    RI         Wayne
                                                                              CA
                                                                         DeKalb
                                                                          OH     MANassau    NY VA
                                        Greene
                                         Lackawanna
                                      Maricopa
                                       Manatee
                                           EscambiaMO
                                           Bernalillo
                                                    AZ
                                                     FL
                                                Galveston
                                               Gaston     NM
                                                          FL PA
                                                           Morris
                                                            Monroe
                                                           NC   TX  Alameda
                                                                   Tarrant
                                                                     NJ Marion
                                                                  Rockland
                                                                       NY
                                                              Montgomery       NYCA
                                                                             Ramsey
                                                                              TXPAIN
                                                                               MilwaukeeMN
                                                                                   Norfolk VA
                                                                                        Arlington
                                                                                            WI
                                           GreggChester
                                           Sedgwick
                                          Erie  PA  Stark KS New
                                                             PA
                                                             OH Jefferson
                                                           Jackson
                                                            Seminole   MO
                                                               Providence
                                                     TXMontgomery   Haven
                                                             Monmouth
                                                                MontgomeryFL  LA
                                                                               RI
                                                                              CT
                                                                             NJ
                                                                            OH    MD
                                         Dane
                                      Rock  Brevard
                                       Madison
                                        Luzerne
                                      Harrison
                                         Fort
                                       Ozaukee    WI
                                            Atlantic
                                             Island
                                      Winnebago      Kent
                                                    AL
                                                    PA  IL
                                                        WI
                                                     Polk
                                                  Plymouth
                                               BendMSWI TXFL MI
                                                         Lehigh
                                                        NJ  Henrico
                                                         Somerset
                                                          Bristol
                                                             IAIL MAPA
                                                                    MA Camden
                                                                       VA
                                                                       NJ
                                                                     Cobb     GA NJ
                                       San   Winnebago
                                       Catawba
                                          VenturaCollin
                                             Pasco
                                            Hamilton
                                           WorcesterNC CA
                                                        FL
                                                      Wake
                                                  Genesee
                                             Joaquin
                                         Cumberland       New
                                                          IN
                                                          CATX
                                                            Lake
                                                            MA  NCCastle
                                                                    IN
                                                             Baltimore
                                                                 MI
                                                           Sacramento
                                                            NC             DE
                                                                          MDDuPage
                                                                             CA       ILRichmond NY
                                           Hall
                                      Washington
                                         Boone  GA
                                           Elkhart
                                     Westmoreland
                                        Cleveland  KY
                                                Allen
                                                LorainIN
                                                Waukesha RI
                                                         IN
                                                        OK Bucks
                                                         Johnson
                                                          PA
                                                SchenectadyOH    WI  PA
                                                                Honolulu
                                                                    NYKSKS    HI                      Queens NY
                                        Madison
                                       St.  Lancaster
                                          St.
                                           Lucie
                                      Cherokee Clair
                                             Denton
                                           Beaver    IL
                                                    FL
                                                    GA
                                             BarnstableIL
                                                       PAWyandotte
                                                     Butler
                                                        Kane
                                                 Jefferson
                                            Dauphin
                                        Clermont       OH TX
                                                          PAPA OH
                                                          Kenton
                                                        Ocean MA
                                                            Salt IL
                                                                CONJKY
                                                                  Suffolk
                                                                      Newport
                                                                   Lake   UT NY News
                                                                          Fairfax   VA VA
                                       Trumbull
                                       Cabarrus
                                      New
                                      RoanokeLondon
                                      Cumberland     OH
                                                     NC
                                                Racine
                                                    VA    CT
                                                Northampton
                                           Niagara
                                              Washington
                                              Kenosha
                                            Brown
                                           Pierce    WA  PA
                                                        NY
                                                       WIWA  Kent
                                                            WI
                                                            Lake
                                                             WI OR  RI
                                                                    PA
                                                                    OH
                                        Hillsborough
                                         Porter
                                       Dutchess
                                             Solano
                                            Berks
                                        Greene     IN
                                                Clark
                                                   OHNY
                                                      PA   NH
                                                         CA Arundel MD
                                      Rockwall
                                          Clark  OH TX  Anne
                 .4




                                          Warren
                                      Muskegon Floyd
                                      Rockingham     OH
                                                   Gloucester
                                                     MI
                                                Kitsap  INNHWAGwinnett
                                                                  Macomb    GAMI
                                                                    NJ Portsmouth        VA
                                        Weber
                                           Orange
                                            Ottawa
                                       Tolland
                                           Putnam UT
                                                  CT
                                             BurlingtonNY
                                                        MI
                                                       NY
                                                        Davis Virginia
                                                             NJ           Beach
                                                                UT Middlesex       VANJ
                                         Middlesex
                                        Johnson
                                            Douglas  IN
                                            Chesapeake
                                           McHenry
                                             York   PAGA CT
                                                          Howard
                                                         GA
                                                         IL     VA MD Hampton VA
                                             Rockdale
                                            Fayette
                                        Island
                                        Medina
                                      Loudoun    WA Will
                                                    OH
                                                   VA        GA
                                           Washington
                                           St.Clay
                                      Lebanon
                                       Calvert
                                          Henry    MDMOIL
                                                Charles
                                                   PA
                                                 Dakota
                                                   GA
                                                              MN George's MD
                                                             MO
                                                            Prince
                                                             MN
                                       CarrollChesterfield
                                                 MD
                                             Harford
                                                 Prince   MD     VA
                                                            WilliamClayton
                                                                       VA GA
                                           Forsyth      GA
                                                    Anoka MN
                 .35




                                       StaffordSarpy
                                                   VA NE

                                -2                    0                    2                                 4                 6
                                                                Log of Population Density


Source: 2006 American Community Survey




                                                                                 42
                                    Figure 2: Gini Coefficient in 2006 and Gini Coefficent in 1980

                 .55
                                                                               New Haven-

                                                                                      Tuscaloosa
                                                                                           Athens, GA    Gainesvill
                          .5


                                                             Wichita Fa                            New York,
                                                                                                    Brownsvill
                                                                Trenton, N
    Gini Coefficient 2006




                                                                                                       McAllen-Ed

                                             San Jose,
                .45




                                                                                                 Ocala, FL

                                         Janesville
     .4




                                     Appleton-O               Wausau, WI
                                                      York, PA
                                             Sheboygan,
                 .35




                               .3                     .35                   .4                        .45
                                                             Gini Coefficient 1980


Notes: The line shown is the forty five degree line, not a fitted regression. Only some datapoints are
labeled with their MSA names to aid readability.
Source: 1980 Gini coefficients are calculated from the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS) for 1980, at usa.ipums.org. 2006 Gini coefficients are from the 2006 American Community
Survey.

Source: 2006 American Community Survey




                                                                          43
                                                 Figure 3: Relationship Between
                                     Gini Coefficient and Log Median Family Income, 2006
                 .55                                                                                                      Bridgeport

                                                                                  Sebastian-
                                                                                   Tuscaloosa
                                                                                     Midland, T
                                                                                     Gainesvill
                                                                                 Athens-Cla
                           .5



                                                                           Wichita Lafayette,
                                                                                       Fa               Naples-Mar
                                                                                                               New York-N
                                                                  Hot Spring          College     St
     Gini Coefficient, 2006




                                          Brownsvill                        Morgantown
                                                                       Dothan,    AL
                                             McAllen-Ed                    Columbus,
                                                                 PineMonroe,
                                                                        Bluff          Miami-Fort
                                                                                               Auburn-Ope
                                                                                         Brunswick,
                                                                                                 Santa     Fe,         Trenton-Ew
                                                                  Alexandria  GALABloomingto
                                                                    Albany, Greenville            Los Angele
                                                                                                 Santa
                                                                                             Durham,
                                                                                         Birmingham
                                                                                         Charleston        Barb
                                                                                                           NC
                                                     El Paso, T       Corpus
                                                                      Mobile,  Tyler,
                                                                        Hattiesbur
                                                                                Chr
                                                                                AL      TX
                                                                                  Jackson,
                                                                              Deltona-Da    Houston-Su
                                                                                                M     Charlottes     Ann  Arbor, C
                                                                   Kingsport-    Memphis,
                                                                               Lake
                                                                                 Savannah,
                                                                         Shreveport
                                                                      Huntington
                                                                          Jackson,     Charl
                                                                                 Bowling
                                                                            Lubbock,      T
                                                                                  Owensboro,
                                                                                       T City
                                                                                     Baton    GrT
                                                                                              Roug    Iowa    City,      Boulder,
                                                                                                                            San Franci
                                                     Laredo, TX Sumter,
                                                                     Rocky
                                                                           SC
                                                                  Cleveland,
                                                                             Beaumont-P
                                                                             Moun Sioux
                                                                                 Missoula,
                                                                                   Oklahoma
                                                                                           Port
                                                                                  Greenville
                                                                                           Toledo,
                                                                                                  St.San
                                                                                                  State
                                                                                                   C
                                                                                          Sarasota-B
                                                                                 Pascagoula New
                                                                                                       L Coll
                                                                                                       OH
                                                                                                   Orlean
                                                                                                    Ocean
                                                                                                 Dallas-For
                                                                                                            Luis O
                                                                                                           Chicago-Na
                                                                                                              City   Santa  Cruz
                                                                        Muncie,
                                                                        Pueblo,
                                                                       Waco,
                                                                 Valdosta,     Chattanoog
                                                                             Macon, IN
                                                                                   CO
                                                                            Longview,   GA
                                                                                Texarkana, Cape
                                                                                      Wilmington
                                                                                     Tampa-St.
                                                                                 Tulsa,
                                                                                TX         OK
                                                                                        Little   Charlotte-
                                                                                                    Coral
                                                                                              Tallahasse
                                                                                               Nashville-
                                                                                         Knoxville,
                                                                                               Roc
                                                                                              Cleveland-
                                                                                           Pittsburgh          Philadelph
                                                                                                        Austin-Rou
                                                                                                    Cincinnati          Boston-Cam
                                                                                                                     Napa,  CA San Jose-S
                                                                     Madera,
                                                            Las Johnson
                                                                 Cruces      San
                                                                            Ci  CA
                                                                        Anniston-O Angelo
                                                                                  SanFlagstaff,
                                                                                     Montgomery
                                                                                    Greensboro
                                                                                  Tucson,Antoni
                                                                                Blacksburg  Kalamazoo-
                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                Lexington-       Ithaca,  NY
              .45




                                                                     Rome,     GA
                                                                      Visalia-Po
                                                                          Fresno, Augusta-Ri
                                                                                 Redding,
                                                                                 Amarillo,
                                                                               Asheville,
                                                                               Farmington
                                                                          Bakersfiel  CA
                                                                                     Lafayette,
                                                                                 Spartanbur
                                                                                  Harrisonbu   C
                                                                                           South  Columbus,
                                                                                                  Springfiel
                                                                                                    Bend
                                                                                            Evansville
                                                                                                Bellingham
                                                                                                 Salinas,
                                                                                                  St.  Louis,
                                                                                                  Fargo,     San
                                                                                                              C
                                                                                                             ND-
                                                                                                       Detroit-Wa  Diego-
                                                                                                                Fort  Colli
                                                                         Cumberland
                                                                    Morristown
                                                                  Merced,     Decatur,
                                                                       Charleston
                                                                          Myrtle
                                                                           Parkersbur
                                                                             CA    Bea     A Jacksonvil
                                                                                  Lynchburg,
                                                                                      Winston-Sa
                                                                                     Modesto,    Phoenix-Me
                                                                                                      Milwaukee-
                                                                                                  Indianapol
                                                                                         Orlando-Ki
                                                                                         Mount     C
                                                                                                   Vern    Denver-Aur
                                                                                                        Atlanta-Sa
                                                                  ElFort
                                                                     Centro,
                                                                      Florence, Florence-M
                                                                              Youngstown
                                                                                  Canton-Mas
                                                                                  Niles-Bent
                                                                               Abilene,
                                                                               Fayettevil  TBuffalo-Ni
                                                                                            Syracuse,
                                                                                             Akron,
                                                                                            Columbia,
                                                                                             Champaign-
                                                                                    Eugene-Spr
                                                                                       Albuquerqu
                                                                               Houma-Bayo
                                                                                  Battle    Cre         OH     New
                                                              Gadsden,
                                                                         Smith
                                                                         Jonesboro,
                                                                  Wheeling,
                                                                 Danville,
                                                                      Yakima,
                                                                          A       Scranton--
                                                                           Prescott,
                                                                                Erie,
                                                                            Bangor,
                                                                                 WA
                                                                           Hickory-LeChico,
                                                                                        PA   Salisbury,
                                                                                               CA
                                                                                        Decatur,
                                                                                        ME
                                                                                      Waterloo-C Springfiel
                                                                                         Louisville
                                                                                                Las    Providence
                                                                                                 Huntsville
                                                                                                     IPortland-V
                                                                                                Peoria,
                                                                                                  Fort
                                                                                               Rochester,
                                                                                             Palm
                                                                                        Davenport-       Ames,
                                                                                                       Vegas-
                                                                                                         Walto
                                                                                                   Atlantic IL C   IAHaven-
                                                                                                                  Seattle-Ta
                                                                                                                  Santa  Rosa
                                                                                                                      Hartford-W
                                                                                                                   Baltimore-
                                                              Yuma,   AZ    Saginaw-Sa
                                                                          Burlington
                                                                          Victoria,
                                                                        Goldsboro,
                                                                         Springfiel
                                                                           Elmira,
                                                                         Gulfport-BYuba
                                                                                      NY Columbia,
                                                                                         Wichita,
                                                                                     Jackson,
                                                                                     Spokane,
                                                                                     Grand
                                                                                         Dubuque,
                                                                                           City,
                                                                                          Roanoke,  WBay-M
                                                                                                 Oshkosh-Ne
                                                                                                   M
                                                                                          Kennewick-
                                                                                              Junc    K I VSacramento
                                                                                                      Kansas
                                                                                                      Des      Raleigh-Ca
                                                                                                                   Madison,
                                                                                                                  Cit
                                                                                                             Moines          W Washington
                                                                                                                        Oxnard-Tho
                                                                     Weirton-St
                                                                Joplin,
                                                                      Johnstown,
                                                                        MOMedford,
                                                                       Lawton,     Dover,
                                                                           Williamspo
                                                                                Pocatello,
                                                                                  Flint,
                                                                                  OK
                                                                              Clarksvill
                                                                         Danville,      O Rockford,
                                                                                          Dayton,
                                                                                          MI
                                                                                   Gainesvill DE
                                                                                     Pensacola-
                                                                                         Duluth,
                                                                                        Lima,
                                                                                         Grand   OH  Omaha-Coun
                                                                                                    MN
                                                                                                   Rapi
                                                                                             Stockton,
                                                                                        Binghamton     OH
                                                                                                        Richmond,
                                                                                                     Kingston,
                                                                                                  Greeley,      C
                                                                                                        Reno-Spark
                                                                                                  Pittsfield      Worcester,
                                                                                                         Bloomingto
                                                                          Fayettevil
                                                                                 Kokomo,
                                                                              Coeur
                                                                               Bay
                                                                              Punta
                                                                         Ocala,
                                                                         Odessa,   FL
                                                                                 Panama
                                                                              Utica-Rome
                                                                                      TXGordCasper,
                                                                                     Elkhart-Go
                                                                                       d'Al
                                                                                      City,Eau Lawrence,
                                                                                               IN Claire
                                                                                              Riverside-
                                                                                              CitSioux
                                                                                                 La     WY
                                                                                                   Olympia,
                                                                                                          Fall W
                                                                                                   Allentown-
                                                                                                      Crosse,
                                                                                                       Corvallis,
                                                                                                 Lancaster,
                                                                                               Bismarck,          Honolulu,
                                                                                                                  Anchorage,
                                                                                                                      Minneapoli
                                                                       Terre   Haut
                                                                               Killeen-Te
                                                                            Altoona,
                                                                           Lakeland,
                                                                             Great       P
                                                                                      Fall  Boise
                                                                                           Provo-Orem
                                                                                       Rapid
                                                                                         Fort
                                                                                        Bend,        City
                                                                                               Hagerstown
                                                                                              Lansing-Ea
                                                                                               Sandusky,
                                                                                                  St.
                                                                                                City
                                                                                               Wayne
                                                                                                 OR
                                                                                              Cedar    Cloud,
                                                                                                       Colorado
                                                                                                        Rapi
                                                                                                   Lincoln,    NRochester,
                                                                                                                    S
                                                                              Anderson,  Topeka,
                                                                                      Wenatchee,
                                                                                           Grand
                                                                                         Winchester
                                                                                              FondSaltKS
                                                                                                     Fork
                                                                                                      du
                                                                                                Racine,  Lake
                                                                                                 Portland-S
                                                                                                  Virginia
                                                                                               Billings,   LaWIBarnstable
                                                                                                             Fairbanks,
                                                                                                               B   Norwich-Ne
                                                                           Dalton,Salem,
                                                                                      GAVineland-MColumbus,
                                                                                                       Harrisburg
                                                                            Longview,
                                                                             Logan,    UT-     ORWarner
                                                                                      Sherman-De
                                                                              Mansfield,
                                                                                     Idaho
                                                                              Hanford-Co      Fall
                                                                                              Green
                                                                                          Reading,      P
                                                                                                               Rob
                                                                                                          Albany-Sch
                                                                                                        Bay,
                                                                                                                       Manchester
                                                                                                              Vallejo-Fa
                                                                          St. Joseph
                                                                                 Springfiel
                                                                              Lewiston-A       Janesville
   .4




                                                                           Elizabetht
                                                                                 Anderson,                          Poughkeeps
                                                                                Muskegon-N
                                                                                       Jefferson
                                                                                          Glens     Fall Burlington
                                                                                                  Ogden-Clea
                                                                                                          Bremerton-
                                                                       Jacksonvil Michigan            CAppleton,
                                                                                              Kankakee-B
                                                                                                 Wausau,Holland-Gr
                                                                                                Cheyenne,      WI
                                                                                                  York-Hanov
                                                                              St. George Lebanon,
                                                                                                Sheboygan,
                                                                                                   Monroe, MI
                                                                                                              P

                                                                      Hinesville
                 .35




                                10                  10.5                   11                                             11.5
                                                  Log Median Family Income, 2006



Source: 2006 American Community Survey




                                                                        44
                           Figure 4: Gini Coefficient and Log of Median Family Income, 1980

              .45
                                                         Gainesvill
                           McAllen-Ed
                                Brownsvill Columbus,    Monroe,
                                                  Alexandria       LAYork,
                                   Ocala, FL            Waco,New Miami,
                                                                 TX        FL
                                                   Gadsden,    A
                                                           Tallahasse
                                                              Shreveport
                                                                  New    Orlean
                                                        Wilmington
                                                            Abilene,
                                                                 GA TT
                                                            Memphis,
                                                       Athens,
                                                    Smith   Montgomery
                                               FortChico-Para   Birmingham
                                                            Jersey
                                                         Mobile,   AL
                                                           Huntington  WestLos
                                                                     Cit      Palm
                                                        Savannah,
                                                  Fayettevil      Huntsville        Angele
                                               El Paso,
                                                    Yuba San Jackson,
                                                            Medford-As
                                                              Antoni
                                                         TCity,
                                                        Tuscaloosa
                                                            Orlando,    Austin-San
                                                                        FMColl
                                                     Tampa-St.
                                                     Texarkana,     State
                                                            Knoxville,
                                                                     Charlottes
   Gini Coefficient 1980




                                                             Jacksonvil
                                                        Sarasota-B Stockton-L Baton
                                                                             Champaign-
                                                                       Nashville,
                                                                   Benton    Har       Roug Bergen-Pas
                                                 Johnson
                                              Joplin,       Ci
                                                      MOYakima,
                                                   Visalia-Tu  Pueblo,
                                                              Fresno,  Bellingham
                                                                 Longview-M
                                                                Lexington,
                                                                  Corpus  Columbia,
                                                                          CO
                                                                         CA  Chr
                                                                      Raleigh-Du
                                                  Florence, Albany,
                                                    Anniston,Macon,
                                                            Florence,WA Salinas,
                                                                       GA
                                                                        GA
                                                                   Roanoke,     V    C
                     .4




                                                     Pensacola,      Tyler,
                                                                 Lubbock,
                                                                  Bakersfiel
                                                                  Tucson,    TX
                                                                           Santa
                                                                              T
                                                                             AZ SantaCruz
                                                                                       Bloomingto
                                                                                         Barb
                                                                                         Newark,
                                           Daytona     Redding,
                                                       Be           C Fort
                                                                    Sioux
                                                                Modesto,
                                                             Lafayette,
                                                               Terre     San  Billings,
                                                                          Evansville
                                                                            Laude
                                                                             City
                                                                               Diego,
                                                                             Olympia,
                                                                           Tulsa,
                                                                             C       OK
                                                                              Philadelph
                                                                      Riverside-
                                                                       Haut
                                                                      Wheeling,
                                                                        Louisville        W SanNJ    Franci
                                                    Asheville,
                                                        Biloxi-Gul
                                                        Augusta-Ai
                                                    Lakeland-W
                                                      Fort  Myers   Providence
                                                                      Oklahoma
                                                                            Atlanta,
                                                                    Albuquerqu
                                                                 Greeley,   Sacramento
                                                                             C
                                                                    Eugene-Spr         G New Haven-
                                                                                      CTrenton,    N
                                                                  Norfolk-Vi
                                                         Springfiel
                                                            Chattanoog
                                                                    Melbourne-
                                                                 Greensboro
                                                             Greenville
                                                                    Hagerstown
                                                                    Spokane,   Boston-Wor
                                                                       Springfiel W
                                                                                Kokomo,
                                                                             Fargo-Moor
                                                                         Charleston          IN
                                                           Charleston
                                                      CumberlandPortland, Las
                                                                 Atlantic-C
                                                               Johnstown,
                                                            Utica-Rome       Santa
                                                                               Vegas,  Rosa
                                                                                       Galveston-
                                                                              Pittsburgh
                                                                                    Wilmington
                                                                                     Cleveland-
                                                                                             Chicago,
                                  Jacksonvil            GlensWichita
                                                           St.
                                                      Danville,Joseph
                                                                Fall
                                                               Little Roc
                                                                 Colorado
                                                                         Kankakee,
                                                                        Fa Amarillo,
                                                                        Tacoma,Wichita,
                                                                      Binghamton Baltimore,
                                                                                  St.
                                                                         Lafayette,
                                                                  Parkersbur
                                                                     Columbia,S      WA
                                                                               Cincinnati
                                                                            Buffalo-Ni
                                                                                Monmouth-O
                                                                        Phoenix-Me
                                                                             Omaha,
                                                                                           KTX
                                                                                      Louis,
                                                                                          Reno,
                                                                                   Portland-V
                                                                                   Dallas,
                                                                                Akron,    OH
                                                                                    Odessa-Mid
                                                                                   Saginaw-Ba
                                                                                         NE-
                                                                                    Springfiel    NV I
                                          Fayettevil                 Charlotte-
                                                                    Salem,
                                                                    Boise     OR
                                                                            City     Kansas
                                                                               Toledo,
                                                                            Columbus,
                                                                            Kalamazoo-        Detroit,
                                                                                       Madison,
                                                                                           OH  Cit W
                                                                                              Ann      M
                                                                                                    Arbor,
                                          Killeen-Te Scranton--
                                                          Vineland-M     New    London
                                                                          Syracuse,
                                                                            Dayton-Spr
                                                                            Richmond-P
                                                                        Albany-Sch
                                                                      Muncie,     INBend  Honolulu,
                                                                                            Houston,
                                                                                         Denver,    CO T
                                                        Hickory-Mo         South Indianapol
                                                                            Youngstown
                                                                          Duluth-Sup
                                                                         Newburgh,          Flint, MI
                                                                                       Rochester,
                                                                               Beaumont-P
                                                                              Topeka,     KS
                                                                Eau   Claire
                                                              Lynchburg,      Jackson,
                                                                      Mansfield,
                                                                              Lake
                                                                           Reading,
                                                                             Fort          M
                                                                                    Steubenvil
                                                                                       Charl
                                                                                    ColliPHartford,
                                                                                      Lansing-Ea
                                                                         Erie, PA
                                                                                Green         Seattle-Be
                                                           Provo-Orem        York,
                                                                         Sioux        PABay,
                                                                                    Des
                                                                               Lincoln,
                                                                               Fort       Moines
                                                                                    Hamilton-M
                                                                                          Ventura,
                                                                                      Wayne
                                                                                  Decatur,
                                                                              Allentown-
                                                                      Burlington           NMinneapoli
                                                                                  Vallejo-Fa
                                                                                  Fall
                                                                                                      Washington
                                                                                             I Gary,CIN
                                                            Williamspo
                                                           Altoona,   PElkhart-Go
                                                                           Lancaster,
                                                                       Wausau,
                                                                            Grand
                                                                              Salt   WI  Milwaukee-
                                                                                       Dutchess
                                                                                      Rapi
                                                                                        Peoria-Pek
                                                                                     Lake           C
                                                                                                  Orange   Cou
                                           Clarksvill                  Sharon,
                                                                          Lima,     PA
                                                                                   OH
                                                                            Harrisburg  Davenport-
                                                                               Sheboygan,
                                                                             Canton-Mas   Racine, WI
   .35




                                                                               Bremerton,
                                                                                    Waterloo-C
                                                                                       Rockford,      San  Jose,   Anchorage,
                                                                St. Cloud,              Cedar Rapi  Nassau-Suf
                                                                                  Janesville         Middlesex-
                                                                               Appleton-O
                                                                                       Kenosha,     W
                                                                                             Richland-K
              .3




                               9.4               9.6          9.8          10        10.2                           10.4
                                                       Log Median Family Income, 1980



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
1980, at usa.ipums.org. Median family income is from the 1980 Census.




                                                                            45
                                                           Figure 5: Relationship Between
                                                      Gini Coefficent and Log Population, 2000
                .55
                                           Bryan-Coll
                                                                                                                          New York,
                                                  Gainesvill                         New Haven-
                                                                                         Miami, FL
                          .5



                                           Athens, GASavannah,
                                          Monroe,
                                        Alexandria     LA Brownsvill   McAllen-Ed
     Gini Coefficient 2000




                                             Tuscaloosa
                                      Auburn-Ope
                                         Greenville
                                       Bloomingto
                                      Hattiesbur
                                      Iowa   City,
                                                       Naples,
                                                      Lubbock,    TLexington, West
                                                                 FL                         Palm
                                                                                        New Orlean                            Los Angele
                                       Albany, GA        Tallahasse
                                                                 Jackson,      M             San Franci
                                     Jackson, TChico-Para
                                                  Longview-M   Shreveport
                                                                Lafayette,           Memphis,
                                                                                Birmingham       T
                                                                                               Newark,    NJ
                                                    Odessa-Mid
                                                   Waco,     TXSanta     JerseyAL
                                                                        Barb
                                                                      Mobile,
                                                                        Sarasota-B Cit Hartford,
                                                                                            Fort Laude       Houston, T
                                           Florence,
                                       Anniston,
                                          State  Laredo,
                                                  CollCharl
                                                Tyler,
                                              Champaign-TX TXTrenton,
                                                            Fort
                                                        Columbus, Pierc  NEl
                                                                        Baton
                                                                   Johnson       Fresno,
                                                                               Paso,
                                                                                Roug
                                                                       Charleston
                                                                            Knoxville,
                                                                                Ci     T CA                        Boston-Wor
                                                Lake       Montgomery
                                                                  Fort  Myers
                                                                           Bakersfiel   Bergen-Pas Pittsburgh    Philadelph
                                             Redding,
                                        Abilene,
                                    Gadsden,           Santa
                                                      San
                                                 A Cruces
                                          Columbia,       C    Cruz
                                                            Luis  O
                                                              Beaumont-P Tucson,
                                                    TWilmington
                                                         Boulder-Lo                       AZ Cincinnati    Dallas,
                                                                                                   Tampa-St.       TX Chicago, I
                                              Las
                                               Yolo,   CA                           Louisville
             .45




                                         Dothan,
                                          Yuba
                                       Danville,     AL
                                                  City,    Macon,
                                                     Asheville,
                                                      Galveston-     GA
                                                                   Chattanoog
                                                                    Augusta-Ai
                                                                    Flint,
                                                             Springfiel
                                                               Visalia-Tu  MI              San
                                                                                    Oklahoma
                                                                                        Nashville,
                                                                                  Providence    C
                                                                                       Buffalo-Ni
                                                                                       Austin-San    San
                                                                                                 Antoni
                                                                                                   Oakland,Diego,
                                                                                                  Cleveland- C
                                             Charlottes
                                          Wichita
                                         Santa
                                        Flagstaff, Fort
                                                  Fe,
                                                 Houma,  Smith
                                                   Yakima,
                                                     Fa       WA
                                                             Reno,
                                                     Amarillo,
                                                            LA        NV
                                                                Pensacola,
                                                         Portland,
                                                             Huntsville        Tulsa,   OK
                                                                                    Monmouth-O
                                                                                   Greenville        Orange Cou
                                       Muncie,
                                          Punta
                                         Rocky Medford-As
                                          Panama  IN  Binghamton
                                                   Gord
                                                   MounCit    Corpus    Toledo,
                                                                         Little
                                                                       Stockton-L
                                                                    Daytona
                                                              Atlantic-C
                                                           Eugene-Spr    Chr    Roc
                                                                                Be
                                                                         Scranton--OH
                                                                             Albuquerqu
                                                                              Syracuse,Greensboro
                                                                                     Jacksonvil                Detroit, M
                                        Sioux
                                      Grand  Benton
                                           Decatur,
                                          Vineland-M
                                                City
                                          Pueblo,    COHar
                                                        AAZ
                                                   Springfiel
                                                Greeley,
                                                  Merced,
                                                Lafayette,
                                                Yuma,
                                               Junc        CCA
                                                     Roanoke,          Columbia,
                                                                  Modesto,
                                                                Spokane,
                                                               Biloxi-Gul
                                                          Evansville
                                                                  V         Akron,
                                                                              WC OH
                                                                         Springfiel        Columbus,
                                                                                           Charlotte-
                                                                                      Raleigh-Du
                                                                                            Orlando, St. Louis,
                                                                                                             Atlanta, G
                                                                                                       FPhoenix-Me
                                                                                                    Baltimore,
                                                                                                         Riverside-
                                         Jamestown,
                                    Sumter,  Bellingham
                                           Terre
                                              SC
                                            Joplin,
                                         Altoona,  Haut
                                                    Barnstable
                                              Fargo-Moor
                                                     P  Ocala,
                                                       Lincoln,
                                                      MO         FLLakeland-W
                                                               Saginaw-Ba
                                                                  NMelbourne-
                                                           Fayettevil
                                                   Lynchburg,          Youngstown
                                                                  Kalamazoo-                 Fort
                                                                                     Rochester,
                                                                                           Las
                                                                                  Richmond-P      Worth
                                                                                                   Seattle-Be
                                                                                          Milwaukee-Nassau-Suf
                                                                                                Vegas,
                                                                                           Sacramento
                                                                                            Indianapol
                                        LaBillings,
                                            Crosse,
                                       Williamspo            Davenport-
                                                         Utica-Rome
                                                                Salinas,Ann
                                                                  Lansing-Ea  Arbor,
                                                                                 Dayton-Spr
                                                                                Albany-Sch
                                                                            CVentura,        San  Jose,
                                                                                                Denver,   CO
                                       Decatur,
                                        Joseph I Johnstown,
                                      Goldsboro,
                                    St. Waterloo-C     South
                                                     Duluth-Sup   Santa
                                                          Erie,Bend
                                                                 PA
                                                                Madison,    Gary,
                                                                              W IN NE-
                                                                           Rosa
                                                                           Omaha,
                                                                        Wilmington       C Kansas      Cit     Washington
                                                 Myrtle   Bea
                                                 Richland-KKilleen-Te
                                                               Canton-Mas
                                                                  Des
                                                                  Boise    City Honolulu,
                                                                        Moines
                                                                         Harrisburg            Portland-V
                                       Sharon,
                                        Rochester,
                                        Hagerstown
                                     Kankakee,    PA Dutchess
                                               Mansfield,
                                            Jackson,     M
                                                             Hickory-Mo
                                                             Peoria-Pek
                                                            Hamilton-M
                                                                    Fort   Tacoma,
                                                                           Wayne  S Middlesex-
                                                                          Allentown-
                                                                     Colorado
                                                                     C                WA
                                                                                            Norfolk-Vi
                                                                                                       Minneapoli
                                           Bloomingto
                                             Topeka,    Fort
                                                         KS    Newburgh,
                                                              Colli
                                                     Bremerton,Rockford,
                                                           Fayettevil
                                                             Salem,
                                                              Reading, Wichita,
                                                                       ORP         KGrand Rapi
                                    Kokomo,
                                        Glens  Sioux
                                               INFall
                                              Fort
                                                Cedar
                                             Lima,      Fall
                                                       Brazoria,
                                                     Walto
                                                Elkhart-Go
                                                  Olympia,
                                                     OH  Rapi W       Vallejo-Fa
                                       Wausau,      WI       Provo-Orem                  Salt Lake
   .4




                                           EauSt. Claire
                                                   Cloud,
                                                    Green
                                                Racine,
                                          Kenosha,      W  WIBay,
                                        Dover,    DE   Anchorage,
                                                   Clarksvill       Lancaster,
                                            Jacksonvil
                                            Janesville          York, PA
                                     Sheboygan,
                                                             Appleton-O
                .35




                               11                12               13            14         15                          16
                                                                         Log of Population


Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org. Population data is from the 2000 Census.




                                                                                    46
                                                                                   Figure 6:
                                                    Gini Coefficient of Housing Consumption and the Gini Coefficient, 2000
    Gini Coefficient of Housing Consumption, 2000
                                             .32                           Baltimore,
                                                                                                 Birmingham        Miami, FL
                                                                     Kansas Cit
                                                                           Columbus,
                                                                                             Boston-Wor
                                                                             Charlotte-
                                     .3



                                                                                    Providence
                                                                                           Philadelph
                                                                                           Pittsburgh    New Orlean
                                                                                                             Los Angele
                                                                                       Tampa-St.
                                                                                         Cincinnati
                                                                                Detroit, M
                                                                              St. Louis,
                                                                         Indianapol  Oklahoma C                                New York,
                              .28




                                                                 Norfolk-ViFort      Buffalo-Ni
                                                                                 Worth   Dallas,      San Franci
                                                                                     San
                                                                                      San  Diego,TX
                                                                                          Antoni
                                                                          Rochester,                Memphis,
                                                                                                Houston, T   T
                                                         Salt Lake Portland-V
                                                                            Riverside-
                                                                     Washington
                     .26




                                                                           Milwaukee-
                                                                                    Cleveland-Hartford,

                                                                          Phoenix-MeChicago, I
                                                                      Denver,
                                                              Minneapoli       COOakland, C
                                                                         Seattle-Be
           .24




                                                                           Atlanta, G
                                                                       San Jose,
                                                                               Orange Cou
   .22




                                                                         Sacramento

                                                    .4                         .45                        .5                       .55
                                                                                        Gini Coefficient 2000



Source: The 2000 Gini coefficient is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
(IPUMS) for 2000, at usa.ipums.org. The housing Gini coefficient was calculated using housing values and
controls from the American Housing Survey Metropolitan Samples for 1998, 2002, 2003 and 2004.




                                                                                                 47
                                                   Figure 7: Gini for Household Income
                                               and Gini for Male Workers Ages 25-55, 2000
                     .55
                                                                                                        New York,
   Gini Coefficient of HH Income, 2000



                                                                                                                 New Haven-
                                                                                                   Miami, FL
                            .5




                                                                                       McAllen-Ed Los Angele
                                                                                         West Palm
                                                             New Orlean
                                                                                                    San Franci
                                                                        Memphis, T Newark, NJ
                                                                        Birmingham
                                                                    Jersey Cit        Houston, T
                                              BatonMobile,
                                                     Roug       El Paso, T Hartford,
                                                             ALCharleston      Fort Sarasota-B
                                                                                    Laude
                                                                                      Fresno, CA
                                                        Knoxville,  Boston-Wor
                                                              Philadelph Bakersfiel Bergen-Pas
                                                       Pittsburgh
                                                             Cincinnati
                                                                  Tucson,   AZ San
                                                                        Chicago,      Dallas, TX
                                                                                  I Diego,
                                                    Louisville           Tampa-St.
           .45




                                Providence Buffalo-Ni
                                                 Cleveland-        CSan Antoni
                                                      OklahomaNashville,       Oakland, C
                                                                                  Austin-San
                                                           Tulsa,  OK
                                               Greenville Monmouth-O                             Orange Cou
                                Toledo, OH
                            Scranton--    Syracuse,
                                               Detroit,       Little
                                                        M Stockton-L
                                                    Greensboro       Roc
                                                                Albuquerqu
                                                               Jacksonvil
                            Springfiel          St. Louis,OH
                                                 Akron,
                                                 Columbus,
                                                 Baltimore, Columbia,    Atlanta, G
                                                                Charlotte-
                                                                     Phoenix-Me
                                                            Raleigh-Du
                                                 Riverside-
                                           Milwaukee- Las
                                    Rochester,                 Fort     Orlando,
                                                                     Worth
                                                             Seattle-BeNassau-Suf F
                      Youngstown           Indianapol
                                                  Ann Arbor, Vegas,
                                                         Sacramento
                                                        Richmond-P               San Jose,
                             Dayton-Spr
                                      Albany-Sch              Denver, CO
                          Gary, IN             Kansas
                                                  Omaha,CitNE-
                                                        Washington              Ventura, C
                                             Wilmington
                                     Honolulu,         Portland-V
                              Harrisburg
                                Allentown- Colorado S Middlesex-
                               Norfolk-Vi
                         Tacoma,  KWA
                         Fort Wayne
                         Wichita,               Minneapoli
                              Grand RapiVallejo-Fa
                                            Salt Lake
                     .4




                                         .35             .4                     .45                                     .5
                                                   Gini Coefficient for Male Workers, 2000


Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org.




                                                                          48
                                                                   Figure 8: Gini Coefficient
                                                           and Human Capital Only Gini Coefficient, 2000
                                                                               New Haven-
                                           .5
   Gini Coefficient for Male Workers, 2000

                                                                                                  New York,

                                                                          San Franci                      Miami, FL         Los Angele
                                                                                                                       Orange Cou
                                                                                                West Palm
                                                                                                                             McAllen-Ed
                             .45




                                                                                   Newark, NJ
                                                                                 Bergen-Pas                               Fresno,
                                                                                                                         Dallas,  CA T
                                                                                                                                 TX
                                                                                                                            Houston,
                                                                                           Sarasota-BAustin-San
                                                                                        San   Jose,
                                                                                     Fort Laude
                                                                                              Oakland, C  San  Diego,
                                                                                                                    Ventura, C
                                                                               Hartford,
                                                                                Birmingham
                                                                                     Memphis,
                                                                                        Tampa-St.TAtlanta,      Bakersfiel
                                                                          Nassau-Suf          Orlando,
                                                                                                Chicago,F IG
                                                                       Boston-Wor                    San         Phoenix-Me
                                                                                                          AntoniCit
                                                                                                        Jersey
                                                                                              Tucson,
                                                                                             Nashville,AZ
                                                                                               Albuquerqu
                                                                                     Jacksonvil
                                                                                      NewCharleston
                                                                             Philadelph
                                                                                    Little  Orlean
                                                                                           Roc         El Paso,
                                                                                                 Charlotte-
                                                                                                  Denver,  Fort  T
                                                                                                           CO Worth
                                                                    Monmouth-O
                                                                            Seattle-Be
                                                                             Cincinnati  Raleigh-Du
                                                                                       Columbia,        Stockton-L
                                                                  Middlesex-Washington
                                                                                Richmond-P  Tulsa, OK Vegas,
                                                                                             Sacramento
                                                                                      Knoxville,  Las
                                                                                         Portland-V
                                                                                                Oklahoma C
              .4




                                                          Pittsburgh
                                                          Ann Arbor, Akron,St.
                                                                             OH
                                                                               Mobile,
                                                                                 Omaha,AL
                                                                                Louisville
                                                                                Columbus,  NE-Greensboro
                                                                                                     Riverside-
                                                                    Cleveland-
                                                                   Minneapoli Baltimore,
                                                                              Kansas
                                                                               Louis,
                                                                              Detroit, Cit
                                                                                 BatonMRoug Greenville
                                                                 Buffalo-NiWilmington  Colorado S
                                                                              Milwaukee-
                                                                                  Indianapol            Salt Lake
                                                                          Syracuse,
                                                                      Albany-Sch                Vallejo-Fa
                                                                    Rochester,Honolulu,
                                                                  Toledo,   OH
                                                                      Allentown-             Providence
                                                                       Harrisburg
                                                                          Dayton-SprNorfolk-Vi
                                                                                    Grand Rapi
                                                              Scranton--       Springfiel
                                                           Gary, IN        Tacoma,
                                                                            Fort WayneWA
                                                                                       Wichita, K
                         .35




                                                      Youngstown

                                                .18               .2               .22                 .24                                .26
                                                                 Human Capital Only Gini Coefficient, 2000



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                           49
                                                                       Figure 9: Gini Coefficient
                                                       and Human Capital Only Gini Coeff. Using Occupations, 2000
                                                                                                                         New Haven-
                                            .5
    Gini Coefficient for Male Workers, 2000

                                                                                                                                   New York,
                                                                                                                                   Los Angele
                                                                                                               San Franci
                                                                                                                    Miami, FL
                                                                                                                                      Orange Cou
                                                                                                                          West Palm
                                                                                                       McAllen-Ed
                               .45




                                                                                                                 Newark, NJ
                                                                                                           Bergen-Pas           Fresno,
                                                                                                                           Dallas, TX CA
                                                                                                              Sarasota-B Houston, T
                                                                                                      Austin-San
                                                                                              San Jose,
                                                                                                    Oakland,
                                                                                                      Fort LaudeC San Diego,
                                                                                                                       Ventura, C
                                                                                                 Birmingham
                                                                                                      Memphis,
                                                                                                   Tampa-St.    Bakersfiel
                                                                                                           Hartford,
                                                                                                                  T FChicago, I
                                                                                                         Atlanta,
                                                                                                         Orlando,
                                                                                                     Nassau-Suf   G
                                                                                                  Boston-Wor
                                                                                                   Jersey    San
                                                                                                            Cit
                                                                                           Tucson, Albuquerqu      Phoenix-Me
                                                                                                      AZNashville,Antoni
                                                                                              ElRoc
                                                                                             New
                                                                                        Little   Paso,
                                                                                        Jacksonvil OrleanT
                                                                                                       Charlotte-
                                                                                                    Fort Worth
                                                                                                      Denver,Charleston
                                                                                                      PhiladelphCO
                                                                                      Monmouth-O
                                                                                   Seattle-Be
                                                                               Middlesex-     Cincinnati
                                                                                               Raleigh-Du
                                                                                         Columbia,           Stockton-L
                                                                                               Tulsa, OK
                                                                                                 Sacramento
                                                                                               Washington
                                                                                        Richmond-P
                                                                                                 Oklahoma C Las Vegas,
                                                                                             Portland-V
                                                                                     Knoxville,
                  .4




                                                                                   Pittsburgh   Greensboro
                                                                             Mobile,
                                                                               Ann   AL
                                                                                    Arbor,
                                                                                 Akron,   OHLouisville
                                                                                             Omaha,    NE-
                                                                                           Columbus,
                                                                                        Riverside-
                                                                                       Cleveland-
                                                                                         St.
                                                                                  Greenville
                                                                                 Detroit,   Baltimore,
                                                                                    Minneapoli
                                                                                            M Kansas Cit
                                                                                             Louis,
                                                                       Baton  Roug
                                                                         Buffalo-Ni Wilmington
                                                                                Colorado    S
                                                                                            Milwaukee-
                                                                                Syracuse, Indianapol Salt Lake
                                                                                Albany-Sch Vallejo-Fa Honolulu,
                                                                            Rochester,
                                                                        Toledo, OH
                                                                                 Allentown-   Providence
                                                                          Norfolk-ViHarrisburg
                                                                                Grand
                                                                              Dayton-Spr Rapi
                                                                  Scranton--Springfiel
                                                         Gary, IN     Tacoma,
                                                                          Fort WA
                                                                               Wayne
                                                                          Wichita, K
   .35




                                                          Youngstown



                                                 .24           .26               .28               .3             .32
                                                         Human Capital Only Gini Coefficient Using Occupation, 2000



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                               50
                                Figure 10: Relationship Between Share of Adults with College Degrees 2000
                                              and Share of Adults with College Degrees 1940
                                                                                                       Boulder-Lo
     Share of Adults with College Degrees, 2000
                                             .5

                                                                                                                                      Iowa City,
                                                                                                                                         Corvallis,

                                                                                          San Franci
                                                                                                                                   Lawrence,
                                                                                                                         Washington
                                                                                                                          Columbia,
                                                                                                             San Jose, Madison, W
                                   .4




                                                                                                Bloomingto
                                                                                            Raleigh-Du  Fort Colli
                                                                                               Gainesvill
                                                                             Middlesex-Charlottes
                                                                                               Santa   Fe,      Bryan-Coll
                                                                                                                           Champaign-
                                                                             Tallahasse      Austin-San
                                                                                    Bloomingto          StateAnn
                                                                                                 Seattle-Be   Coll Arbor,
                                                                           Burlington
                                                                         Portland,  Santa
                                                                                       Yolo,   Rochester,
                                                                                             Cruz           Oakland,
                                                                                                      Denver, CO       C
                                                                                 Trenton,
                                                                                 New          NCA GA
                                                                                         Athens,
                                                                                         Haven-
                                                                                    Boston-Wor
                                                                                        Barnstable
                                                                                      Minneapoli
                                                                                  Bergen-Pas
                                                                              Atlanta,    G Newark,          Missoula,Lincoln, N
                                                                                      Provo-Orem   Colorado
                                                                                                         NJ S
                                                                                                Nassau-Suf
                                                        Huntsville           Hartford,       Orange    Cou
                         .3




                                                                                   Chicago,
                                                                                       Dallas,
                                                                                    Olympia,    I TX
                                                                                                  W San Santa
                                                                                           Flagstaff,
                                                                                             Fargo-Moor  Diego,Barb
                                                                          Baltimore,
                                                                           Santa         New
                                                                                 Richmond-P
                                                                                     Rosa   Des York,
                                                                                          Columbus,
                                                                                        Portland-V
                                                                                        AlbuquerquMoines
                                                                                               Lexington, Columbia,
                                                           Naples, FL          Kansas
                                                                        Springfiel
                                                                               Omaha,
                                                                            Philadelph
                                                                        Dutchess      Lansing-Ea
                                                                                Albany-Sch CitLafayette,
                                                                                       Jackson,
                                                                                            NE-
                                                                                        Auburn-Ope
                                                                                     West
                                                                            Monmouth-O    Cedar
                                                                                             Palm
                                                                                       CHouston,
                                                                                       Wilmington   M
                                                                                                  Honolulu,
                                                                                                   Rapi
                                                                       Bellingham
                                                                             Rochester,
                                                                              Milwaukee-
                                                                       Nashville,      Ventura,    C T Lake
                                                                   New
                                                               JerseySt.
                                                                          London
                                                                        CitWilmington
                                                                           Pittsfield
                                                                               Sioux  San
                                                                                Charlotte-
                                                                       Greenville           Luis
                                                                                         Boise
                                                                                      Billings,   Topeka, KS Tucson, AZ
                                                                                                  OSalt
                                                                                                  City
                                                                                        Fall Eugene-Spr
                                                                                    Sacramento
                                                                                Indianapol
                                                                               Bismarck,
                                                                               Bremerton,
                                                                             Cincinnati
                                                                            Louis,
                                                                          Little
                                                         Fort WaltoLaMontgomery  Fort
                                                                            Charleston
                                                                                  Roc
                                                                         Birmingham
                                                                             Springfiel
                                                                          Crosse,
                                                                          Providence
                                                                       Grand   Akron,
                                                                                Hattiesbur
                                                                                 Fork     Phoenix-Me
                                                                                        Worth
                                                                                        Spokane,
                                                                                   Pocatello,
                                                                                          Rapid
                                                                                        Orlando,
                                                                                          Fort
                                                                                        Baton
                                                                                          OH         FW K
                                                                                                   City
                                                                                                    Los
                                                                                              Wichita,
                                                                                         Sarasota-B
                                                                                                Laude
                                                                                                Roug
                                                                                       Asheville,        Angele
                                                                                                  Oklahoma
                                                                                                  Lubbock,   TC
                                                                           SouthSyracuse,
                                                                                Tuscaloosa
                                                                             Pittsburgh
                                                                            Norfolk-Vi
                                                                          Knoxville,
                                                                         Hamilton-M  Bend
                                                                             Melbourne-
                                                                             Kalamazoo-
                                                                                   Cleveland-
                                                                            Richland-K        Cheyenne,      Reno,  NV
                                                                  Savannah,
                                                                    Grand
                                                                   Memphis,
                                                                  Green    Buffalo-Ni
                                                                              Rapi
                                                                           Greensboro
                                                                         Detroit,
                                                                      Monroe,     LA
                                                                         Galveston-
                                                                                  T M
                                                                             Vallejo-Fa
                                                                           Harrisburg
                                                                        Tyler,
                                                                          New
                                                                      Appleton-O
                                                                      Springfiel TX
                                                                             Roanoke,
                                                                            Bay, San
                                                                                 Orlean  Tulsa,
                                                                                  Waterloo-C
                                                                          Jacksonvil   Salinas,
                                                                                        Antoni
                                                                                             V    OK
                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                Abilene,   T
                                                                  Fayettevil
                                                                  Eau   Toledo,Medford-As
                                                                       Louisville  Las
                                                                          Dayton-Spr
                                                                        Claire
                                                                       Newburgh,
                                                                  Binghamton   GrandOH   Cruces
                                                                                         Junc
                                                                                  Chico-Para
                                                                                  Tampa-St.
                                                                                      Greeley,  Miami,
                                                                                                  C      FL
                                                                  St.
                                                         Jonesboro,   Pensacola,
                                                                      Cloud,
                                                                 Augusta-Ai
                                                                       Erie,Dubuque,
                                                                           Duluth-Sup
                                                                      Allentown-
                                                                       Peoria-Pek
                                                                               PA     Great
                                                                                 Salem,
                                                                               Greenville  I
                                                                                     Fort MyersFall
                                                                                             OR WY   Amarillo,
                                                                   Lancaster,
                                                                     Bangor,
                                                                  Racine,     Tacoma,
                                                                        Muncie,
                                                                            TWI
                                                                      Davenport-Charleston
                                                                                 ME  IN     WA
              .2




                                                               Jackson,
                                                              Mobile,    AL
                                                                    Benton
                                                                   FortMacon, Fort
                                                                     Chattanoog
                                                                     Atlantic-C
                                                              Brazoria,   WayneHarGA    Casper,
                                                                                     Pierc
                                                                                    Enid,
                                                                                        San OKAngelo
                                                              Kenosha,
                                                           Myrtle  Glens
                                                                   Bea
                                                                 Dover,
                                                              York,  Terre
                                                                  Columbus,
                                                              Evansville    W
                                                                         Fayettevil
                                                                            Waco,
                                                                           Shreveport
                                                                           DE
                                                                    Rockford,
                                                                 Reading,
                                                                      PA
                                                                   Pueblo,   Fall
                                                                    Lynchburg,
                                                                          Florence,
                                                                             Wichita
                                                                              Haut
                                                                           Elmira,
                                                                              PCO      TX
                                                                                 Lawton,
                                                                                       NY     OK
                                                                                          FaDaytona    Odessa-Mid
                                                          Wausau,
                                                           Sheboygan, WI
                                                                Saginaw-Ba
                                                                  Killeen-Te
                                                                   Utica-Rome
                                                           Lafayette,Gary,
                                                                Panama
                                                                   Albany,    Sioux
                                                                               Corpus
                                                                              IN
                                                                            Cit
                                                                        Punta  GA Gord City
                                                                               Biloxi-Gul Chr          Be
                                                        Dothan, Scranton--
                                                                Canton-Mas
                                                                 St.     Sharon,
                                                                        Sherman-De
                                                                      Joseph
                                                                  Owensboro,
                                                           Clarksvill
                                                                 Jamestown,
                                                                  AL   Decatur,       PAPaso,
                                                               Joplin,
                                                              Flint,
                                                       Decatur,
                                                         Pine
                                                                       Longview-M
                                                                    Lake
                                                               Florence,    Charl
                                                                     Jackson,
                                                                      MI
                                                                Victoria,
                                                                 Johnson
                                                                  A
                                                               Bluff       Sumter,
                                                                  Elkhart-Go       MI ElSC
                                                                               CiFresno,
                                                                           Janesville
                                                                             Redding,
                                                                      Alexandria
                                                                         MO                CCAVegas,
                                                                                          Las     T
                                                                                         Riverside-
                                                            Texarkana,
                                                           Kankakee,
                                                      Jacksonvil          Yakima,
                                                                   Anniston,
                                                                  Parkersbur
                                                                  Youngstown
                                                               Kokomo,Williamspo
                                                                            IN
                                                                   Goldsboro,          WA
                                                                              Lakeland-W
                                                              Hagerstown
                                                               Lewiston-A
                                                            Laredo,
                                                             Altoona,
                                                            Fort Rocky
                                                                 Smith
                                                                Lima,
                                                            Cumberland
                                                           Gadsden,    TX
                                                                   Ocala,PBeaumont-P
                                                                   Stockton-L
                                                                    Huntington
                                                                            Modesto,
                                                                           Moun
                                                                   Hickory-Mo
                                                                        OH
                                                                        A    FLBakersfiel
                                                                        Brownsvill
                                                                        Yuba     City,
                                                                                           C
                                                                  LA McAllen-Ed
                                                             Johnstown,
                                                        Houma, Wheeling,
                                                             Steubenvil
                                                                   Mansfield,
                                                           Vineland-M
                                                            Danville, Visalia-Tu
                                                                      Merced,  Yuma,
                                                                                  CA AZ
   .1




                                                  0                  .05                       .1                                                .15
                                                              Share of Adults with College Degrees, 1940



Source: Share of adults with college degrees in 2000 is from the 2000 Census. Share of adults with college
degrees in 1940 is from Haines, M.R., ICPSR study number 2896, Historical, Demographic, Economic, and
Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000.




                                                                                            51
                                       Figure 11: Relationship Between Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 2000
                                                     and Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 1940
                    .5                                                                                  McAllen-Ed
                                                                                                                          Laredo, TX
                                                                                                  Brownsvill
   Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 2000
                              .4



                                                                                                 Visalia-Tu
                                                                                                                Wheeling,
                                                                                                       Merced, CA
                                                                                         El Paso,
                                                                                               Yuma,  T AZ
                                                                                     Fresno, CA                                       Houma, LA
                                                                Miami, FL           Salinas,
                                                                                    Bakersfiel
                                                                                    Yakima,    C
                                                                                               WA                Vineland-MDanville,
                                                                                                  Kokomo,       IN
                    .3




                                                    Los Angele                        Modesto, C             Las Cruces
                                                                                                                     Hickory-Mo
                                                                                                                   JohnsonJersey
                                                                                                                              Ci Cit
                                                                                                       Stockton-L      Rocky MounLafayette,
                                                                                           Yuba City, Florence,
                                                          Odessa-Mid                     Corpus     Chr
                                                                                                     New     York,Fort
                                                                                                              Sumter,  Anniston,
                                                                                                                  Lynchburg,
                                                                                                                        Smith
                                                                                                                     Gadsden,
                                                                                                                         SC     Decatur,
                                                                                                                                 A        A
                                                                        Riverside-
                                                                                 Wichita Fa Lakeland-W         Alexandria
                                                                                                            Albany,   GA Pine Bluff
                                                                                                                        Florence,
                                                                                                                  Greenville
                                                                            San   Angelo TElkhart-Go
                                                                               Houston,          Charlottes     Huntington
                                                                                                               Victoria,
                                                                                                                  Texarkana,
                                                                                             Waco,
                                                                                           San Antoni   TX   New
                                                                                                         ChattanoogOrlean
                                                                                                                    Columbus,
                                                                                                            Providence
                                                                                                          Lake    Charl
                                                                                                                  Jackson,
                                                                                                                       Goldsboro,
                                                                                                                              T PDothan,
                                                                                                                            Jonesboro,
                                                                                                                   Lancaster,             AL
                                                                Lubbock,    T                     Longview-M
                                                                                                    Monroe,   Ocala,
                                                                                                          Mobile,
                                                                                                           Greensboro
                                                                                                                 LA  Hagerstown
                                                                                                                    ALReading,
                                                                                                                      FL
                                                               SantaLasBarb
                                                                         Vegas,
                                                                         Dallas,   TX         Beaumont-P
                                                                                         Shreveport
                                                                                                  Baton        Tuscaloosa
                                                                                                             Macon,
                                                                                                            Roug
                                                                                                        Atlantic-C  Augusta-Ai
                                                                                                                      GA
                                                                                                             Utica-Rome Johnstown,
                                                                                                                   Dover,   DE
                                                     Amarillo,Orange     Cou           Greeley,           Montgomery
                                                                                                    Joplin,
                                                                                                    C        Brazoria,
                                                                                                          Knoxville,
                                                                                                               MO
          .2




                                                                             Ventura,
                                                                            Sioux   City
                                                                                 Salem, Yolo,
                                                                                         C
                                                                                Richland-K OR  CA
                                                                                          Richmond-P
                                                                                             Tyler,
                                                                                       Mansfield,   Lewiston-A
                                                                                                        Memphis,
                                                                                                       TX  Athens,
                                                                                                  Sherman-De
                                                                                               Biloxi-Gul
                                                                                                     Charlotte-
                                                                                                     Birmingham
                                                                                               Williamspo          Kankakee,
                                                                                                             Savannah,
                                                                                                          Fayettevil  T
                                                                                                                     Greenville
                                                                                                                    Cumberland
                                                                                                                     GA
                                                                               Fort  Worth    Hattiesbur
                                                                                              Fort
                                                                                        Asheville,
                                                                                           Chicago,      IOwensboro,
                                                                                                  Charleston
                                                                                                     Pierc
                                                                                              Roanoke,
                                                                                                 Galveston-           CitYork,Naples,
                                                                                                                   Allentown-
                                                                                                              VAuburn-Ope
                                                                                                          Panama               PA
                                                        San Diego,
                                                                        Abilene,
                                                                              Fort
                                                                           Enid,
                                                                                  TLaude
                                                                                  OK
                                                                             Daytona   Fort
                                                                                Orlando,Be
                                                                                           Jackson,
                                                                                    Tampa-St. Pueblo,
                                                                                        Bryan-Coll
                                                                                             Rockford,
                                                                                         Newark,
                                                                                         Muncie,
                                                                                        Springfiel
                                                                                Phoenix-Me      Benton
                                                                                               St.
                                                                                           Elmira,
                                                                                            FDetroit,
                                                                                          Lexington,
                                                                                             Myers
                                                                                    Chico-Para
                                                                                             South
                                                                                                 Gary,
                                                                                                      Jamestown,
                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                        Terre
                                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                       Nashville,
                                                                                                       Cincinnati
                                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                     IN
                                                                                                      Trenton,
                                                                                                       Glens
                                                                                                    Joseph
                                                                                                      NYM   Har
                                                                                                      Youngstown
                                                                                                      Bergen-Pas
                                                                                                      Punta
                                                                                                       BendIN
                                                                                                                 Haut
                                                                                                          Charleston
                                                                                                         Louisville
                                                                                                                Fall
                                                                                                               Gord
                                                                                                        Philadelph
                                                                                                               Newburgh,
                                                                                                        Parkersbur       ClarksvillMyrtle
                                                                                                                 Scranton--
                                                                                                                  Steubenvil
                                                                                                                St.NWI
                                                                                                                Baltimore,
                                                                                                                    Louis,             FLBea
                                                                     San
                                                                  Tucson, Jose,
                                                                             AZSanta
                                                                        Oklahoma     Cleveland-
                                                                                   Vallejo-Fa
                                                                                Redding,
                                                                                    West
                                                                                     C  Cruz CSharon,
                                                                                              Flint,
                                                                                            Decatur,
                                                                                             Little
                                                                                             Lima,
                                                                                           Palm
                                                                                           Jacksonvil
                                                                                      Dayton-Spr       MI
                                                                                                     Roc
                                                                                                       OHRacine,
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                Harrisburg
                                                                                                 Wilmington
                                                                                           Norfolk-Vi
                                                                                              New     Haven-PA
                                                                                                           Buffalo-Ni
                                                                                                              Evansville
                                                                                                              Pensacola,
                                                                                                      Canton-Mas
                                                                                                     Hamilton-M
                                                                                                             Saginaw-Ba
                                                                                                              Kenosha,     W    Huntsville
                                                          Reno,
                                                        Oakland,NV
                                                              San CFranci     T ulsa,  OK
                                                                                   Santa   Syracuse,
                                                                                         Flagstaff,
                                                                                   Janesville
                                                                                     Albuquerqu
                                                                                  Indianapol   Springfiel
                                                                                             Hartford,
                                                                                          Jackson,
                                                                                     Columbia,
                                                                                           Fe,    Atlanta,
                                                                                              Toledo,       Altoona,
                                                                                                            Killeen-Te
                                                                                                           OH
                                                                                                  Rochester,
                                                                                           Davenport-
                                                                                                  Milwaukee-
                                                                                                   Grand     Dutchess  PWausau,
                                                                                                              G Sheboygan,
                                                                                                        MBinghamton
                                                                                                              Rapi        C        WIJacksonvil
                                                                               Sarasota-B
                                                                           Sacramento
                                                                        Medford-As
                                                                               Grand    Junc
                                                                               Boston-Wor    Erie,
                                                                                         Austin-San PAPittsburgh
                                                                                           Peoria-Pek
                                                                                             Wilmington
                                                                                         Honolulu,
                                                                                         Santa    Rosa
                                                                                            Pittsfield
                                                                                            Lawton,     OK  Fayettevil
                                                                 Wichita,
                                                             Denver,   CO
                                                                            KKansas
                                                                            San  Luis
                                                                              Bangor,
                                                                           Columbus,
                                                                    Waterloo-C
                                                                    Boise  City
                                                                                        O
                                                                                   Akron,ME  OHDubuque,
                                                                                           Fort
                                                                                      Kalamazoo-
                                                                                       Bismarck,
                                                                                       Cit
                                                                                Lafayette,
                                                                                     Melbourne-
                                                                                      Nassau-Suf
                                                                                                  Wayne
                                                                                                   Raleigh-Du
                                                                                                 Albany-Sch
                                                                                            Monmouth-O
                                                                                                  Green   New   ILondon
                                                                                                             Tallahasse
                                                                                                             Bay,   St. Cloud,
                                                                                                             Middlesex-
                                                               Washington
                                                       Salt Lake        Great
                                                                     Portland-V Tacoma,
                                                                               Fall         WA    Grand
                                                                                             Duluth-Sup
                                                                                                    Eau     Fork
                                                                                                            Claire
                                                                                                          Appleton-O
                                                                      Eugene-Spr
                                                                     Pocatello,
                                                                 Rapid
                                                                Topeka,
                                                              Casper,    City
                                                                         WYOmaha,Bellingham
                                                                           KSSioux   NE-   Springfiel
                                                                                       State     Gainesvill
                                                                                               Coll                              Fort Walto
                                                           Des  Billings,
                                                                Moines
                                                                  Spokane,
                                                            Cheyenne,                 Fall
                                                                              Lansing-Ea
                                                                              W
                                                                      Columbia,            Burlington
                                                                                               Bloomingto
                                                                                               La   Crosse,
                                                                          Olympia,
                                                                          Fargo-Moor  W
                    .1




                                                Lincoln, NSeattle-Be    Ann
                                                                  Portland,
                                                                  Cedar
                                                                Missoula,
                                                              Colorado
                                                                             Arbor,
                                                                          Rapi
                                                                             Minneapoli
                                                                         Bremerton,
                                                                    Provo-Orem
                                                                Champaign-
                                                                       Rochester,
                                                                          S      Bloomingto
                                                                  Barnstable
                                                           Madison,
                                                          Lawrence,  WFort Colli
                                               Corvallis,             Boulder-Lo
                                                  Iowa City,

                                      .5              .6               .7              .8                                      .9
                                                            Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 1940



Source: Share of adult high school dropouts in 2000 is from the 2000 Census, and share of adult high
school dropouts in 1940 is from Haines, M.R., ICPSR study number 2896. Historical, Demographic,
Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2000.




                                                                                    52
                                      Figure 12: Relationship Between Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 2000
                                                   and Share of Hispanic Population, 2000
                    .5                                                                                                               McAllen-Ed
                                                                                                                                           Laredo, TX
                                                                                                                                  Brownsvill
   Share of Adult HS Dropouts, 2000
                              .4



                                                                                                     Visalia-Tu
                                          Wheeling,
                                                                                               Merced, CA
                                                                                                 Yuma, AZ                    El Paso, T
                                           Houma, LA                                          Fresno, CA Miami, FL
                                          Danville,                 Vineland-M        Yakima,  WASalinas, C
                                                                                        Bakersfiel
                                           Kokomo, IN
                    .3




                                               Hickory-Mo
                                          Johnson       Ci                        Modesto,  C LosCit
                                                                                         Jersey    Angele       Las Cruces
                                           Lafayette,
                                              Rocky Moun                         Stockton-L
                                          Florence,                  Yuba  City,
                                             Decatur,
                                           Anniston,
                                          Lynchburg,       A                          Odessa-Mid        Corpus Chr
                                          Pine  Fort
                                           Gadsden,
                                           Sumter,
                                           Alexandria
                                                  Bluff
                                          Florence,
                                           Albany,
                                             Greenville
                                                       Smith
                                                        SC
                                                       GA Wichita
                                                      Lakeland-W     Fa New York, Riverside-
                                          Huntington
                                            CharlottesElkhart-Go
                                              Texarkana,                        Houston,
                                                                                 San      T
                                                                                         Victoria,
                                                                                      Angelo
                                           LakeNew
                                            Dothan,
                                           Jackson,    Orlean
                                               Columbus,
                                           Chattanoog    AL
                                                      Providence
                                                    Charl
                                                Goldsboro,
                                            Jonesboro,    T
                                                 Lancaster,       Waco,   TX                         San Antoni
                                          Hagerstown
                                                 Ocala,
                                           Mobile,     Reading,
                                                       AL
                                                Greensboro
                                          Monroe,       LA   FL
                                                    Longview-M       P       Lubbock,   T Barb
                                           Tuscaloosa
                                            Macon,
                                              Dover, Beaumont-P
                                            Augusta-Ai
                                           Shreveport
                                             Utica-Rome
                                          Johnstown,
                                           Baton        GA
                                                     Roug
                                                       Atlantic-C
                                                        DE           Las  Vegas,
                                                                        Dallas,  TX  Santa
                                                                                 Orange
                                          Montgomery
                                          Knoxville,
                                              Joplin,   MO              Brazoria,
                                                                             Greeley,  C Cou
          .2




                                          Lewiston-A
                                            Memphis,
                                                Kankakee,
                                            Richmond-P
                                            Savannah,
                                              Greenville
                                          Cumberland
                                          Mansfield,
                                            Biloxi-Gul       T
                                                     Fayettevil
                                                Athens,      GA
                                                         Tyler,
                                                          Sioux
                                                   Sherman-De
                                                Charlotte-
                                           Birmingham
                                          Williamspo              TX
                                                                  City
                                                               Salem,      Yolo,
                                                                    Amarillo,
                                                                      Richland-K
                                                                         OR       CAVentura, C
                                          Hattiesbur
                                          Owensboro,
                                             York,
                                          Charleston
                                          Roanoke,
                                            Panama
                                            Myrtle
                                          Jackson,
                                            Charleston
                                          Terre       PA
                                                     Allentown-
                                            Asheville,
                                                     Fort
                                                    Haut
                                           Louisville
                                           Auburn-Ope  Bea
                                               Jamestown,
                                              Nashville,
                                          Scranton--
                                          Cincinnati     MV Pierc
                                                          Cit
                                                        Tampa-St.  Galveston-
                                                                  Chicago,
                                                                   Fort     TI FL
                                                                        Worth
                                                                  Abilene,
                                                                  Bryan-Coll            Pueblo, CO
                                          Steubenvil
                                          Muncie,   Rockford,
                                            Baltimore,
                                             Benton
                                           Glens
                                            St.  Joseph
                                           Elmira,
                                             Detroit,
                                            Lexington,
                                           Youngstown
                                              Punta
                                               Enid,
                                                South  IN
                                                       NYHar
                                                Clarksvill
                                                     FallM
                                                       Gord
                                                Philadelph
                                                       OK
                                                      Fort   Newark,
                                                           Springfiel
                                                       Trenton, Fort
                                                        Chico-Para
                                                  Daytona Bend          NJ
                                                                    Naples,
                                                                    N     Phoenix-Me
                                                                       Laude
                                                                  Bergen-Pas
                                                              Myers
                                                               Be
                                           St.  Louis,
                                          Parkersbur
                                              Cleveland-
                                          Evansville
                                            Pensacola,
                                            Flint,
                                          Decatur,
                                          Canton-Mas MI
                                              HarrisburgNewburgh,
                                                        Gary,
                                                     Racine,
                                             Buffalo-Ni
                                          Sharon,      PA
                                                        I
                                                 Redding,
                                           Hamilton-M
                                                Saginaw-Ba
                                            Little   Roc
                                            Huntsville         C IN
                                                                Orlando,
                                                                WI         FSan
                                                                    Vallejo-Fa
                                                                            Santa Diego,
                                                                                    CruzAZAlbuquerqu
                                          Lima,     OH
                                                    Kenosha,
                                                   Oklahoma
                                               Jacksonvil
                                            Wilmington
                                          Dayton-Spr
                                              Norfolk-Vi
                                                Tulsa,
                                          Altoona,
                                          Wausau,
                                            Syracuse,  PWI
                                                  Dutchess
                                             Indianapol
                                                  Atlanta,
                                           Binghamton
                                           Springfiel
                                               Toledo,
                                            Jackson,       West
                                                         New
                                                          OK
                                                      Hartford,
                                                           MOH    WPalm
                                                                   C
                                                                Haven-
                                                               Killeen-Te
                                                        Flagstaff,
                                               Janesville      G         San
                                                                 COakland,
                                                                Reno,
                                                                 San           Jose,
                                                                                Tucson,
                                                                        NVAustin-San
                                                                       Franci  C
                                            Columbia,
                                            Erie,   Jacksonvil
                                               Rochester,
                                              Sheboygan,
                                                 Davenport-
                                                  Milwaukee-
                                                  Grand
                                                    PA
                                           Peoria-Pek
                                                  Sarasota-B
                                                Wilmington
                                                   Honolulu,
                                                   Fayettevil
                                                   Medford-As
                                                       Grand Rapi Santa
                                                              Sacramento Rosa                      Santa Fe,
                                          Pittsburgh
                                           Pittsfield
                                          St.    Boston-Wor
                                          Dubuque,
                                              Fort   Lawton,
                                                     Wayne
                                              Kalamazoo-
                                             Albany-Sch
                                          Bangor,
                                          Akron, Monmouth-O
                                          Bismarck,  OH
                                                Kansas
                                           Columbus,
                                                Cloud, ME
                                               Tallahasse
                                                New        I Cit
                                                    Wichita,
                                                  Raleigh-Du
                                                        London
                                                 Lafayette,     KJunc
                                                                  OK
                                                                San   Luis O
                                               Green
                                           Waterloo-C
                                             Grand
                                          Duluth-Sup
                                          Eau
                                            GreatClaire  Bay,
                                                Melbourne-
                                                       Fork    CityDenver, CO
                                                       Nassau-Suf
                                                         Middlesex-
                                                      Boise
                                                      Washington
                                                 Tacoma,
                                                      Fall     WA
                                            Rapid
                                          SpringfielPortland-V
                                           Appleton-O   SaltWY
                                                Eugene-Spr
                                                Bellingham
                                                Pocatello,
                                                      City
                                                 Omaha,
                                               Fort   Walto
                                                 Gainesvill    Lake
                                                              NE-
                                           State    Topeka,
                                           Bloomingto
                                          La   Des
                                            Sioux    Coll
                                                Casper,
                                               Billings,
                                          Burlington Fall
                                               Crosse,Moines
                                                Lansing-Ea      KS
                                             Spokane,
                                           Columbia,
                                                Olympia,
                                            Fargo-Moor  Cheyenne,
                                                             WW
                    .1




                                              Ann
                                          Portland,
                                           Cedar     Arbor,
                                                Seattle-Be
                                                 Anchorage,
                                              Lincoln,
                                                     Rapi
                                              Minneapoli
                                            Bloomingto
                                               Bremerton,  N
                                                   Provo-Orem
                                             Champaign-
                                           Missoula,
                                            Rochester,
                                          Barnstable      Colorado S
                                              Madison,
                                                     Fort
                                              Lawrence,      W
                                                            Colli
                                                        Boulder-Lo
                                            IowaCorvallis,
                                                     City,

                                      0                     .2                  .4             .6                            .8              1
                                                                              Share Hispanic, 2000



Source: 2000 Census.




                                                                                           53
                                                          Figure 13: Relationship Between Share of Employment in High Capital
   Share of Employment in High Capital Industries, 2000
                                                                Industries and Share of Adults with College Degrees, 2000
                                                  .7

                                                                                                                                       San Jose,
                                                                                                    Springfiel           Rochester,
                                         .6



                                                                                                                                   Gainesvill
                                                                                                                              Tallahasse Columbia, Iowa City,
                                                                                                                                         Washington
                                                                                                                        Trenton,  N
                                                                                                                              Austin-San
                                                                                                                                 Charlottes
                                                                                                                             Bloomingto
                                                                                                                                      Madison,
                                                                                                                                Middlesex-      W    Boulder-Lo
                                                                                                        Wilmington Boston-Wor  Santa Fe, San Franci
                                                                                                                                Champaign-
                                                                                                                              StateRaleigh-Du
                                                                                                                                    Coll
                                                                                                                               Bryan-Coll
                                                                                          Galveston- Albany-Sch
                                                                                                             New York,
                                                                                       Binghamton       Dutchess    C
                                                                                                                  Newark, Oakland,
                                                                                                                            NJ      C
                                                                                                         Philadelph
                               .5




                                                                             Lafayette,           Sacramento
                                                                                                    Sioux    Fall Huntsville
                                                                                                             Baltimore,  Yolo,
                                                                                                                  Nassau-Suf
                                                                                                                       New
                                                                                                                  Hartford,     CA
                                                                                                                             Haven-
                                                                                                         Jackson,
                                                                                                        Cedar     Provo-Orem
                                                                                                                 Rapi
                                                                                                          Richmond-P Lincoln,
                                                                                                                     M
                                                                                                            Lexington,
                                                                                                          Des   Moines
                                                                                                           Albuquerqu
                                                                                                              Olympia,        N GABloomingto
                                                                                                                        Athens,
                                                                                                                         W
                                                                            Corpus Brazoria,
                                                                                       Chr    Lubbock,
                                                                                              Baton
                                                                                            Melbourne-Monmouth-O
                                                                                                        RougT
                                                                                                      Ventura,    CNE-
                                                                                                             Columbia,
                                                                                                               Dallas,
                                                                                                            Columbus,    Portland,
                                                                                                                        Santa
                                                                                                                        Denver,
                                                                                                                        TX     Cruz
                                                                                                                               Ann
                                                                                                                                 CO  Fort Colli
                                                                                                                                    Arbor,
                                                                             Odessa-Mid       Birmingham
                                                                                          Harrisburg
                                                                                        Las   Cruces      Lansing-Ea
                                                                                                        Omaha,
                                                                                                     Greenville
                                                                                                          Kansas    Bergen-Pas
                                                                                                                    CitMinneapoli
                                                                                              Oklahoma
                                                                                                  Jersey
                                                                                             Pittsburgh     Cit    Colorado
                                                                                                             C Chicago,
                                                                                                       Houston,              S
                                                                                                                          I Seattle-Be
                                                                                                                   TAtlanta,
                                                                          Alexandria
                                                                            Utica-Rome
                                                                          Lake Macon,
                                                                    Beaumont-P           San
                                                                                 CharlTampa-St.
                                                                                        New     Los  Tucson,
                                                                                            Buffalo-NiAngele
                                                                                              Montgomery
                                                                                        Newburgh,  Topeka,
                                                                                                Phoenix-Me
                                                                                              Syracuse,
                                                                                               Antoni           Orange
                                                                                                                AZ
                                                                                                              Flagstaff,
                                                                                                               KS
                                                                                                        Auburn-Ope
                                                                                                     Boise    City       Cou G
                                                                                         Monroe, Little
                                                                                            GAOrlean
                                                                                                  St. LARoc
                                                                                                      Salt
                                                                                                       Louis,
                                                                                                Springfiel
                                                                                                             San Diego,
                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                             Santa  Barb
                                                                                            Tulsa,    OK  Santa
                                                                                                              W Rosa
                                                                  Brownsvill
                                                               Houma,    LA    Columbus,
                                                                            Albany,
                                                                         Longview-M
                                                                McAllen-Ed
                                                                                            Richland-K
                                                                                        Medford-As
                                                                                       GARoanoke,
                                                                                          Abilene,
                                                                                       Chico-Para
                                                                                           Jacksonvil
                                                                                               Fort
                                                                                      Allentown-      TRochester,
                                                                                             Tuscaloosa
                                                                                                  Cincinnati
                                                                                               Spokane,
                                                                                             Knoxville,VWest
                                                                                                      Laude
                                                                                               Hattiesbur
                                                                                            Cleveland-
                                                                                                Asheville,
                                                                                                     San
                                                                                                            Anchorage,
                                                                                                   Indianapol
                                                                                                          Lafayette,
                                                                                                            Portland-V
                                                                                                       Nashville,
                                                                                              Providence
                                                                                                      Milwaukee-
                                                                                                            Luis  O Barnstable
                                                                                                                Palm
                                                                  Laredo,Redding,
                                                                             TX      C
                                                                                 Waco, Amarillo,
                                                                                          TX     Fort
                                                                                          Vallejo-Fa
                                                                                     Duluth-Sup        Worth Fargo-Moor
                      .4




                                                                  BakersfielScranton--
                                                                             Sioux
                                                                        Johnson      City
                                                                                Shreveport
                                                                                    Ci
                                                                              Pueblo,   CO
                                                                               Lynchburg,  Tyler,
                                                                                        Miami,     TX
                                                                                                  FL
                                                                                          Springfiel
                                                                                            South
                                                                                        Dayton-Spr     Billings,
                                                                          Fresno,
                                                                          El Daytona
                                                                             Paso,
                                                                             Saginaw-Ba  Louisville
                                                                                       Greeley,
                                                                                        Grand
                                                                                     TPensacola,
                                                                                    CA   Memphis,
                                                                                        Be
                                                                                         Eau
                                                                                    Salem,
                                                                                     Peoria-Pek     CBend
                                                                                            Hamilton-M
                                                                                                 Junc
                                                                                               Claire
                                                                                          Greensboro
                                                                                               OR     Charlotte-
                                                                                                        THonolulu,
                                                                                                 Bremerton,
                                                                                                 Eugene-Spr
                                                                    Stockton-L
                                                                     Kankakee,
                                                                    Hagerstown       Augusta-Ai
                                                                                  Mobile,
                                                                              Reading,
                                                                                 Chattanoog
                                                                                    Muncie,
                                                                                   Racine,
                                                                                Glens
                                                                               Terre St.
                                                                               Kenosha,HautP AL
                                                                                             WWI
                                                                                          Cloud,
                                                                                         Fall   Charleston
                                                                                                   Wilmington
                                                                                           Savannah,
                                                                                               La
                                                                                               IN  Crosse,
                                                                                                Orlando,
                                                                                             Norfolk-Vi
                                                                                              Akron,
                                                                                           Kalamazoo-   OHF
                                                                  Rocky
                                                                Johnstown,Moun
                                                                           St. Dover,
                                                                               Joseph
                                                                            Punta
                                                                           Sharon,  Gord
                                                                                      PA DE
                                                                                       Erie,  PA
                                                                                          Waterloo-C
                                                                                   Jackson,    T       Bellingham
                                                                                               Sarasota-B
                                                                                                Wichita,     K
                                                                 Yuba    Riverside-
                                                                            Panama
                                                                        City,
                                                                     Williamspo         Cit
                                                                               Evansville
                                                                                Fort
                                                                               York,
                                                                             Wausau,  Wayne
                                                                                       PA  Detroit,
                                                                                          Salinas,
                                                                                       Toledo,
                                                                                          WI     OH
                                                                                              Fort    M
                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                     Walto
                                                                   Altoona,   PWichita
                                                                                  Fort
                                                                              Gary,
                                                                          Jamestown,  IN Pierc
                                                                                   Tacoma,Fa
                                                                                   Davenport-
                                                                                     Fort      WA
                                                                                            Myers
                                                                                     Greenville
                                                                   Modesto,
                                                                     Kokomo,
                                                              Vineland-M
                                                                   Ocala,
                                                                 Gadsden,
                                                              Visalia-Tu    FLAC
                                                                          Dothan,
                                                                         Joplin,
                                                                        Decatur,
                                                                    Lakeland-W
                                                                       Anniston,
                                                                     Goldsboro,   MO AL
                                                                               Rockford,
                                                                                 IN
                                                                           Canton-Mas        Reno,
                                                                                    Lancaster,
                                                                                   A Bea Green    Bay,
                                                                                         Appleton-O    NV
                                                              Yuma,Fort
                                                             Merced,  AZ
                                                                     CA
                                                                  Lima, Smith
                                                                     Yakima,
                                                                       Sumter,
                                                                          OH    WASC
                                                                               Myrtle
                                                                                  Atlantic-C
                                                                             Biloxi-Gul   Grand Rapi
                                                                     Youngstown
                                                                        Jackson,
                                                                          Flint, MIMI Fayettevil
                                                                              Killeen-Te
                                                                                 Benton
                                                                           Florence,
                                                                           Decatur,         Har
              .3




                                                              Danville,          Fayettevil
                                                              Mansfield,Janesville                       Naples, FL
                                                                         Las
                                                                  Hickory-MoClarksvill
                                                                              Vegas,
                                                                            Sheboygan,
                                                                       Elkhart-Go
                                                                     Jacksonvil
      .2




                                                               .1              .2             .3              .4                                         .5
                                                                    College Completion Among Population 25 or Above, 2000



Source: 2000 Census




                                                                                                          54
                                                         Figure 14: Relationship Between Share of Employment in Low Capital
   Share of Employment in Low Capital Industries, 2000
                                                             Industries and Share of Adults without College Degrees, 2000
                                                  .6
                                                                                                                                            Jacksonvil
                                       .5



                                                                                                                                              Hickory-Mo



                                                                                                                            Fayettevil               Yuma,
                                                                                                                                                      Merced,AZCA
                                                                                                                                                 Gadsden,    A
                                                                                                                                                     Visalia-Tu
                            .4




                                                                                                                 Naples, FL              Florence,
                                                                                                                                       Gary,  IN
                                                                                                                                               Modesto,
                                                                                                                                    Myrtle   Bea
                                                                                                                                               Fort
                                                                                                                                          Joplin,  MO
                                                                                                                                            Anniston,
                                                                                                                                                Ocala,   FLC
                                                                                                                                                      Smith
                                                                                                                                                      Danville,
                                                                                                                                             Lakeland-W
                                                                                                                                                  McAllen-Ed
                                                                                                                               Fort Myers
                                                                                                                             Medford-As
                                                                                                                              Greeley,         Rocky
                                                                                                                                         C Yakima,
                                                                                                                                      Sheboygan,
                                                                                                                                       Punta
                                                                                                                                        Sharon,GordPA
                                                                                                                                             Youngstown
                                                                                                                                             Williamspo
                                                                                                                                             Kankakee,  Moun
                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                           GreensboroEvansville
                                                                                                                                     Wausau,
                                                                                                                                         Redding,
                                                                                                                                Lancaster,        WI
                                                                                                                                                 YubaVineland-M
                                                                                                                                                      C City,
                                                                                                                                  Fort
                                                                                                                           Waterloo-C
                                                                                                                           Grand   Rapi
                                                                                                                          Richland-K
                                                                                                                             Chico-Para Pierc
                                                                                                                                Greenville
                                                                                                                                      Sioux   Stockton-L
                                                                                                                                          Riverside-
                                                                                                                                              City
                                                                                                                                            Elkhart-Go
                                                                                                                                         Fresno, Bakersfiel
                                                                                                                                             Goldsboro,
                                                                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                               St.
                                                                                                                             Eau
                                                                                                                     Eugene-Spr
                                                                                                                    Wilmington  Salem,
                                                                                                                                  Claire
                                                                                                                                Erie,   Jamestown,
                                                                                                                                   Cloud,ORSumter,
                                                                                                                                         Dothan,
                                                                                                                                     Pueblo,
                                                                                                                                      PA
                                                                                                                                 Davenport-
                                                                                                                             Grand    Junc
                                                                                                                                     Reading,
                                                                                                                                     Terre  HautCO
                                                                                                                                                 P ALSC
                                                                                                                                              Hagerstown
                                                                                                                  Billings, Tyler,
                                                                                                                       Sarasota-B
                                                                                                                 Bellingham       Benton
                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                              Toledo,
                                                                                                                            Green           Har
                                                                                                                                           Decatur,
                                                                                                                                      Daytona
                                                                                                                                        Canton-Mas
                                                                                                                                        OH
                                                                                                                                     Bay,         Be
                                                                                                                                         Janesville
                                                                                                                                          Johnson      A
                                                                                                                                                  Johnstown,
                                                                                                                  Charlotte-
                                                                                                               Auburn-Ope   Salinas,
                                                                                                                        Hattiesbur
                                                                                                                            Las    Fort
                                                                                                                            Springfiel
                                                                                                                       Asheville,
                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                 Muncie,
                                                                                                                                  Cruces El
                                                                                                                                  Chattanoog
                                                                                                                               Amarillo,St. Paso,
                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                            Joseph
                                                                                                                                         Decatur,
                                                                                                                                         Wayne
                                                                                                                                       Panama
                                                                                                                                 Jackson,
                                                                                                                                   Waco,
                                                                                                                                     York,          ITCiOH
                                                                                                                                                 Brownsvill
                                                                                                                                                 Lima,
                                                                                                                                             Beaumont-P
                                                                                                                                    Lynchburg,
                                                                                                                                    Glens
                                                                                                                                   Kenosha, Fall
                                                                                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                            TX  W Cit
                   .3




                                                                                                            Santa Boise
                                                                                                            Fargo-Moor
                                                                                                                  San  La
                                                                                                                    Barb     Louisville
                                                                                                                           City
                                                                                                                          Hamilton-M
                                                                                                                        Akron,
                                                                                                                        Luis
                                                                                                                         SouthO  OH  Dover,
                                                                                                                              Pensacola,
                                                                                                                           Crosse,Mobile,
                                                                                                                                Tacoma,
                                                                                                                                 Bend       AL Laredo,
                                                                                                                                              DE
                                                                                                                                         Longview-M
                                                                                                                                        Scranton--
                                                                                                                                     WichitaWA Fa
                                                                                                                                      Saginaw-Ba   Houma, TX
                                                                                                                                                    Mansfield,
                                                                                                                                               Altoona,    P LA
                                                                                                   Barnstable
                                                                                            Bryan-Coll
                                                                                                  Athens,   GA    Greenville
                                                                                                              Santa
                                                                                                                West  Spokane,
                                                                                                                       Palm    Allentown-
                                                                                                                      Charleston
                                                                                                                           Memphis,
                                                                                                                            Roanoke,
                                                                                                                         Pittsburgh
                                                                                                                      Rosa Monroe,      T Flint,
                                                                                                                                  Brazoria,
                                                                                                                                   WRockford,
                                                                                                                            Appleton-O LA
                                                                                                                               Augusta-Ai
                                                                                                                        Tuscaloosa
                                                                                                                          Kalamazoo-
                                                                                                                      Phoenix-Me       Albany,   MI
                                                                                                                                         VJackson,
                                                                                                                                                 GA M
                                                                                       Fort Colli Yolo,      Portland-V
                                                                                                                 Houston,
                                                                                                                 Nashville,
                                                                                                            Flagstaff,
                                                                                                        Provo-Orem     Baton
                                                                                                                    Sioux
                                                                                                                      Little T
                                                                                                                            San   Antoni
                                                                                                                          Knoxville,
                                                                                                                      Orlando,    F
                                                                                                                               Roug
                                                                                                                              Miami,
                                                                                                                            Fall
                                                                                                                       Lubbock,
                                                                                                                         Reno,RocNV    FLLake  Charl
                                                                                                                                          Las Vegas,
                                                                                                                                    TOdessa-Mid
                                                                                                                           Vallejo-Fa     Alexandria
                                                                                                      Atlanta,  G Salt
                                                                                                         CAOlympia,    Fort
                                                                                                                  Tucson,
                                                                                                                      Fort
                                                                                                               Jackson,
                                                                                                                      Los
                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                      St.  Jacksonvil
                                                                                                                        Lake Laude
                                                                                                                             AZ
                                                                                                                          Savannah,
                                                                                                                           MWorth
                                                                                                                              Tampa-St.
                                                                                                                                   Macon,
                                                                                                                               Duluth-Sup
                                                                                                                          Melbourne-
                                                                                                                        FortAngele
                                                                                                                              Walto
                                                                                                                     Cincinnati
                                                                                                                            New
                                                                                                                    Indianapol Peoria-Pek
                                                                                                                                  Orlean
                                                                                                                          Cleveland-
                                                                                                                            Abilene,
                                                                                                                          Louis,             GA
                                                                                                                                    Shreveport
                                                                                                                                       Corpus
                                                                                                                                       T WI      Chr
                                                                                                  Santa
                                                                                                  Denver,  Dallas,
                                                                                                         Cruz
                                                                                                            CO      TX
                                                                                                               Omaha,
                                                                                                             Columbus, Birmingham
                                                                                                                          NE-
                                                                                                                           Harrisburg
                                                                                             State
                                                                                      Bloomingto
                                                                                        Raleigh-Du
                                                                                                            San
                                                                                                    CollHuntsville
                                                                                                         Orange
                                                                                                           Chicago,
                                                                                                     Lincoln,Des
                                                                                                                   CouIMontgomery
                                                                                                                 Diego,
                                                                                                             AlbuquerquProvidence
                                                                                                                 Ventura,
                                                                                                            Columbia,
                                                                                                                CedarJersey
                                                                                                             Richmond-P
                                                                                                              Kansas
                                                                                                               Honolulu,
                                                                                                                             Dayton-Spr
                                                                                                                             CCitRacine,
                                                                                                                           Detroit,
                                                                                                                    Sacramento
                                                                                                                Monmouth-O
                                                                                                                 Milwaukee-
                                                                                                             Lexington,
                                                                                                             Anchorage,Oklahoma
                                                                                                              Lafayette,   Galveston-
                                                                                                                          Tulsa,
                                                                                                                         Cit
                                                                                                                        Rapi
                                                                                                                    Moines
                                                                                                                        Syracuse,
                                                                                                                       Springfiel
                                                                                                              Lansing-Ea
                                                                                                               N                   OK
                                                                                                                          Buffalo-Ni MBiloxi-Gul
                                                                                                                             Newburgh,
                                                                                                                                     Columbus,
                                                                                                                                     C Lafayette,
                                                                                                                                             Kokomo, IN
                                                                                                                                       Utica-Rome
                                                                        Iowa City,            Seattle-Be
                                                                                                Oakland,
                                                                                         Charlottes
                                                                                            Santa   Fe,
                                                                                                  Portland,
                                                                                         Champaign-        CBaltimore,
                                                                                                    Minneapoli         Wichita,   K
                                                                                                                                  Atlantic-C
                                                                                                                         Norfolk-ViFayettevil
                                                                                                                                        Clarksvill
                                                                                        Gainesvill   Bergen-Pas
                                                                                            Austin-San Colorado
                                                                                                        Nassau-Suf
                                                                                                       Newark,  Dutchess
                                                                                                                   STopeka,
                                                                                                                Philadelph
                                                                                                                  NJ
                                                                                                                 Rochester,  C
                                                                                                                             Binghamton
                                                                                                                     Bremerton,KS     Killeen-Te
                                                                Boulder-Lo          Madison,
                                                                                   Columbia,AnnW  New   Haven-
                                                                                                Rochester,
                                                                                                 Arbor,
                                                                                            Tallahasse        Albany-Sch
                                                                                                            New Wilmington
                                                                                                          Hartford,York,
                                                                                    Franci Middlesex-
                                                                               SanWashington Bloomingto
                                                                                                   Boston-Wor
          .2




                                                                                                               Springfiel
                                                                                     San Jose, Trenton, N


                                                                  .5             .6             .7           .8                                    .9
                                                                       Share of Adults without a College Degree, 2000



Source: 2000 Census




                                                                                                       55
                                                            Figure 15:
                            Returns to College and the Percent of Residents with College Degree, 2000
                                  .7                                                     New Haven-

                                              McAllen-Ed
   Log College Wage Premium, 2000



                                                                                                         San Jose,
                                                                                  New Newark,
                                                                                       York, NJ                San Franci
                         .6




                                                                      Birmingham
                                               Bakersfiel
                                                    El Paso, T                Houston, T
                                                                        CincinnatiDallas,
                                                                     Pittsburgh             TX
                                                                                    Hartford,
                                                                  Memphis,
                                                                       Little  T
                                                                              Roc
                                                                               West Palm
                                                                            Charlotte-   Bergen-Pas         Washington
                                                             Greenville
                                                                Tampa-St.
                                                            Mobile,  AL                 Atlanta,
                                                                                     Orange   CouG
                                                                         FL Philadelph
                                                                Miami,Orlando,              Boston-Wor
                                                                  SanAkron,
                                                                       Antoni     F
                                                                                 Richmond-P
                                                                                  San   Diego,    Austin-San
                                                                                                   Middlesex-
                                                                       Los Ventura,
                                                                             Angele
                                                                               OH Chicago,
                                                                                       C
                                                                              Wilmington      IOakland, C
                .5




                                                     Fresno, CA JacksonvilSacramento
                                                                        Charleston
                                                                   Greensboro
                                                                    Cleveland-         Colorado S
                                                                                  Baltimore,
                                                               Allentown-
                                                                  Harrisburg
                                                                      Sarasota-B
                                                                      Fort
                                                                 Dayton-Spr
                                                                  Detroit,  M    Albuquerqu
                                                                             Laude
                                                                    Knoxville,                        Raleigh-Du
                                                                             Rochester,
                                                                              Monmouth-O
                                                                        Phoenix-Me
                                                                               Omaha,
                                                Stockton-L              St.
                                                                    Norfolk-Vi
                                                                  New   Fort
                                                                 Louisville
                                                                   Tulsa,   OK  Kansas NE-
                                                                            Louis,
                                                                          Indianapol
                                                                        OrleanWorth      Cit Denver, CO
                                                                  Vallejo-Fa
                                                                      Oklahoma Albany-Sch
                                                                                  Columbia,
                                                                                   C
                                                                             Nashville,
                                                                             Milwaukee-
                                                                        Jersey   Cit Nassau-Suf
                                                                                 Columbus,
                                                                                 Portland-VMinneapoli
                                                                   Buffalo-Ni
                                                                            Tucson, AZ
                                                                      Providence
                                                                     Syracuse,                  Seattle-Be
       .4




                                                      Scranton--
                                                 Youngstown
                                                    Las    Fort Wayne Salt Lake
                                                          Vegas,
                                                                      Wichita,
                                                                      Baton Roug K                Ann Arbor,
                                                                   Grand Rapi  Honolulu,
                                                                Toledo, OH
                                                   Riverside-         Springfiel
                                                             Tacoma, WA
                  .3




                                                       Gary, IN

                                       .1              .2            .3             .4            .5
                                            College Completion Among Population 25 or above, 2000



Source: Data is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 2000, at
usa.ipums.org.




                                                                              56
                                              Figure 16: Gini Coefficient and Returns to College, 2000
                                                                                                                      New Haven-
                     .5                                                                            New York,
   Gini Coeff. for Male Workers, 2000


                                                                            Los Angele
                                                                               Miami, FL            San Franci
                                                                               Orange Cou
                                                                                    West Palm
                         .45




                                                                         Fresno, CA Bergen-Pas Newark, NJ             McAllen-Ed
                                                                                            Dallas, TX T
                                                                                              Houston,
                                                                       Sarasota-B
                                                                                Austin-San
                                                                               San Diego,
                                                                             Ventura,
                                                                       Fort Oakland,
                                                                            Laude     C
                                                                                      C                   San Jose,
                                                                                     Memphis,    Bakersfiel
                                                                                            Hartford,
                                                                                                  Birmingham
                                                            Nassau-Suf          Orlando,
                                                                              Chicago,  I FG T
                                                                                    Tampa-St.
                                                                                   Atlanta,
                                                              JerseyPhoenix-Me
                                                                       Cit     San  Antoni
                                                                                 Boston-Wor
                                                         Tucson,Nashville,
                                                                  AZ Albuquerqu
                                                                   New
                                                                   Fort
                                                                  Denver,Orlean
                                                                         Worth
                                                                         Charleston
                                                                  Stockton-LCO Philadelph
                                                                    Monmouth-O
                                                     Seattle-BeColumbia,
                                                                      Raleigh-Du            RocEl Paso, T
                                                                                     Charlotte-
                                                                            Jacksonvil
                                                                                     LittleCincinnati
                                                                  Tulsa,  OK   Middlesex-
                                                                           Sacramento
                                                                                    Washington
                                                                              Richmond-P
                                                   Las Vegas,
                                                           Portland-V
                                                               OklahomaKnoxville,
                                                                            C
           .4




                                                                                         Pittsburgh
                                                                       Greensboro
                                                                   Louisville
                                                                   Omaha,     NE- Mobile,    AL
                                               Ann Arbor, Columbus,
                                       Riverside-                            Akron,
                                                                        Cleveland-
                                                                        Baltimore,   OH
                                               Baton Roug Minneapoli
                                                                  Kansas
                                                                     St.    Cit M Greenville
                                                                         Louis,
                                                                       Detroit,
                                                                            Wilmington
                                                          Buffalo-Ni
                                                         Lake Milwaukee-
                                                    SaltSyracuse,        Colorado
                                                                    Indianapol     S
                                                                Vallejo-Fa
                                                                Albany-Sch
                                              Honolulu,               Rochester,
                                          Toledo, OH Providence Allentown-
                                            Grand Rapi               Norfolk-Vi
                                                                        Harrisburg
                                                                      Dayton-Spr
                                       Springfiel   Scranton--
                                  Tacoma,
                                 Gary, IN WA Wichita,
                                                   Fort Wayne
                                                          K
                     .35




                                                   Youngstown

                                        .3               .4               .5           .6                             .7
                                                                Log College Wage Premium, 2000



Source: Data is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 2000, at
usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                     57
                            Figure 17: Gini Coefficient and the Gini Coeff. Holding Skills Constant, 2000
                                                                                                                      New Haven-
                  .5
                                                                                                   New York,
   Gini Coeff. for Male Workers, 2000


                                                                                   Los Angele
                                                                                       Miami, FL San Franci
                                                                                        Orange Cou
                                                                                            West Palm
                                                                                                  McAllen-Ed
                         .45




                                                                                                       Newark, NJ
                                                                                                 Bergen-Pas
                                                                           Fresno, CA Dallas,
                                                                                            Houston,TX T
                                                                                Sarasota-B
                                                                                     Austin-San
                                                                              Fort Oakland,
                                                                                   Laude     CSan Jose,
                                                                                       San Diego,
                                                                                    Ventura,  C
                                                                        Bakersfiel                       THartford,
                                                                                   Tampa-St.
                                                                                      Atlanta,
                                                                                  Orlando,
                                                                                    Nassau-Suf
                                                                                    Chicago,  IBirmingham
                                                                                            FMemphis,
                                                                                                 G
                                                                           Phoenix-Me
                                                 Jersey Cit           Tucson,   AZ San Antoni
                                                                              Nashville,
                                                                          Albuquerqu
                                                                                              Boston-Wor
                                                                                  El
                                                                               Fort
                                                                                 CO  Paso,
                                                                                     Orlean
                                                                                     Worth  TLittle Roc
                                                                                   Charlotte-
                                                                                Jacksonvil
                                                                       Denver,New    Charleston
                                                                                         Philadelph
                                                                 Stockton-L
                                                                  Seattle-Be    Monmouth-O        Cincinnati
                                                        Las Vegas,         Tulsa,
                                                                     Sacramento   OKRaleigh-Du
                                                                            Columbia,Middlesex-
                                                                                        Washington
                                                                                        Richmond-P
                                                                      Portland-V
                                                                   Oklahoma    C       Knoxville,
           .4




                                                                                                   Pittsburgh
                                                                         LouisvilleGreensboro
                                                                                Mobile,  AL
                                                  Riverside-               AnnOmaha,
                                                                                Arbor,
                                                                          Columbus,
                                                                                        NE-
                                                                                     Akron,
                                                                                  Cleveland-
                                                                               Baltimore,    OH
                                                                     Kansas
                                                                  Baton  Roug  Minneapoli
                                                                              Cit
                                                                                St. Louis,
                                                                                  Greenville
                                                                           Detroit, M
                                                            Salt Lake        Wilmington
                                                                           Buffalo-Ni
                                                                     Colorado  S
                                                                            Milwaukee-
                                                                            Indianapol
                                                                     Syracuse,
                                                         Vallejo-Fa      Albany-Sch
                                                                  Honolulu,    Rochester,
                                                             Providence
                                                                  Toledo, OH Allentown-
                                                                      Norfolk-Vi
                                                     Grand Rapi Scranton-- Harrisburg
                                                                        Dayton-Spr
                                                          Springfiel
                                              Tacoma,  WA
                                                 Gary, IN  Fort Wayne
                                                         Wichita, K
                  .35




                                                                   Youngstown

                                        .15                        .2                .25                 .3                .35
                                                                   Gini Coeff. Holding Skill Constant, 2000



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                             58
                                    Figure 18: Returns to Schooling and Share of Workers in Finance, 2000
                                                                                                                   New Haven-
                  .7                      McAllen-Ed
   Log College Wage Premium, 2000



                                                                                              San Jose,
                                                                                                          Newark, NJ San Franci
                                                                                                   New York,
                          .6



                                                                                              Birmingham
                                                 Bakersfiel    El Paso, T                  Houston, T
                                                                                         Cincinnati Dallas,
                                                                                  Pittsburgh                   TX
                                                                                                         Hartford,
                                                                         Little RocMemphis,WestT Charlotte-     Washington
                                                                                                     Palm Bergen-Pas
                                                      Mobile, ALGreenville         Tampa-St.          Atlanta,
                                                                                                        Orange GCou
                                                                                   Miami,F FLPhiladelph    Boston-Wor
                                                                               Orlando,
                                                                        San Antoni
                                                                               San  Diego,  Austin-San     Richmond-P
                                                                                                              Middlesex-
                                                                                  Los
                                                                                    OHAngele
                                                                          Akron,Ventura,          Chicago,
                                                                                                   Oakland,I C
                                                                                             C Sacramento                  Wilmington
                .5




                                                          Fresno,Charleston
                                                                   CA                       Jacksonvil
                                                                    Colorado
                                                              Allentown-
                                                                      Harrisburg
                                                                      Sarasota-B S  Cleveland-
                                                                                   Greensboro
                                                                               Albuquerqu    Baltimore,
                                                                     Knoxville,
                                                                          Detroit,
                                                                    Dayton-Spr
                                                                      Rochester,    M  Fort  Laude
                                                                                    Raleigh-Du   Monmouth-O
                                                               Norfolk-Vi    NewFort    St.  Phoenix-Me
                                                                                            Louis,
                                                                                        Indianapol
                                                                                   Orlean
                                                                                       Worth       Omaha,   NE-
                                                          Stockton-L    Louisville                Kansas   Denver,
                                                                                                          Cit      CO
                                                                       Vallejo-Fa
                                                                            Oklahoma     CTulsa,  OK
                                                                                              Albany-Sch
                                                                                           Columbia,
                                                                                        Nashville,
                                                                                  Milwaukee-         Jersey CitNassau-Suf
                                                                                Portland-V Columbus,     Minneapoli
                                                               Tucson,   AZBuffalo-Ni
                                                                     Providence
                                                                 Syracuse,                Seattle-Be
      .4




                                                        Scranton--
                                                   Youngstown          Fort Wayne
                                                              Las Vegas,                         Salt Lake
                                                                   Wichita, K
                                                                                AnnBaton
                                                                                     Arbor, Roug
                                                                                       Honolulu,
                                                                     Grand Rapi
                                                       Toledo, OH
                                                             Springfiel
                                                            Riverside-
                                                                   Tacoma, WA
                  .3




                                                             Gary, IN

                                    .01                  .02              .03               .04                                     .05
                                                          Share of Employment in Finance, 2000



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                  59
                             Figure 19: Returns to Schooling and Share of Workers in Computers, 2000
                                                             New Haven-
                 .7
                                    McAllen-Ed
   Log College Wage Premium, 2000


                                                                                                                           San Jose,

                                                               New York,Newark, NJ             San Franci
                          .6



                                                                 Birmingham
                                              Bakersfiel
                                          El Paso,  T           Houston, T
                                                                         Hartford,
                                                                Cincinnati
                                                            Pittsburgh                Dallas, TX
                                                          Memphis,
                                                        Little Roc    T   Bergen-Pas                         Washington
                                                     ALWestTampa-St.
                                            Mobile,Greenville   Palm
                                                                   Charlotte-
                                                                    Orange     Atlanta,
                                                                             Cou        G
                                                Miami, FLOrlando,    Philadelph     Boston-Wor
                                                        San Angele
                                                              Antoni
                                                                  San F
                                                                     Richmond-P
                                                                        Diego, I                Austin-San    Middlesex-
                                                        Los       OH Chicago,
                                                         Akron,Jacksonvil
                                                                 Ventura,  C
                                                                           Wilmington     Oakland, C
                .5




                                        Fresno,  CA Greensboro
                                             Charleston                  Sacramento
                                              Sarasota-B  Cleveland-
                                                        Allentown-  Harrisburg
                                                             Albuquerqu       Baltimore,   Colorado S
                                                         Fort  Laude
                                                      Knoxville,
                                                               Detroit,
                                                             Dayton-Spr MRochester,
                                                                          Monmouth-O               Raleigh-Du
                                               New Orlean           Phoenix-Me
                                                           Norfolk-ViSt.
                                                             Indianapol  Louis,
                                                                      Fort WorthOmaha,   NE- CO
                                              Stockton-L Louisville
                                                               Tulsa,  Kansas
                                                                        OK      Cit Denver,
                                                     Vallejo-Fa
                                                       Oklahoma
                                                          Nashville,Albany-Sch
                                                             Columbia,
                                                                     C
                                                                Milwaukee-
                                                         Nassau-Suf         Jersey Cit
                                                                             Columbus,
                                                                      Portland-V Minneapoli
                                                   Buffalo-Ni
                                                            Tucson, AZ
                                                        Providence
                                                      Syracuse,                             Seattle-Be
      .4




                                               Scranton--
                                        Youngstown
                                             Las Fort Wayne Salt Lake
                                                  Vegas,
                                                   Wichita,
                                               BatonHonolulu,
                                                       Roug   K
                                                                              Ann Arbor,
                                                   Grand Rapi
                                               Toledo, OH
                                                        Springfiel
                                                Riverside-
                                                  Tacoma, WA
                 .3




                                               Gary, IN

                                    0                      .02             .04             .06                                 .08
                                                           Share of Employment in Computers, 2000


Source: Data is calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for 2000, at
usa.ipums.org.




                                                                                      60
                                                        Figure 20: Murder Rate and the Gini Coefficient, 2000

                                             15
   Murder Rate per 100,000 inhabitants, 2000

                                                                                                  Flint, MI
                                                                                                           Mobile, AL
                                                                         Kokomo, IN                Macon,Baton
                                                                                                            GA Roug
                                                                                  Goldsboro,
                                                                                                                 Shreveport
                                                                                                                  Jackson, M
                                                                                                          Laredo, TX       Savannah,
                             10




                                                                                  Kansas Cit Danville,
                                                                                               Yakima,
                                                                                           Rocky    Moun
                                                                                             Albuquerqu   WA
                                                                                                          Columbus, Greenville
                                                                                                      Bakersfiel
                                                                                          Merced,    CAMontgomery
                                                                                             Little Roc Fresno, CA
                                                                                              Huntsville
                                                                                         Pueblo,    CO
                                                                                            Jacksonvil
                                                                  Racine, WI                   Tulsa, OK AZ
                                                                                                    Tucson,
                                                                                       Sumter,    SCBeaumont-P
                                                                                           St. Louis,
                                                                                                  Dothan,   ALJackson, T Alexandria
                                                                                                 Yuba
                                                                                           Columbia,     City,
                                                                           Fort  Wayne  Roanoke,
                                                                                        Yuma,     AZ
                                                                                           Columbus,  V Charleston
                                                                                                     Gadsden,     A
                                                                          Fayettevil                            Lafayette,
                                                                                          Modesto, Chattanoog
                                                                                                       CLakeWaco,
                                                                                                               CharlTX
                                                                                                         Knoxville,
                                                                          Reading, PRochester,     Columbia,
                                                                                                  San    Tyler,
                                                                                                        Antoni
                                                                                                 Buffalo-Ni      TXTallahasse
                                                                Anchorage,            Altoona,
                                                                                           Akron,
                                                                                       Ocala,     Oklahoma
                                                                                                  P
                                                                                                FLOH Fa        C          McAllen-Ed
                                                                                          Vineland-M
                                                                                               Wichita                 Lubbock, T
               5




                                                                                             Toledo,
                                                                       Lima, OH Joplin,Amarillo,        OH
                                                                                                MO PittsburghAlbany,    Auburn-Ope
                                                                                                                           GA
                                                                           Topeka, KS Lynchburg,   Tampa-St.
                                                                                               Santa
                                                                                                Fort  Fe,
                                                                                                     Abilene,
                                                                                                    Wilmington
                                                                                                   LasSmith
                                                                                                        Cruces  T        Monroe, LA
                                                                            Jackson, M Spokane,        W
                                                                                                   Asheville,
                                                                   Green Bay, Lansing-Ea
                                                                                   Salinas,
                                                                                    Williamspo
                                                                                     Billings,
                                                                                   Utica-Rome  CCharlottes
                                                                                             Syracuse,
                                                                                             Binghamton
                                                                        Elkhart-Go
                                                                         Sioux  Fall
                                                                              Colorado    SGreeley,
                                                                                             Corpus C
                                                                                     Albany-Sch        Chr                          Gainesvill
                                                                 Dover,   DE
                                                                   St. Cloud,
                                                                          Salem,  Erie,  PA
                                                                                  OR Bellingham
                                                                                     Ann    Arbor,
                                                                                           Eugene-Spr
                                                                                                Springfiel El Paso, T
                                                                                         Lafayette,  Redding,
                                                                                                     Santa Cruz  C
                                                                           Fort Colli
                                                                                Honolulu,
                                                                             Mansfield,     Muncie, IN                 Bloomingto
                                                                      Provo-Orem Lincoln,
                                                                 Lancaster,                 PuntaN Gord
                                                                                           Decatur,   A
                                                                       Olympia, WLa Crosse,              State   CollIowa City,
                                                                    EauCedar     Waterloo-C
                                                                         ClaireRapi
                                                                                 Madison,     W
                                                            Sheboygan,Wausau,    WI Grand Junc
                                                                              Rochester,
                          0




                                                  .35              .4                   .45                           .5                         .55
                                                                               Gini Coefficient, 2000



Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org. Murder rates are from the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports.




                                                                                            61
                                                 Figure 21: Happiness and the Gini Coefficient, 2000

                     1
   Share Self-reporting as Happy, 2000

                                              Grand Rapi
                              .95




                                                      Portland-V Syracuse,
                                                             Richmond-P   Austin-San
                                                Minneapoli
                                                        Gary,Milwaukee-
                                                               IN                  Knoxville,
                                                                                       Houston, T
                    .9




                                                Tacoma,  WA      Atlanta, Nashville,
                                                                            G
                                                  Allentown-
                                                   Norfolk-Vi Seattle-Be              Fresno, CA
                                                        Kansas  Charlotte-
                                                                 Cit
                                                                Phoenix-Me   Tampa-St.
                                                                               Dallas,
                                                                 Akron,
                                                                     LittleOH
                                                            Indianapol      San
                                                                            Roc  Diego,TX          West Palm
                                                Fort WayneDayton-Spr
                                                                 St. Louis,
                                                                Baltimore,
                                                                 Columbia,           Charleston
                                                                                                 New Orlean
                                                                               Cincinnati     San Franci
                                                        Washington            Chicago,Fort
                                                                                       I Laude
                                                                    Detroit,  M
                                                                           Cleveland-
       .85




                                                                           Buffalo-Ni                 Los Angele
                                                               Riverside-         Philadelph
                                                                 Columbus,
                                                               Orlando,    F     Pittsburgh
                                                                                                                   New York,
                                                                              Tucson, AZ


                                                                                         Jackson, M
                     .8




                                         .4                        .45                              .5                  .55
                                                                         Gini Coefficient 2000


Source: Gini coefficients are calculated using the 5% Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) for
2000, at usa.ipums.org. Average level of happiness is calculated using data from the General Social Survey.




                                                                                    62
