NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSIDE THE BLACK OF BOX OF ABILITY PEER EFFECTS:
EVIDENCE FROM VARIATION IN THE PROPORTION OF LOW ACHIEVERS IN THE CLASSROOM
Victor Lavy
M. Daniele Paserman
Analia Schlosser
Working Paper 14415
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14415

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We thank the Israeli Ministry of Education for assisting with the data. We thank Caroline Hoxby, Damon
Clark, Stephen Ross, and seminar participants at Hebrew University, University of Connecticut, LSE,
PSE, and the CEPR, NBER Education Program and SOLE conferences for many helpful comments.
Roy Mill, Issi Romem, Yannay Spitzer, and Rachel Berner provided outstanding research assistance.
We thank the Falk Institute for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Victor Lavy, M. Daniele Paserman, and Analia Schlosser. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inside the Black of Box of Ability Peer Effects: Evidence from Variation in the Proportion
of Low Achievers in the Classroom
Victor Lavy, M. Daniele Paserman, and Analia Schlosser
NBER Working Paper No. 14415
October 2008, Revised August 2009
JEL No. I2,I21,J24
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we estimate the extent of ability peer effects in the classroom and explore the underlying
mechanisms through which these peer effects operate. We identify as low ability students those who
are enrolled at least one year behind their birth cohort (“repeaters”). We show that there are marked
differences between the academic performance and behavior of repeaters and regular students. The
status of repeaters is mostly determined by first grade; therefore, it is unlikely to have been affected
by their classroom peers, and our estimates will not suffer from the reflection problem. Using within
school variation in the proportion of these low ability students across cohorts of middle and high school
students in Israel, we find that the proportion of low achieving peers has a negative effect on the performance
of regular students, especially those located at the lower end of the ability distribution. An exploration
of the underlying mechanisms of these peer effects shows that, relative to regular students, repeaters
report that teachers are better in the individual treatment of students and in the instilment of capacity
for individual study. However, a higher proportion of these low achieving students results in a deterioration
of teachers’ pedagogical practices, has detrimental effects on the quality of inter-student relationships
and the relationships between teachers and students, and increases the level of violence and classroom
disruptions.

Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus
91905 Israel
and Royal Holloway
University of London
and NBER
msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and Hebrew University
and also NBER
paserman@bu.edu

Analia Schlosser
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 69978
ISRAEL
analias@post.tau.ac.il

1. Introduction
This paper studies peer effects in educational outcomes in middle schools and high schools. It
investigates the existence and magnitude of peer effects, and explores some of the potential mechanisms
that may explain their emergence. Specifically, we investigate whether having unusually low-achieving
classmates has any effect on the educational outcomes of regular pupils. Using students’ exact date of
birth and the rules governing school enrollment in first grade, we identify as potentially low ability
students those who were born substantially before the relevant threshold date for their cohort
(“repeaters”).1 We show that repeaters have substantially lower academic achievements relative to both
regular students and relative to any other group of students identified based on their socio-economic
background.
The paper makes two contributions to the literature on peer effects. The first part of the paper
explores how classroom ability composition, as measured by the proportion of repeaters in the grade,
affects scholastic achievements of high school students, as measured by performance in the matriculation
exams completed by the end of 12th grade .The second part of the paper identifies mechanisms by which
the ability peer composition affects academic outcomes. Using a unique national survey administered to
middle school students, we are able to identify whether peer composition affects teachers’ pedagogical
methods in the classroom, the level of disruption and violence, and the quality of inter-student and
student-teacher interactions. With the exception of Lavy and Schlosser (2007) who apply a similar
research design to study the extent and mechanisms of gender peer effects in the classroom, we are not
aware of other studies that have attempted to explore empirically the “black box” of peer effects.
Investigating inside the black box is important in its own right, as there is abundant evidence that parents
place a high value on a good classroom environment.
It is well known that the estimation of peer effects entails a number of difficult econometric
problems. First, we need to solve the obvious selection problem stemming from the fact that the
proportion of a student’s peers who are low ability is not determined randomly; rather, repeater status is
correlated with low socioeconomic background and therefore repeaters are typically clustered in lowachieving schools.2 In order to overcome this selection problem, we exploit idiosyncratic variations in the
proportion of repeating students across adjacent cohorts within the same schools.

1

The term “repeater” is used somewhat loosely: a large majority of repeaters never really repeated a grade, but
rather entered first grade one year after their normative entry date. In a sense, they repeated the last year of
kindergarten.
2
We later show that in Israel repeater status is strongly negatively correlated with socioeconomic status. This is in
contrast to the U.S., for example, where “redshirting” (i.e., holding back children one more year before they enter
kindergarten), is mostly a high socioeconomic status phenomenon (Deming and Dynarski, 2008; Dobkin and
Ferreira, 2009; Elder and Lubotsky, 2009).

1

By using multiple cohorts and conditioning on school fixed-effects and school specific time
trends we are able to control for unobserved factors that might confound the repeater peer effect in
schools. We show that within schools, there is considerable cohort-to-cohort variation in the proportion of
repeaters, and demonstrate that this within school variation is not related to variation in student
background characteristics. We are also able to enhance the credibility of this identification strategy by
contrasting the estimated treatment effects to those based on two alternative “placebo” treatments, which
measure the key treatment variable not in the cohort of interest, but in adjacent cohorts within the same
school.
A second difficulty in the estimation of peer effects involves the measurement of peer ability. The
direct approach that regresses own achievement on contemporaneous or lagged achievement of peers is
problematic, since these variables are determined simultaneously with own achievement (Manski, 1993).
Therefore, the empirical evidence on ability peer effects in schools comes primarily from studies that
examine the effect of peers’ background characteristics, such as parental schooling, race, and ethnicity on
student outcomes. A wide variety of approaches are used in these studies to identify peer effects. The
papers closest in spirit to ours are the ones by Hoxby (2000) for the US, and Ammermueller and Pischke
(2009) for several European countries. Similarly to us, these papers rely on differences in the composition
of cohorts within a school, which come about by chance. 3 A limitation of these studies is that they do not
measure directly the ability of students’ peers but rely on socio-economic background characteristics as
proxies for ability. This point is highlighted by Hoxby and Weingarth (2005) who find that, when
properly accounting for the effects of peers’ achievement, the race, ethnicity, parental income and
education of one’s peers have little or no effects on students’ academic outcomes. On the other hand, the
alternative approach that measures peer quality directly using lagged academic achievements has its own
shortcomings: since a student’s peer group is usually constant during his or her time in school if not for
mobility-related reasons, lagged peer achievement is unlikely to be exogenous to own current
achievement and therefore it may still suffer from the reflection problem.
An advantage of our study is in the use of a closer proxy of peers’ ability, which we believe
captures some of the most important dimensions of academic ability, and is unlikely to have been affected
by own ability. As we argue below, the status of being a repeater is determined primarily during
elementary school, usually as early as kindergarten and first grade, and it is highly correlated with
academic achievements, especially in subjects that demand high levels of abstract reasoning, such as
mathematics and science.

A number of recent studies have also used explicit random or quasi-random assignment to classes or schools, or
other natural experiments, for example, Sacerdote (2001), Zimmerman (2003), Angrist and Lang (2004),
Arcidiacono and Nicholson (2005), Hanushek et al. (2003) and Gould, Lavy and Paserman (forthcoming).

3

2

Our results show that the proportion of repeaters in class has a negative and significant effect on
the academic achievements of regular middle and high school students. We also find that the negative
effect of repeaters is larger on students with low socio-economic background. When we replace the actual
treatment variable with two alternative “placebo” treatments – the proportion of repeaters in either the
previous or the subsequent cohorts – we find no effect at all. The lack of any discerned effects when using
the placebo treatments strongly suggests that our estimates are not spuriously picking up any short term
effects of unobserved confounders at the school level.
The exploration of the underlying mechanisms of these peer effects shows that, relative to regular
students, repeaters report that teachers are better in the individual treatment of students and in the
instilment of capacity for individual study. However, a higher proportion of such students results in a
deterioration of teachers’ pedagogical practices and the relationships between teachers and students, and
increases the level of violence and classroom disruptions. These findings suggest that one of the main
channels through which low-achieving students negatively affect their peers is by diverting teacher
attention from regular to struggling students.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the relevant recent
literature on peer effects. The following section describes the data and the construction of the analysis
samples, and explains the definition of the treatment variable and identification strategy. Section 4
discusses the validity of the underlying assumptions required for identification, while section 5 presents
the main OLS and school fixed effect estimates of ability peer effects on middle and high school students’
achievements. Section 6 presents evidence on the possible mechanisms driving the negative peer effects
of low ability students on the achievement of their peers. Section 7 concludes.

2. Related Literature on Peer-Effects
Social scientists have long recognized that peer effects may be among the most important
determinants of student outcomes. Most models of the educational production function used to analyze
the effects of different school policies (school choice, subsidies, tracking, etc.) assume some form of peer
effects, which can take on a linear-in-means form (Epple and Romano, 1997), or be highly nonlinear
(Lazear, 2001). However, it has been often difficult to convincingly isolate peer effects in empirical
studies, because students from similar backgrounds typically tend to associate together, so that one’s peer
group is almost always self-selected.
Recent years have seen a flurry of research that has attempted to use natural and quasiexperimental settings to identify peer effects in the classroom. Hoxby (2000), Ammermueller and Pischke
(2009), Burke and Sass (2006), Lavy and Schlosser (2007) and Bifulco et al., (2009) measure peer quality
by fixed student characteristics and identify the effects of peers by exploiting within-school variation in

3

these characteristics across cohorts. A variation in this approach is present in Aizer (2008) and Carrell and
Hoekstra (2008), who study specifically the effects of students with a high potential of being disruptive
(students with ADD or exposed to domestic violence) on their classmates’ outcomes. Lefgren (2004) and
Gibbons and Telhaj (2008) use lagged outcome measures as the key peer characteristic. Cooley (2008)
exploits the introduction of student accountability policies in North Carolina, which induced low
achieving students to increase studying efforts to estimate behavioral spillovers effects of peers. Boozer
and Cacciola (2001) and Duflo et al., (2008) exploit variation in peer characteristics generated by actual
randomization. Other closely related papers in the educational setting are those by Sacerdote (2001) and
Zimmerman (2003), who study residential peer effects by exploiting the random assignment of college
roommates; the literature on the effects of desegregation on the educational outcomes of white students
(Angrist and Lang, 2004; Guryan, 2004); and the literature on the effects of immigrants on natives’
educational outcomes (Betts, 1998; Hoxby, 1998a; Borjas, 2004; Gould, Lavy and Paserman,
forthcoming). A non-exhaustive summary of the recent literature is given in Gibbons and Telhaj (2008).
They conclude that peer effects, even when statistically significant, are rather small: most studies find that
a one standard deviation increase in peer quality raises outcomes by less than 10 percent of a standard
deviation.
Finally, our paper is also related to the recent literature on the effects of age at school entry on
educational and labor market outcomes. Most studies find that being relatively older and more mature
when entering the compulsory school system has positive effects on early academic performance (Datar,
2006; Bedard and Dhuey, 2006; Elder and Lubotsky, 2009) although the evidence on long-term outcomes
is more mixed.4 Almost none of these studies, however, investigate the effects of late school entrants on
their peers, which is the focus of the current paper.5 Moreover, while these studies compare the outcomes
of students born just within the relevant school entry threshold dates for their cohort, our focus is on the
effects of peers born several months outside the relevant threshold dates. We will show that these students
are unquestionably weaker academically relative to their peers.

3. Data and Empirical Strategy
In this section, we first briefly describe the high school data that we use to estimate the effect of
the proportion of low-ability students on high school outcomes. We then describe the construction of our
4

Fredrikkson and Öckert (2005), Bedard and Dhuey (2006), and Puhani and Weber (2007) find that a higher age at
school entry is beneficial for long-term outcomes; Cascio and Whitmore Schanzenbach (2007) find no effects;
Black, Devereux, and Salvanes (2008), Dynarski and Deming (2008) and Dobkin and Ferreira (2009) find small
negative effects of later school entry, operating mostly through higher dropout rates because of compulsory
schooling laws. This was the mechanism originally argued for by Angrist and Krueger (1992).
5
The only exception is Elder and Lubotsky (2009), who find that having relatively more advanced peers increases
the probability of grade repetition and diagnoses of learning disabilities.

4

key treatment variable and explain why we believe it is a good measure of the proportion of low-ability
students. Finally, we present the econometric specification and discuss the identification strategy.
A. The High School Data
We use administrative records collected by the Israel Ministry of Education for 7 consecutive
cohorts (from 1994 to 2000) of 10th grade students. The data are based on annual reports submitted by
school authorities to the Ministry of Education at the beginning of the school year. We use 10th grade to
define the base population because it is the first year of high school and the last year of compulsory
schooling. We limit the analysis to all Jewish state-run schools. The sample is restricted to students in
non-special education schools that have a matriculation track.6 As a further restriction, we drop all
schools that experienced a change in enrollment of 80 percent or more between two consecutive years of
the analyzed period to avoid changes in the proportion of school repeaters that might be originated by
structural changes of the school. Finally, we only keep schools that appear in all 7 years, and omit schools
with extremely small reported grade size. Each student record contains an individual identifier, a school
and class identifier, and detailed demographic information on the student: date of birth, gender, parental
education, number of siblings, year of immigration (where relevant), and ethnicity.
Israeli high school students study during upper secondary schooling towards the matriculation
certificate (Bagrut in Hebrew).7 The Bagrut is completed by passing a series of national exams in core
and elective subjects taken by the students between 10th and 12th grade. Students choose to be tested at
various levels of proficiency, with each test awarding from one to five credit units per subject, depending
on difficulty. Some subjects are mandatory, and for many the most basic level is three credit units.
Advanced level subjects are those subjects taken at a level of four or five credit units. A minimum of 20
credit units is required to qualify for a matriculation certificate. We link the students’ file with
administrative records that include the results (test scores) of these matriculation exams.
We focus on the following matriculation outcomes that are available for all the years: the average
score in the matriculation exams, matriculation status (equals 1 if the student was awarded the
matriculation diploma, and 0 otherwise), the number of credit units, the number of advanced level
subjects in math and science, and a matriculation status that meets university entrance requirements (at
least 4 credits in English and another subject at a level of 4 or 5 credits, in addition to being awarded with
This excludes about 15 percent of Jewish students who attend ultra-orthodox schools, yeshivot, and other
independent schools and schools that offer low tech vocational programs, some of which allow also students to work
part time.
7
The matriculation certificate is a prerequisite for university admission and receiving it is one of the most
economically important educational milestones. Similar high school matriculation exams are found in many
countries and in some states in the United States. Examples include the French Baccalaureate, the German
Certificate of Maturity, the Italian Diploma di Maturità, and the New York State Regents examinations.
6

5

the diploma).8 We also constructed indicator variables for student enrollment in advanced courses in
math, physics, computer science, biology, and chemistry.
B. Empirical Approach and Definition of the Treatment Variable
The effect of ability composition is usually confounded by effects of unobserved correlated
factors that affect students’ outcomes. This correlation could result if there is selection and sorting of
students across schools based on ability or if there is a correlation between average students’ ability in a
school and other characteristics of the school that affect students’ outcomes. A feasible approach that
avoids both sources of confounding factors in the estimation of peer effects is to rely on within school
variations in the ability distribution of students across adjacent cohorts provided that these variations are
purely idiosyncratic and uncorrelated with students’ potential outcomes. Based on this approach we
examine whether cohort-to-cohort changes in students’ outcomes within the same grade and school are
systematically associated with cohort-to-cohort changes in the proportion of low ability students.
The key requirement for our empirical approach is the identification of a group of low-ability
students based on a predetermined proxy for student ability that has not been affected by the ability of
his/her peers and therefore, does not suffer from the reflection problem. For this purpose, we define as
low ability students, those who were born at least three months before the relevant cutoff date for their
cohort. These students have essentially been held back or “repeated” a grade – mostly because they were
held back in kindergarten or repeated first grade – and therefore we dub them “repeaters.” We later show
that repeaters have indeed substantially lower academic outcomes relative to “regular” students, and that
repeater status is usually determined very early in a student’s school career.
In Israel, children roughly enter first grade in September of the calendar year in which they turn
six years old. We say “roughly” because the relevant threshold date is based on the Hebrew calendar. For
example, the first grade class of September 2007 is composed of children born between the 1st of Tevet
5761 (December 27th, 2000) and the 30th of Kislev 5762 (December 15th, 2001).9 Virtually all students
enroll in 1st grade after attending a public kindergarten at age 5; kindergarten is free, compulsory and
universally provided by the local authorities and regulated by the Ministry of Education.10 Therefore, the
transition to 1st grade is mostly supervised by the Ministry of Education and the Municipality. However,
parents have some discretion in deciding when to send their children to first grade. Parents of a gifted
8

Roughly, 10 percent of the students in the sample did not take any of the matriculation exams. These students get
zero values in the average score. Results are not sensitive to dropping these students from the sample. None of the
other four matriculation outcomes that we use require such imputation since the zero values that these students get
for these outcomes, for example, number of credit units, is a real and not an imputed measure of their achievements.
9
For conversion between Hebrew dates and Gregorian dates, see http://www.hebcal.com.
10
The enrollment rate of Jewish children aged 5 at public kindergartens is 98 percent (Central Bureau of Statistics,
2008).

6

child who can already read and write may decide to have her skip the last class of kindergarten, or make
her enter school directly in second grade. More commonly, some parents who think that their child is not
cognitively and emotionally mature enough for first grade, may decide to hold their child back and delay
entry into first grade.
For children born between September 1st and the cutoff date, the process of delaying entry into
first grade is relatively simple: all that is needed is a written request by the parents, accompanied by a
letter from the kindergarten teacher in support of delayed entry. In contrast, the decision to delay entry
into first grade for children born before September 1st is closely regulated and supervised by the Ministry
of Education. The Ministry protocol specifies that the kindergarten psychologist and teachers are in
charge of identifying those children who are not ready for entry into first grade and who would rather
spend an extra year in kindergarten. Parents are advised to take their child to an external educational
psychologist to evaluate the case, diagnose the child outside the kindergarten environment, and write an
independent report. The retention decision is then taken jointly by the kindergarten psychologist, the
teachers, and parents, and in case of disagreement the final word is reserved to the parents.11
We therefore focus on children who are enrolled in a grade that is one year below their expected
grade and were born before September 1st, as well as children who are enrolled in a grade that is two or
more years below their expected grade, and define them as “repeaters.” To the extent that these children
repeated kindergarten, we are focusing on children who are identified both by the school and the external
educational psychologist as having some cognitive and non-cognitive deficiencies. Note that we do not
define as repeaters children who are one year behind but were born between September 1st and the cutoff
date. As a result, we are confident that our sample of repeaters includes primarily children with low
cognitive or emotional maturity, rather than children who are maybe deliberately kept one additional year
in kindergarten to obtain a competitive advantage in school.12 We also exclude from the count of repeaters
students who are new immigrants, since the proportion of new immigrants who are repeaters is very high,
and it is unclear whether repeater status among new immigrants indeed reflects low academic ability.
Even though we cannot ascertain that all “repeaters” were held back in kindergarten we know that
grade repetition is highly unlikely at higher grades.13 In fact, since the early 1970’s repetition was
11

For more information about this process, see the Ministry of Education regulations (in Hebrew) at :
http://cms.education.gov.il/EducationCMS/applications/mankal/arc/se9ak3_10_11.htm.
12
In Israel, as elsewhere, there have been reports in the popular press that an increasing number of parents delay
their children’s entry into the school system (red-shirting), and that this phenomenon is particularly common among
affluent parents (see also Deming and Dynarski, 2008).
13
Our data does not allow following a student from first grade to the end of high school, so we cannot determine for
each student the exact timing of becoming a repeater. However, we can assemble some evidence in support of the
claim of early determination of these indicators. For example, we traced the repeater status for three cohorts of 10th
graders (1997-1999) back to their last year of elementary school and found that around 85 percent of repeaters are
already in this status by 6th grade. We also traced back a cohort of middle school students and found that 85 percent

7

abandoned in Israel as a pedagogical tool in all the compulsory schooling grades (until 10th grade). The
number of repeaters has declined since then dramatically and repetition in primary and middle school has
become a very rare phenomenon. It is therefore not surprising that the most recent Ministry of Education
documents that discuss repetition in primary school and middle school were published in 1963 and in
1971, respectively, and that both documents are no longer in effect.14
Since we do observe in our data some grade repetition in primary and middle schools, we
inquired about the guidelines for making such decisions by interviewing the Ministry of Education’s
Head Superintendent and other officials at the Jerusalem school authority. The essence of the information
we learned from these officials is that repeating a grade is a very unusual event and should be approved
by the Central Authorities at the Ministry of Education.15 We infer from this information that the decision
of grade retention is unlikely to be determined at the school level and therefore also unlikely to be
potentially correlated with unobserved determinants of learning by other pupils in the grade.
Table 1 shows mean outcomes for repeaters and regular high school students.16 Column 1
presents the means of the repeaters, column 2 for a group with low parental education (both father and
mother did not complete primary school), and column 3 reports outcome means for all students who
progressed in school regularly according their age. The sample includes 310 high schools and 377,527
students from seven cohorts. The average proportion of repeaters is 3.7 percent and the proportion of
students from low education families is 3.4 percent.
It is immediately apparent that repeaters have substantially lower mean outcomes relative to all
regular students, as well as relative to students with low parental education. For example, on average for
the whole sample period, 60.6% of regular students in the sample were awarded a matriculation
of repeaters were already in this status in elementary school with 60 percent being held back in kindergarten or first
grade.
14
The most recent regulations at the post compulsory level (after the completion of 10th grade) are specified in
Ministry of Education publication from December 1994, and specify that grade retention should be based only on
academic considerations and not on pupil’s discipline and behavior. The decision is determined by a pedagogical
council that includes all the pupil’s teachers, the school educational counselor and the school head master. The
council decision should depend on the number of courses the pupil failed, his exact grades in each failing course, the
level of these courses, and whether the transition considered is to 11th or to 12th grade. However, these guidelines
allow the council a degree of discretion to deviate from the specified rules in cases of special personal circumstances
of the pupil such as new immigrants, parental recent chronic illness, death or divorce or other unusual personal
crisis. For more information about this process, see the Ministry of Education regulations, Special Director General
Circular, December 1994 (in Hebrew).
15
The guidelines described to us by the Ministry staff are that the school’s pedagogic council has to discuss and
approve every case for grade repetition. The school headmaster, the school educational counselor, the psychologist
and the home class teacher have each to present to the council the relevant learning, emotional, and family
background aspects of the case at hand and explain why they think that repeating the grade would be beneficial to
the pupil. The council makes a decision and forwards it to the Ministry of Education District superintendent who
reviews the evidence and the various recommendations, and must then approve or reject the recommendation. The
same guidelines apply for skipping grades. Contrary to this process, the rules that were in effect until the early
1970’s gave the school’s pedagogic council the authority to decide on these matters.
16
For a more detailed description of the high school data and the outcome variables, see Section 4.

8

certificate, versus only 23.0% among repeaters. Regular students accumulated, on average, 21.4 credit
units while repeaters accumulated only 12.4. The achievement gap is much larger in science and math:
regular students’ matriculation curriculum includes 0.54 advanced level subjects in math and science
while repeaters had only 0.16 such subjects.
A more specific illustration of the large gap between these groups is presented in the lower panel
of Table 1. The enrollment rate of repeaters in advanced level math classes in high school is extremely
low, 1.6%, versus 14.0% among regular students. Similarly, the enrollment rate in advanced physics is
9.8% among regular students, and only 1.6% among repeaters. A similar pattern is seen in advanced
computer science and chemistry classes while the gaps in biology are somewhat smaller.
These findings provide strong support for our working hypothesis that repeaters have low
cognitive ability. The means presented in column 2 suggest that the weakest group in terms of socioeconomic background (based on parental schooling) has better average outcomes than the group of
repeaters. In fact, the gap between columns 2 and 3 is narrower than the gap between column 1 and 2
suggesting that the low parental education group is more similar to the regular students than to the
repeaters. It is also worth noting that the mean years of parental schooling in the repeaters group is 10.2
while the mean in the low education group is less than 7, proving that repeaters have significantly lower
outcomes, even though they are not the most disadvantaged students in terms of parental education.
The lower academic outcomes of repeaters compared to those in the lowest end of the distribution
of parental education suggests that the strategy we propose may be more successful in identifying the
truly low ability peers than alternative strategies that use low socioeconomic status as a proxy for lowachievers
C. Econometric specification
The basic idea of our empirical strategy is to compare the outcomes of students from adjacent
cohorts who have similar characteristics and face the same school environment, except for the fact that
one cohort has a relatively high proportion of low ability students (repeaters) than the other due to purely
random factors. Using repeated cross-sectional data we estimate the following equation for the sample of
regular students:
'
'
yigst = α g +β s + γ t + X igst
δ1 + S gst
δ 2 + δ 3 LAgst + ε igst

(1)

where i denotes individuals, g denotes grades, s denotes schools, and t denotes time. yigst is an
achievement measure for student i in grade g, school s, and year t; α g is a grade effect, β s is a school
effect, γ t is a time effect, X igst is a vector of student’s covariates that includes gender, mother’s and

9

father’s years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic origin, and indicators for
missing values of these covariates, S gst is a vector of characteristics of a grade g in school s and time t
and includes a quadratic function of enrollment and set of variables for the average characteristics of the
regular students in the grade; LAgst is the proportion of low ability students in grade g, school s, and year
t, and ε igst is the error term which is composed of a school-specific random element that allows for any
type of correlation within observations of the same school across time and an individual random element.
The coefficient of interest is δ 3 which captures the effect of having a higher proportion of low-ability
peers on student’s achievement.
Including school fixed effects controls for the most obvious potential confounding factor – the
endogenous sorting of students across schools based on socio-economic background. However, one may
be concerned that there are time-varying unobserved factors that are also correlated with the proportion of
low achieving students.17 Therefore, in our preferred specification we add to equation (1) a full set of
school-specific linear time trends. Hence, identification is achieved from the deviation in the proportion
of low-achieving students from its long-term trend within a school.
In implementing this methodology we use the proportion of repeaters measured at the grade and
not at the class level because the latter might be endogenous, as parents and school authorities may have
some discretion in placing students in different classes within a grade. This is not a very restrictive
compromise because within a given school the proportion of repeaters in a grade is highly correlated with
their proportions in a class.
For equation (1) to yield valid causal estimates of the parameter of interest, the key identifying
assumption is that cohort-to-cohort variation in the proportion repeaters is random within school. This
assumption is fairly reasonable for a number of reasons. First, our analysis is mostly centered on high
school and middle school students: these cohorts have inherited a given proportion of repeaters from the
feeder schools at the lower level. As we explained before, repeater status is determined very early, often
at the time of elementary school entry, and the decision is taken independently of the staffing and
academic needs of the school. Therefore, it is unlikely that, within a school, the proportion of repeaters in
a cohort would be correlated with unobserved determinants of ability of that cohort.
Second, it is important to note that our key identifying assumption would hold as long as the
threshold for determining repeater status is fixed, and any year-to-year shocks in the density of ability
below the threshold within a school are uncorrelated with shocks to the density above the threshold. In
17

These concerns are particularly relevant for the high school outcomes equation because we have a longer panel
and also because secular trends in school proportion of repeaters is more likely to exist in high schools since there is
school choice at this level of education.

10

other words, we require that the proportion of repeaters does not change because the entire ability
distribution within schools shifts from year to year, or because the threshold for determining repeater
status changes from year to year at the school level. Since the decision of grade retention is mostly
centralized and involves the intervention of external professionals who evaluate the student independently
of the school environment, this assumption is very likely to hold. Notice also that, even if there were a
time-varying threshold at the school level, it would induce a correlation between the proportion of
repeaters in cohort t, and the ability distribution of students in cohort t-1, the cohort to which repeaters
originally belonged. Therefore, we can test for violation of the key identifying assumption by looking at
the correlation between the actual proportion of repeaters in cohort t and outcomes of regular students in
cohort t-1.

4. Evidence on the Validity of the Identification Strategy in the High School Sample
A. What is the source of variation in the proportion of repeaters?
The identification strategy outlined in the previous section raises a number of concerns. The first
is related to precision: since identification relies on within school variation in the proportion of repeaters,
sufficient variation in peer composition across cohorts within schools is needed to obtain precise
estimates. We find that there is substantial cohort-to-cohort variation in the proportion of repeaters, which
can be exploited in the empirical analysis: a variance decomposition of the proportion of repeaters in high
schools shows that the within school variation accounts for 34% of the total variance. As our results
show, this amount of variation enables us to obtain sufficiently precise estimates even in specifications
with a full set of school fixed effects or school specific trends. We also find that this variation is evident
not only in small schools but also in medium and large schools as well as in large and medium sized
towns. This evidence is important because it suggests that the identification of the ability peer effects will
not rely solely on variation in small schools and towns, which are mainly situated in the periphery of the
country, but will rely also on variation from medium and large schools and towns, including the large
metropolitan areas in the center of the country. A second important question is what explains the within
school variation in the proportion of repeaters. We argue that natural fluctuations in the number of low
ability students in a cohort generate within school variation in the proportion of repeaters. To assess this
issue, we checked whether the observed within school variation in the proportion of repeaters is consistent
with a random process by performing Monte Carlo simulations where we randomly generated the
proportion of repeaters in each cohort and compared the simulated within school standard deviation with
the standard deviation observed in the data.18 .We also computed an empirical confidence interval for the
18

For each school, we randomly generated the repeater status of the students in each cohort using a binomial
distribution function with p equal to the average proportion of repeaters in the school across all years. We then

11

standard deviation in the proportion of repeaters for each school finding that 93% percent of the high
schools had a standard deviation in the proportion of repeaters that fell within the 95% confidence
interval.19 We further re-estimated all models by restricting the samples to schools that had a standard
deviation within the confidence interval and obtained virtually identical results to those based on the full
sample and reported below.
B. Does variation in the proportion of repeaters affect school mobility?
Another concern is whether the within school variation in the proportion of repeaters affects the
mobility of students across schools. The lack of school choice at the middle school level and the very
limited scope of private schooling in Israel diminish significantly the possibility of such selection. Such
selection could occur in high schools, though it is very unlikely since, while parents may know the
average proportion of repeaters at a school, it will be difficult for them to predict in advance these
proportions for a specific cohort. Nevertheless, parents might still respond to cohort peer composition
once they observe its actual realization in the first year of high school.
We address this concern by checking whether the likelihood that a student leaves a school (by
moving to another school or dropping out) is associated with the proportion of repeaters in his/her initial
grade. Using the sample of 10th grade students (which is the first grade of high school) we constructed a
dummy variable that equals to one if the student left the school in the following year.20 Using this
indicator as a dependent variable, we estimated models similar to equation (1) to asses the effects of the
proportion of repeaters in the grade on the likelihood that a 10th grade student leaves his/her initial school.
It is worth noting in this regard is that the rate of students’ mobility is relatively low. Roughly,
2.7 percent of the students left their school at the transition between 10th and 11th grade. This relatively
low mobility rate (in comparison, for example, to the US) makes the implementation of an identification
strategy based on within school variation in peer composition especially appealing in the Israeli context.21
The estimates of the effects of the proportion repeaters on the likelihood of leaving the initial high school
computed the within school standard deviation of the proportion repeaters based on the simulated data and repeated
this process 1,000 times.
19
We computed within school standard deviations using residuals from a regression of the proportion of repeaters
on school fixed effects and school specific time trends.
20
In order to avoid classifying as school movements or drop-outs those cases that arise from structural school
changes (closures, merges, etc.) or from data collection problems, we follow Hanushek et al. (2004) and exclude
from school leavers those cases where the student moved to a school attended by more than 30 percent of the
students of his/her former grade. We further excluded from school leavers those cases were 100 percent of the
students in the grade left the school. Less than half percent of the sample’s observations are affected by these two
adjustments.
21
A US national study reports that 40 percent of third graders have changed schools at least once since 1st grade (US
General Accounting Office, 1994). Hanushek et al. (2004) report an annual rate of student mobility of 24% in Texas
elementary schools. Similar annual rates are reported for Ohio by Rhodes (2005) and for Florida (personal
communication with David Figlio).

12

are small and insignificant regardless of the specification used. For example, the estimate based on a
specification that includes school fixed effects and school time trends is -0.018 (s.e. = 0.056). Overall,
this suggests that the likelihood that a student leaves his/her initial school is unrelated to the proportion of
repeaters in his/her cohort.
C. Is the variation in proportion repeaters associated with cohort compositional changes?
Finally, we test directly whether the within school variation in the proportion of repeaters is
associated with changes in the characteristics of regular students in the cohort. In particular, we checked
whether the proportion of repeaters within a school is correlated with students’ background characteristics
such as parental education, family size, and proportion of new immigrants. Table 2 provides evidence on
these balancing tests and reports the estimated coefficients from regressions of various student
characteristics on the proportion of repeaters in high school. We present estimates from three
specifications: simple OLS regressions, a specification with a full set of school fixed effects, and a
specification with both school fixed effects and school-specific time trends.
The OLS estimates show strong negative associations between the proportions of repeaters and
student background characteristics. These correlations show unambiguously that in Israel repeater status
is strongly negatively correlated with socioeconomic status, in contrast with the United States, where
“redshirting” is more common among high socioeconomic status families (see, e.g., Dobkin and Ferreira,
2009).22 However, these correlations are much smaller and become insignificant in most of the within
school regressions, where some of the estimates even change signs. The addition of school specific linear
time trends wipes away almost all associations. For example, the coefficient of mother’s years of
schooling on the proportion of repeaters is -26.692 (s.e. 2.272) in the OLS regression. It drops to -0.523
(s.e. 1.435) in the within school regression and it is further reduced to -0.149 (s.e. 1.367) when adding
school specific linear time trends.
Overall, by conditioning on school fixed effects and school specific linear time trends we are able
to eliminate most of the observed associations between the proportion of repeaters and family background
characteristics. There are some imbalances for students’ ethnicity, but they are relatively small, only
marginally significant and are of inconsistent signs. For example, the coefficient of Asia/Africa ethnic
origin on the proportion of repeaters (in the full specification) is 0.152 (s.e. 0.068) and the coefficient of
Europe/America ethnic origin is 0.101 (s.e. 0.049). This means that a change in the proportion of
repeaters is positively associated with a change in the proportion of students from Asia/Africa, a relatively

22

We also did not find any evidence of bimodality, with some repeaters having high socioeconomic status, and
others low socioeconomic status. Rather, the entire distribution of parents’ education for repeaters is shifted to the
left relative to the distribution of parents’ education for regular students.

13

disadvantaged group in Israel, but it is also positively associated with a change in the proportion of
students from American or European origin, a relatively privileged group. It is also worth noting that the
magnitude of the estimates is very small relative to the magnitude of the independent variable. For
example, a one standard deviation increase in the proportion of repeaters (0.03) is associated with a 0.3
percentage points increase in the proportion of students with Asian/African ethnic origin and with a
similar increase in the proportion of students whose parents were born in America or Europe. In any case,
in the outcome regressions, we will control for the student background covariates and for the average
background characteristics of the regular students.

5. Results in the High School Sample
A. Effects on High School Students’ Achievement
Table 3 reports the effects of the proportions of repeaters on the high school achievements of
regular students. Each cell in the table shows the estimated coefficient on the proportion of repeaters in a
grade from a separate regression. Column 1 presents the outcome means for regular students. Columns 25 report the results for the effect of the proportion of repeaters. The estimates presented are based on four
different specifications. Columns 2 report OLS estimates when only year dummies are included as
controls. In column 3 school fixed effects are added, in column 4 individual and school time varying
controls are added and in column 5 school specific time trends are added as controls.23
We see a common pattern for the effect of repeaters for most outcomes, as we move from the first
to the fourth specification. Adding school fixed effects dramatically reduces the negative point estimates
obtained from simple OLS regressions, though they remain negative and statistically significant. This
decline, by about a factor of ten, suggests that selection and sorting play a large role in these OLS
correlations. Adding the individual and school time varying controls leaves the estimates almost
unchanged, suggesting that the school fixed effects eliminate essentially all the effect of the observables
characteristics on the outcomes.24 This pattern is consistent with the findings reported in Table 2 that
suggested that the proportion of repeaters is not correlated with observable students- characteristics.
Adding the school specific time trends, though, leads to a further decline in the point estimates, with
23

The individual-level control variables are: a gender dummy, father’s and mother’s years of schooling and
indicators for missing parents’ years of schooling, number of siblings, a dummy for post 1989 immigrants, and
ethnic origin dummies. The grade-level control variables are: enrollment and its square, the percentage of boys,
average parental education, average number of siblings, percentage of immigrants, and percentage belonging to each
ethnic group.
24
The control variables enter the regression with the predicted signs: females, children of highly educated parents,
and children from smaller families have better educational outcomes; children of Asia-Africa origin and immigrants
have worse educational outcomes; and high socioeconomic status peers are associated with positive outcomes. The
individual-level and grade-level controls on their own explain about 12% of the overall variation in educational
outcomes.

14

standard errors staying roughly unchanged. For example, the simple OLS estimate for the effect of the
proportion repeaters on the average score is -193.370, it declines to -20.059 when school fixed effects are
added, then it is changed to -26.059 when student and school characteristics are added, and finally drops
to -11.183 when the school specific trends are added. It should be noted that inclusion of school-specific
time trends may severely exacerbate attenuation bias in the presence of classical measurement error
(Griliches and Mairesse, 1995). Hence, our estimates may well represent a lower bound on the true effect
of repeaters on their peers.
Four out of the five point estimates are significantly different from zero (at 10% level of
significance) in the fourth and most complete specification (column 5). Only the effect of proportion
repeaters on the number of advanced level subjects in science becomes non-significant. This evidence
suggests that having a larger proportion of low ability students in class harms the achievements of the
regular students. 25 These negative effects are, however, moderate. For example, a one standard deviation
increase (i.e., a 0.032 increase) in the proportion of repeaters leads to a decrease of between 0.012 and
0.036 of a standard deviation in the matriculation rate, and to a decrease of between 0.015 and 0.036 of a
standard deviation in the average score of regular students.26 These effects are on the lower end of the
range reported in Gibbons and Telhaj (2008), but are not all that unusual. For comparison purposes, a one
standard deviation increase in the proportion of boys in a grade reduces the matriculation rate by between
0.038 and 0.050 of a standard deviation, while a one standard deviation increase in mother’s education
raises matriculation rates by about 0.12 of a standard deviation.
B. Falsification tests
To check whether our results are being confounded by any short term trend that is not captured by
the school specific linear time trend, we perform falsification tests by replacing the proportion of
repeaters in cohort (t) by the proportion of repeaters in adjacent cohorts - the younger cohort (t-1) and the
older cohort (t+1).
The evidence on these falsification tests is presented in the last two columns of Table 3: in
columns 6-7 we show the effect on outcomes when we use as the measure of peer quality the proportion
of repeaters in cohorts t-1 and t+1 respectively. The results based on the t-1 or t+1 measure of treatment
25

One possible explanation for our results is that repeaters have a negative effect on their peers’ outcomes not
because of low academic ability, but because of emotional immaturity, since repeater status reflects mostly late entry
to first grade which may occur because the child is not ready for the transition to elementary school, either
cognitively or emotionally at the end of kindergarten. Alternatively, the negative effect may arise simply because
repeaters are older than regular students, and we are picking up an effect of age rather than of academic ability. The
likelihood of certain types of misbehavior (truancy, smoking, sexual activity, etc.), which may harm academic
performance, is probably higher among older students. We examined this potential channel by dividing the repeaters
into two age groups and found no significant differences in the treatment effect by age of repeaters.
26
The standard deviation in the proportion of repeaters is calculated using one observation per school-year.

15

show no effect at all on any of the outcomes, for both types of the placebo treatment. Moreover, the sign
of the estimates does not have a consistent pattern. For example, some of the estimates for the effect of
repeaters when the t-1 measure is used are positive while the sign of all the estimates obtained with the
true treatment measure are negative. When the t+1 measure is used, two of the point estimates are
negative and three are positive and none of them is significantly different from zero. We interpret these
falsification tests as compelling evidence that our main results are not capturing a spurious correlation
between the proportion of repeaters and time-varying school factors. The absence of correlation between
the proportion of repeaters in cohort t+1 and the outcomes of regular students in cohort t can also be
interpreted as evidence that variation in the proportion repeaters is not due to a shift (within schools) in
the threshold determining repeater status.
C. Allowing for Heterogeneous Effects by Students Socio-Economic Status
We now test for the presence of heterogeneous effects: specifically, we look at whether repeaters
differently affect students with different socio-economic background and academic ability. For this
purpose, we stratify the sample into two groups as follows: students who had both parents with 12 or
more years of schooling (approximately 60% percent of students) and the rest. We then re-estimate
equation (1) separately for the two groups reporting the results in Table 4.
The first two columns of Table 4 present the mean of the dependent variables for the two
subsamples. Unsurprisingly, students with highly educated parents have substantially higher outcomes.
The next two columns present the estimates of equation (1) on the two subsamples. We include the full
set of control variables, as well as school fixed effects and school-specific time trends. Overall, the
estimates suggest that low ability peers have a negative impact mainly on students from low socioeconomic background. The estimated negative effects for this group are larger than those for students
with highly educated parents, and those reported in Table 3 for the whole sample. For example, a one
standard deviation increase in proportion repeaters reduces the number of credit units among students
with low parental education by 0.224 units, or 0.022 of a standard deviation; and reduces the
matriculation rate by 0.9 percentage points, or 0.017 of a standard deviation. On the other hand, we find
substantially smaller and mostly insignificant effects of the proportion repeaters on the outcomes of
students with highly educated parents.
As argued before, parental education may be only an imperfect measure of student ability.
Therefore in Table 5 we propose an alternative test to assess whether regular students of different
academic ability are affected differently by the proportion of repeaters in their grade. We exploit an
institutional feature of Israeli high schools whereby students are tracked in most compulsory and elective
subjects into study groups defined by the level of the curriculum. The assignment of students into the

16

advanced placement class in each subject is shaped both by student’s self-selection and by teachers’
recommendations and usually takes place at the beginning of 10th grade. Once students are tracked
according to their academic orientation, they are usually assigned to classes for the remaining subjects
with the same group of students.
Based on this idea, we stratified the sample of regular students according to their enrollment in
advanced math and science programs (biology, chemistry, computer science and physics). We define
three different groups: the first group includes students with no enrollment in any of these programs and it
accounts for about two thirds of the overall sample. These students can be thought of as relatively low
ability students. The next two groups comprise relatively high ability students: the second group includes
students enrolled in at least two advanced programs (a sixth of the sample) while the third group (less
than a tenth of the sample) includes students enrolled in three or more programs.
Though enrollment in such programs is determined relatively early in high school, it could still be
affected by the proportion of repeaters in a grade. If this is the case, an estimation based on stratified
samples by the number of advanced math and science programs may involve a selection bias. In the first
row of Table 5 we present evidence on this issue by reporting the effect of the proportion of repeaters on
students' enrollment in advanced math and science programs. All these estimates are small and not
statistically different from zero, suggesting that there is no significant association between the number of
math and science advanced programs that a student is enrolled in and the proportion of repeaters in
his/her grade. These results imply that we can stratify the sample by number of math and science
advanced programs without concern about potential selection bias.
The bottom panel of Table 5 presents the estimates of the effect of repeaters on students’
outcomes for the three groups we defined above. In columns 1, 3, and 5, we report the outcome means for
each of the three groups and in columns 2, 4, and 6 we report the estimates for the proportion of repeaters.
The mean of each of the outcomes increases sharply and monotonically as we move from the first to the
third group. For example, the matriculation rate in the third group is 0.972, more than twice the respective
rate (0.460) in the first group. This pattern strongly supports the notion that the number of advanced
programs in math and science that students are enrolled in is a good proxy of students' cognitive ability.
The results reported in columns 2, 4, and 6 are quite striking: the proportion of repeaters affects
negatively only students in the first group, those who are not enrolled in any math and science advanced
program. In contrast, the effects of the proportion of repeaters on students who are enrolled in 2+ or 3+
math and science programs are small, not significantly different from zero and some even have a positive

17

sign.27 This evidence indicates that a higher proportion of low ability students particularly harms regular
students who are not tracked into advanced programs in math and science. This contrast persists even if
we restrict the sample to schools that have at least some students enrolled in 3 or more advanced classes
(column 8 in the Table), indicating that the result is not driven by a different composition of schools.28
One possible interpretation of this result is that high ability students are simply better able to cope
with the difficulties associated with learning with a high proportion of repeaters. A more appealing
explanation is that high ability students may be unaffected by the presence of repeaters because they
hardly interact with them. Because of the tracking system, repeaters are hardly ever enrolled in the
advanced classes in any of the subjects; consequently, those students who do enroll in these classes have
almost no exposure or classroom interaction with repeaters. Indeed, only 2 percent of the total number of
repeaters is enrolled in 2 or more advanced classes while only 0.75 percent of repeaters are enrolled in 3
or more advanced classes.
In this sense, the results in this table can be seen an additional falsification test, where we are able
to identify a group of students belonging to the same cohort as the repeaters, but who in practice share
almost no classroom interaction with them. If there were any type of school-cohort specific shocks
correlated with the proportion of repeaters and outcomes, or if peer effects operated mostly in nonclassroom activities, we should expect a negative effect of the proportion of repeaters even among the
group of students enrolled in 2 or more advanced classes. The lack of such an effect indicates that the
negative effect of repeaters occurs because of what happens inside the classroom. In the next section we
attempt to investigate in more depth the mechanisms that might give rise to this negative peer effect.
D. The Effect of Proportion Repeaters on Middle School Test Scores
In the next section we discuss the mechanisms through which low ability students affect the
outcomes of their peers using a unique survey on teachers’ pedagogical methods and the classroom
environment administered to all middle school students. Here we investigate whether a high proportion of
repeaters affects the test scores of middle school students using information on national test scores of 8th
graders in math, science, Hebrew and English. The data is based on the GEMS (Growth and Effectiveness
Measures for Schools - Meizav in Hebrew) datasets for the years 2002-2005. The GEMS includes exams
to 8th graders in four subjects and a student questionnaire provided to all students from 7th through 9th
27

It is important to note in this regard, that the standard errors of the estimates are similar across subsamples proving
that the insignificant effects of repeaters on the subsample of students enrolled in advanced classes stems from the
low magnitude of the estimates and not from a lack of statistical power.
28
We also performed balancing tests in each of the four ability groups and found that after conditioning on school
fixed effects and school specific linear time trends, there are no observed associations between the proportion of
repeaters and student’s background characteristics in each of the four sub-samples (results available from the
authors).

18

grade (described in the next section) and is administered by the Division of Evaluation and Measurement
of the Ministry of Education at the mid-term of each school year to a representative 1-in-2 sample of all
elementary and middle schools in Israel, so that each school participates in GEMS once every two years.29
In principle, all students except those in special education classes are tested and administered the
questionnaires. The rate of tested students is above 90 percent and the rate of questionnaire completion is
roughly 91 percent. Student test scores are originally in a 1 to 100 scale and we transformed them into
standardized z-scores to facilitate the interpretation of the results.
We linked the test score data to student administrative records collected by the Israeli Ministry of
Education (identical in structure to the data used for high school students). The administrative records
include student background characteristics and are used to construct the peer composition variables. We
dropped from the sample all religious schools due to the high instability of the student population and the
measurement error in the treatment variable in these types of schools at the middle school level.30
The samples we have for middle schools test scores pool together only two cohorts of 8th grade
students. Therefore, the within school estimation of the effect of the proportion of repeaters is less
powerful in this sample as we have only two data points per school (as opposed to the high school sample
where we have seven cohorts per school). We present in appendix Table A1 the estimates for the effects
of the proportion of repeaters on 8th grade test scores. The format of the table is similar to the previous
ones.31
Despite the reduced power of our empirical strategy, we do find negative effects of the proportion
of repeaters on test scores in all four subjects but the estimates are less precise than those found for high
school outcomes. The most comprehensive specification (column 5) tells us that a one standard deviation
increase (i.e., a 0.031 increase) in the proportion of repeaters, reduces test scores in math and Hebrew by
0.03 of a standard deviation, and in English by 0.02 of a standard deviation. The magnitude of these
effects are very much in line with what we obtained for the high school sample although they are less
precisely estimated since we only have two observations per school. We also report in the table the effect
on the average score of the four subjects: again, the estimate is negative and only marginally significant.

29

The GEMS are not administered for school accountability purposes and only aggregated results at the district
level are published. For more information on the GEMS see the Division of Evaluation and Measurement website:
http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.
30
A large proportion of religious middle schools have separate classes by gender. Since we are unable to observe
whether the students study in single-sex or mixed- sex classes in these schools we cannot measure the proportion of
repeaters accurately. In addition, a large proportion of religious boys leave the public school system to attend
Yeshiva institutions during middle school grades. This creates more measurement error and instability in the
treatment variables within the religious schools. We therefore, drop all religious schools from the middle school
sample.
31
In this case, we do not control for school specific time trends since we have only two observations per school.

19

Altogether, the results are in line with those obtained in the high school sample, although our estimates
are less precise, as expected.

6. Identifying Mechanisms of Ability Peer Effects
The results reported above show that the proportion of low ability students in class lowers the scholastic
achievements of regular students. In this section we attempt to explore the mechanisms through which
repeaters in class impact their peers. Ability peer effects could operate through various channels: this
could include effects through changes in the pedagogical methods used by teachers, the classroom
climate, the quality of interactions within students and between students and teachers, and the level of
motivation and self confidence of students. We examine here these possible mediating channels by
estimating equation (1) using as dependent variables students’ responses to the GEMS questionnaire. We
first describe the middle school questionnaire and, in similar fashion to the high school data, we report
results from balancing tests showing that changes in the proportion of repeaters are uncorrelated with
changes in student’s background characteristics within middle schools. We then show striking differences
in behavior and perception of the classroom environment between repeaters and regular students and
report the effects of the proportion of repeaters on on teachers’ pedagogical methods and on the classroom
environment.
A. The middle school data
The student questionnaire is administered to all students from grades 7th through 9th and includes
several questions addressing various aspects of the school and the learning environment. We concentrate
on two sections of the questionnaire which focus on issues related to teaching pedagogy and the school
learning environment. In these two sections students are asked to rate the extent to which they agree with
a series of statements on a 6-point scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. We
transformed students’ responses to these items into standardized z-scores.
We grouped the individual items of the student questionnaire under eight categories. The first five
describe teachers’ pedagogical practices in the classroom: (1) instilment of knowledge and enhancement
of comprehension; (2) instilment of applicative, analytical and critical skills; (3) transparency, fairness
and feedback; (4) individual treatment of students; and (5) instilment of capacity for individual study.
These categories of teacher’s pedagogical practices are common and accepted terminology in the
literature of educational psychology (see Bloom, 1956). The remaining three categories describe the
classroom environment: (6) classroom disruption and violence; (7) teacher-student relationships; and (8)
inter-student relationships. We recognize that evidence on the effect of repeaters on these behavioral
outcomes is not a definite proof for a specific form of the educational production function. Nevertheless,

20

since the following behavioral outcomes are highly correlated with students’ test scores, observing
treatment effects on these mediating factors provides suggestive evidence on the possible channels by
which peer effects operate.
Similar to the procedure done for the test score data, we linked the student questionnaire with
student administrative records to obtain information in student’s background characteristics and peer
composition. We also restrict the sample to secular students by dropping all religious schools for the
reasons described in footnote 30. In addition, to get a more stable population within schools across years,
we further restrict our sample to a balanced panel keeping only schools that have complete data for the 3
grades (7th, 8th and 9th) at least two years. We therefore have six observations of the same school for
middle schools (7th, 8th and 9th grade for two years). Since we have only two observations per grade and
school in this dataset, we pool all grades and years and exploit within school variation in the proportion of
repeaters across grades and years to gain more variability in the treatment variable while controlling for
year, school, and grade fixed effects.
B. Balancing Tests
We begin our analysis of the effect of repeaters on teaching methods and classroom environment
by presenting balancing tests of the covariates for the sample of 7th to 9th graders to whom the student
questionnaire was administered. The results of these tests are presented in Table 6 where we report the
estimated coefficients from regressions of student’s background characteristics on the proportion of
repeaters in their cohort. Once again, we observe that the coefficients on the treatment variable drop by a
substantial amount when we control for school fixed effects and all of them become insignificantly
different from zero. Some of the coefficients even change sign. Overall, it appears that controlling for
school fixed effects removes almost all of the correlation between the proportion repeaters and the
background variables. As usual, in the outcome regressions we still control for the full set of covariates to
increase the precision of our estimates.32
As with the middle school test score data, we cannot control for school specific time trends since
we have only two observations per grade and school. Nevertheless, given that the balancing tests show no
associations between student’s covariates and the proportion of repeaters in the school fixed effects
specification, we feel pretty confident that this specification is powerful enough to control for possible
confounders. Similar to the tests conducted with the high school data, we also performed falsification
tests where we replace the treatment variable with the proportion of repeaters in the previous or following
32

The individual-level covariates include: a gender dummy, mother’s and father’s years of schooling, number of
siblings and indicators for missing values in these covariates, a dummy for post 1989 immigrants, and ethnic origin
dummies. The grade-level control variables are: enrollment and its square, the percentage of boys, average parental
education, average number of siblings, percentage of immigrants, and percentage belonging to each ethnic group.

21

grade. The results show no cross-cohort effects for the proportion of repeaters in school suggesting that
our results are not being confounded by other short-term school shocks.
C. Differences between Repeaters and Regular Students in the Assessment of Teachers and Classroom
Environment
Table 7 reports the differences in means (in standard deviation units) of the eight categories
between repeaters and regular students. These statistics permit assessing how the two different groups of
students perceive their learning and classroom environment. Column 1 reports the differences after
controlling for year and grade dummies and columns 2 reports the controlled differences after adding
individual controls, as well as grade, year, and school-grade-year fixed effects. The controlled differences
for the individual questionnaire items included in each category are reported in column 1 of Table A2.
First, column 1 clearly shows that repeaters have a higher appreciation of their teachers’
pedagogical methods relative to regular students. These differences in the teachers’ assessment by
repeaters and by regular students remain almost unchanged even after controlling for the full set of
individual covariates and for school-grade-year fixed effects. Repeaters give to their teachers higher
scores on their teaching methods (category 1 and 2), and the quality of their feedback and formative
assessment as they also perceive their teachers as being more fair and transparent (category 3). In
addition, there are striking differences between repeaters and other students in the items grouped under
the categories of “individual treatment of students” and “instilment of capacity for individual study”
(categories 4 and 5), with repeaters substantially more likely to evaluate their teachers positively.
More insight about these differences is gained from the differences in the individual questionnaire
items reported in columns 1 of Table A2. There are large differences in items 17, 21, 22 and 23, which all
relate to whether teachers adapt their teaching methods and pace to individual student needs. Repeaters
value highly the individualized attention bestowed upon them by their teachers, and therefore rate their
teachers highly in this dimension. We conclude from this remarkable contrast between repeaters and
regular students in teachers’ assessments that teachers pay more attention and time to underachieving
students (repeaters), perhaps at the expense of time and attention given to regular students. This crowding
out of instruction time from regular students will be shown to intensify as the proportion of repeaters
rises.
The differences in category 6 (discipline and lack of violence) reveal that repeaters have worse
behavior and are exposed more to violence than regular students.33 This is seen more explicitly in items
34-36 of table A2. Repeaters are more likely to report being involved in physical fights, they report a
33

In constructing the mean of the grouped item, all variables are transformed so that high values indicate a more
disciplined and less violent learning environment.

22

higher incidence of fights among their classmates, and they are more intimidated and often scared to go to
school because there are violent students.
In contrast to the worse behavior of repeaters, it is interesting that we find that they report better
student teacher-relationships relative to the regular students. In particular, repeaters are more likely to
report that they can turn to their teachers and a counselor if they have a problem at school (item 41 in
table A2). Finally, repeaters report a lower quality of inter-student relationships compared to regular
students. They seem to be less socially adjusted and to have a lower level of satisfaction with school than
regular students.
Overall, the pattern of differences between repeaters and regular students regarding their
relationships with teachers is consistent with the pattern of differences in the perception of teaching
methods. It seems that teachers give more attention to the special needs of repeaters while overlooking the
attention demanded by other students in the class.
D. The Effect of Proportion Repeaters on Teachers’ Pedagogy and Classroom Environment
We now turn to the analysis of the effects of repeaters on the learning and classroom environment
faced by the regular students. We report within school estimates of the proportion of repeaters for each of
the categories (column 3 in Table 7) as well as for individual items of the student questionnaire (column 2
in Table A2) using the sub-sample of the regular students.34 Following Kling et al. (2007) we also
compute the average effect for each category

by averaging across the standardized effects of the

individual outcomes included in that category and estimating a system of seemingly unrelated
regressions.35 As there is no prior information to justify a particular weighting, we assign equal weight to
all outcomes within a category as this provides a more transparent interpretation.36
Focusing first on the effects on teachers’ pedagogical methods, we see that the sign of the
repeaters’ estimates is always negative. The coefficients are almost always significant at the 5 percent
34

We have also estimated falsification or placebo regressions for all students’ questionnaire items similarly to the
respected models estimated for the high school outcomes reported in Table 3. The results for these tests are not
reported here but they indicate that the estimates of the placebo treatment measures are always small, have
sometimes the wrong sign, and are not significantly different from zero.
35

That is, we define the average effect τc of the proportion of repeaters for category c as τ c =

1
kc

Kc

π kc

∑σ
k =1

where kc

kc

is the number of outcomes included in category c, πkc is the effect on outcome k included in category c, and σkc is the
standard deviation of the outcome. We treat (σkc) as known based on the results of Kling and Liebman (2004) and
given that we have a large sample.
36
As an alternative strategy, we also constructed aggregate outcomes by averaging across the standardized outcomes
included in each category and estimated the effects of the proportion of repeaters on these aggregate outcomes. The
results for these averaged outcomes (not reported here to save space) are virtually identical to the average effects for
each category reported in Table 7. In practice, both methods provide identical estimates when there are no missing
values in item responses and the model has no additional covariates besides the treatment variable.

23

level. These results support the notion that a high proportion of low achieving students induces teachers to
modify their pedagogy and their personalized attention to students. For example, the detailed results in
Appendix Table A2 show that a higher proportion of repeaters leads teachers to focus less on real
comprehension and more on memorizing the material; and it induces less focus on developing analytical
skills and more effort on instilling technical understanding of concepts. A higher proportion of repeaters
also induces teachers to devote less time to the individual support of the regular students and less
emphasis on teaching them the skills needed for individual study.
The analysis on classroom violence and discipline shows that a higher proportion of repeaters
increases sharply the level of disruption. This result is consistent with the descriptive statistics from table
A2 that showed that repeaters are more likely to be involved in physical fights. The estimate on the
aggregate measure of “discipline and lack of violence” is -0.409 (s.e 0.158). This effect summarizes the
negative estimates of all the seven items that are included in this group (shown in table A2).
The good relationship between repeaters and their teachers stands in sharp contrast to the negative
effects of repeaters on the relationship between regular students and their teachers. The estimated
treatment effect is -0.622 (s.e. 0.230). The negative influence of the repeaters on student-teacher
relationships is manifested in particular in how often students are perceived to be rude to their teachers
(item 37 in Table A2, estimate -0.863, s.e. 0.404) and on the lack of respect between teachers and students
(estimate. -0.773, s.e. 0.406). Such “bad blood” between students and teachers is reflected also in the
negative effect of repeaters on the overall relationship between teachers and students (estimate -0.838, s.e.
0.281). Lastly, we find that a higher proportion of repeaters in class has a detrimental effect on interstudents relationships but the effect is only marginally significant. The effect on the average of these
items is -0.331 (s.e. 0.194). We can conclude that while repeaters have good relationships with their
teachers, they seem to be crowding out teachers’ attention to regular students.
Overall, the evidence in this section is strongly suggestive of the fact that lower quality
instruction and crowding out of teachers’ attention are among the reasons behind the overall negative
impact of repeaters on their peers’ test scores and matriculation rates, even though it is difficult to prove
the link conclusively with the data at our disposal. Regardless, the results in this section are still quite
informative: the effect of repeaters on instruction methods, disruption, and violence are very interesting
outcomes in their own right, as exemplified by the numerous studies showing that parents are willing to
pay for a better classroom environment and by the central role attributed to the school environment on
school choice decisions (Hoxby, 1998a; Black, 1999; Kane, Riegg and Staiger, 2006, Cullen, Jacob and
Levitt, 2006).

24

7. Conclusions
In this paper we have estimated the effects of being in school with a high proportion of lowability peers on the outcomes of regular students and on the learning environment. We view our main
contribution as twofold: first, we are able to proxy for peer ability using a variable that is strongly related
to academic ability but that is determined before school entry, so that it is relatively unlikely to suffer
from the reflection problem; second, by means of a unique survey on the schooling environment, we are
able to explore the “black box” of the educational production function, and investigate the possible
mechanisms that underlie the estimated peer effects.
We find that an unusually high concentration of low ability students lowers the academic
achievements of regular students. In particular, this negative impact is concentrated among the students
located at the left tail of the socio-economic distribution. The schooling environment survey reveals that a
high proportion of low ability students has a significant detrimental effect on teachers’ pedagogical
practices, it raises sharply the level of disruption and violence within the classroom and it deteriorates
teacher-student relationships. These results are quite striking, since low ability students generally report a
higher level of satisfaction with their teachers’ pedagogical practices and with the quality of teacherstudent relationships. These findings, combined, suggest that one of the main channels through which
low-achieving students negatively affect their peers is by diverting teacher attention from regular to
struggling students. While we cannot of course rule out that there are direct spillover effects from lowability to regular students (“endogenous peer effects”), it is important to be aware that contextual peer
effects are also important.
Overall, our results enhance our understanding of the operation of peer effects in educational
settings, and can have important implications for the design of many educational policies. Though the
nature of interaction of repeaters with their peers and their teachers might be specific to the Israeli
education system, high rates of repetition are observed in many developed countries. For example, in
France as many as 45 per cent of pupils repeat at least one grade before the end of junior high school
(Maurin, 2005) and in the US approximately 10 percent of young adults aged 16-19 report to have been
retained at least once in their school career (NCES, 2006). In these countries, as in Israel, repeaters have,
on average, low cognitive and non-cognitive skills and therefore it is necessary to understand how
educational outcomes are affected by the interaction of these students with their peers.

25

8. Bibliography
Aizer Anna, “Peer Effects and Human Capital Accumulation: The Externalities of ADD.” Brown
University, August 2008
Ammermueller, Andreas and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, “Peer Effects in European Primary Schools: Evidence
from the Progress in International Reading Literacy Study,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2009,
Vol. 27 No. 3.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Krueger, Alan B. “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational Attainment:
An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples.” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, June 1992, 87(418), pp. 328-336.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Lang, Kevin. “Does School Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence from
Boston’s Metco Program,” American Economic Review, 94(5), December 2004, 1613-1634.
Arcidiacono, Peter and Nicholson Sean, “Peer Effects in Medical School,” Journal of Public Economics,
89, 2005, pp. 327-350.
Bedard, Kelly and Dhuey, Elizabeth. “The Persistence of Early Childhood Maturity: International
Evidence of Long-Run Age Effects.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2006, 121(4), pp.
1437-72.
Betts, Julian R. “Educational Crowding Out: Do Immigrants Affect the Educational Attainment of
American Minorities?” in Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean (Eds.), Help or Hindrance?
The Economic Implications of Immigration for African-Americans, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1998.
Bifulco, R, J. Fletcher and S. Ross, “The Effect of Classmate Characteristics on Individual Outcomes:
Evidence from the Add Health”, University of Connecticut, Department of Economics, WP 200821, 2008.
Black, Sandra E. “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May 1999, 114(2), pp. 577–99.
Black, Sandra E., Devereux Paul and Kjell Salvanes, “Too Young to Leave the Nest? The Effects of
School Starting Age”, NBER Working Paper No. 13969, March 2008.
Bloom, Benjamin S. (ed.), Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, Handbook 1: Cognitive Domain, David
McKay Co: New York, 1956.
Boozer, Michael A. and Stephen E. Cacciola. “Inside the ‘Black Box’ of Project STAR: Estimation of
Peer Effects Using Experimental Data.” Economic Growth Center Discussion Paper 832, Yale
University, June 2001.
Borjas, George J. “Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate Programs?” NBER
Working Paper 10349, 2004.

26

Burke, Mary A. and Sass, Tim R. “Classroom peer effects and student achievement.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston Working Paper 08-5, June 2008.
Cascio, Elizabeth and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, “First in the Class? Age and the Education
Production Function”, NBER Working Paper No. 13663, December 2007.
Central Bureau of Statistics, Statistical Abstract of Israel, 2008.
Carrell, S. E. and M. L. Hoekstra, “Externalities in the Classroom: How Children Exposed to Domestic
Violence Affect Everyone's Kids.” NBER SI, Labor Studies, July 2008.
Cooley, Jane C. “Desegregation and the Achievement Gap: Do Diverse Peers Help?”, Mimeo, University
of Wisconsin, November 2008.
Cullen, Julie Berry; Jacob, Brian A., and Levitt, Steven. “The Effect of School Choice on Participants:
Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” Econometrica, September 2006, Vol. 74 No. 5, pp. 11911230.
Datar, Ashlesha. “Does Delaying Kindergarten Entrance Give Children a Head Start?” Economics of
Education Review,Volume 25, Issue 1, February 2006, pp. 43-62.
Deming David and Susan Dynarski, “The Lengthening of Childhood”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 22 No. 3, pp. 71-92, Summer 2008.
Dobkin, Carlos and Ferreira, Fernando. “Do School Entry Laws Affect Educational Attainment and Labor
Market Outcomes?” NBER Working Paper 14945, May 2009.
Duflo Esther, Pascaline Dupas and Michael Kremer, “Peer Effects and the Impact of Tracking: Evidence
from a Randomized Evaluation in Kenya”, June 2008.
Elder, Todd E. and Lubotsky, Darren H. “Kindergarten Entrance Age and Children’s Achievement:
Impacts of State Policies, Family Background, and Peers.” Journal of Human Resources, 2009
(forthcoming).
Epple, Dennis and Romano, Richard E. “Competition between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers, and
Peer-Group Effects.” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88(1), pp. 33-62.
Fredriksson, Peter and Öckert, Björn. “Is Early Learning Really More Productive? The Effect of School
Starting Age on School and Labor Market Performance.” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1659, July
2005.
Figlio, David N. “Boys Named Sue: Disruptive Children and Their Peers.” Education Finance and
Policy, Fall 2007, Vol. 2(4), Pages 376-394.
Gibbons, Stephen and Shqiponja Telhaj, “Peers and Achievement in England’s Secondary Schools.”
Spatial Economics Research Centre Discussion Paper 1, July 2008.

27

Gould, Eric D.; Lavy Victor and Paserman, M. Daniele. “Does Immigration Affect the Long-Term
Educational

Outcomes

of

Natives?

Quasi-Experimental

Evidence.”

Economic

Journal,

forthcoming.
Griliches, Zvi and Mairesse, Jacques. “Production Functions: The Search for Identification.” NBER
Working Paper 5067, March 1995.
Guryan, Jonathan, “Desegregation and Black Dropout Rates,” American Economic Review, 94(4),
September 2004, 919-943.
Hanushek, Eric, John Kain, Jacob Markman and Steven Rivkin, “Does Peer Ability Affect Student
Achievement?,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 18(5), 2003, pp. 527-544.
Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, Steven G. Rivkin (2004), “Disruption versus Tiebout Improvement: the
Costs and Benefits of Switching Schools”, Journal of Public Economics, 88 (9), pp. 1721– 46.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Do Immigrants Crowd Disadvantaged American Natives Out of Higher Education?”
in Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean (Eds.), Help or Hindrance? The Economic
Implications of Immigration for African Americans. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1998a.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “When Parents Can Choose, What Do They Choose? The Effects of School Choice
on Curriculum and Atmosphere," in When Schools Make a Difference, S. Mayer and P. Peterson,
eds., Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution Press, 1998b.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation.” NBER
Working Paper No. 7867, August 2000.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Gretchen Weingarth, “Taking Race Out of the Equation: School Reassignment
and the Structure of Peer Effects”, Mimeo, Harvard University, 2005.
Kane, Thomas J.; Riegg, Stephanie K. and Staiger, Douglas O. “School Quality, Neighborhoods and
Housing Prices.” American Law and Economics Review, 8(2), August 2006, pp. 183-212.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
Results from a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVI (2001),
607-654.
Lavy, Victor and Analia Schlosser, “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School”, NBER
Working Paper No. 13292.
Lazear, Edward P. “Educational Production.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2001, 116(3), pp.
777-803.
Lefgren, Lars. “Educational Peer Effects and the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Urban Economics,
56(2), September 2004, pages 169-191.
Manski, Charles, “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,” Review of
Economic Studies, 60(3), 1993, pp. 531-542.

28

Maurin Eric, “The French Educational System: Issues and Debates.” German Economic Review 6(3):
297–307, 2005.
Puhani, Patrick and Weber, Andrea. “Does the Early Bird Catch the Worm? Instrumental Variable
Estimates of Early Educational Effects of Age of School Entry in Germany” Empirical Economics,
32 (2-3), 2007, pp. 359-386.
Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth Roommates,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 681-704.
Sacerdote, Bruce and Marmaros, David. “How do Friendships Form?” NBER Working Paper No. 11530,
August 2005.
Rhodes, Virginia, “Kids on the move: The Effects of Student Mobility on NCLB School Accountability
Ratings”, Perspectives on Urban Education, 3(3), Spring 2005.
U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. (2006). The Condition of
Education 2006, NCES 2006-071, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Zimmerman, David J., “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXV (2003), 9-23.

29

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics: Student's Achievements in High Schools

Low parental
education
(2)

Others
(non-repeaters)
(3)

49.7

59.8

69.0

Matriculation status

0.230

0.474

0.606

Number of credit units

12.4

18.0

21.4

Number of advanced level
subjects in math and science

0.111

0.428

0.615

Matriculation diploma that
meets university requirements

0.159

0.381

0.541

Math

0.016

0.095

0.140

Physics

0.016

0.062

0.098

Computers

0.040

0.071

0.126

Biology

0.030

0.079

0.110

Chemistry

0.017

0.067

0.098

13,814

12,768

363,713

Repeaters
(1)
Main matriculation outcomes
Average score

Enrollment in advanced classes

Number of students

Notes: The table reports descriptive statistics for students outcomes by group for the years 1994 through
2000. The sample includes all public Jewish high schools that have a matriculation track. The "others"
subsample reported in column 3 includes also the low parental education group reported in column 2.

Table 2. Balancing Tests for the Proportion of Repeaters in High School
Outcome means

Treatment: Proportion of Repeaters

Repeaters
(1)

Others
(2)

OLS
(3)

School Fixed
effects
(4)

School specific
time trends
(5)

Boy

0.589
[13.973]

0.472

0.910
(0.292)

0.022
(0.069)

-0.007
(0.067)

Father's years of
schooling

10.184
[-20.457]

12.158

-30.080
(2.426)

-1.153
(1.378)

-0.556
(1.289)

Mother's years of
schooling

10.200
[-21.480]

12.255

-26.692
(2.272)

-0.523
(1.435)

-0.149
(1.367)

Number of siblings

2.839
[12.557]

2.406

4.017
(1.225)

1.227
(0.738)

0.099
(0.576)

**

0.124

0.712
(0.171)

-0.481
(0.133)

-0.167
(0.078)

0.373
[-6.235]

0.414

-1.549
(0.180)

0.107
(0.100)

-0.084
(0.073)

Asia or Africa

0.399
[17.118]

0.272

1.858
(0.178)

0.280
(0.075)

0.152
(0.068)

Europe, the Americas
or Oceania

0.176
[-2.443]

0.190

-1.192
(0.108)

0.092
(0.048)

0.101
(0.049)

Ethiopia

0.052
[6.377]

0.010

0.318
(0.067)

-0.068
(0.030)

-0.049
(0.031)

Soviet Union

**

0.103

0.607
(0.164)

-0.446
(0.132)

-0.165
(0.073)

Other

**

0.012

-0.042
(0.023)

0.035
(0.016)

0.044
(0.015)

13,814

363,713

Immigrant
Ethnic Origin:
Israel

Number of students

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report means for repeaters and regular students. T-statistics for differences in means between repeaters and regular
students adjusted for clustering at the school level, are reported in squared brackets. Columns 3-5 report OLS and school fixed effects
estimates from separate regressions of the relevant variables on the proportions of repeaters. All regressions include year dummies.
Regressions in column 4 include also school fixed effects. Regressions in column 5 include school fixed effects and school specific linear
time trends. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the school level are reported in parentheses.
**: By definition, immigrants are never repeaters.

Table 3: Estimates of the Effects of the Proportion of Repeaters on Bagrut Outcomes of Regular Students
Placebo regressions
Outcome
means
(1)

Treatment effects: Proportion of Repeaters
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

In year
t-1
(6)

In year
t+1
(7)

Average Score

68.995

-193.370
(12.972)

-20.908
(6.659)

-26.059
(5.941)

-11.183
(4.513)

-1.919
(4.847)

4.334
(4.529)

Matriculation status

0.606

-4.638
(0.261)

-0.580
(0.142)

-0.542
(0.122)

-0.179
(0.098)

0.019
(0.089)

-0.016
(0.089)

Number of credit units

21.441

-87.085
(6.512)

-13.315
(3.818)

-13.226
(2.976)

-4.695
(1.914)

-0.220
(2.083)

0.880
(1.897)

Number of advanced level
subjects in science

0.615

-6.941
(0.493)

-0.685
(0.205)

-0.617
(0.182)

-0.177
(0.129)

-0.032
(0.122)

0.164
(0.119)

Matriculation diploma that meets
university requirements

0.541

-5.275
(0.279)

-0.476
(0.132)

-0.473
(0.113)

-0.148
(0.077)

0.031
(0.088)

-0.006
(0.078)

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Enrollment (2nd Poly.)

3

3

3

3

Individual Pupil Controls

3

3

3

3

Cohort Mean Controls

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

Year Fixed-Effects
School Fixed Effects

School Time Trend
Number of students

363,713

Number of schools

310

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1), OLS estimates (column 2), and estimates that include school fixed effects
(columns 3-4), and school-specific time trends (column 5) of the effects of the proportion of repeating students in a grade on their peers'
achievements in high school. Columns 6 and 7 report estimates from falsification tests using the proportion of repeaters of the t-1 or t+1 cohort
respectively. The proportion of repeaters is measured in 10th grade. Individual controls include: a female dummy, both parents' years of schooling,
number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic origin, and indicators for missing values in these covariates. Cohort mean controls include students
individual controls averaged by school and year and a quadratic function of enrollment. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are
reported in parentheses.

Table 4: Estimates of the Effects of Proportion of Repeaters on Matriculation Outcomes of Regular
Students Estimated Separately for Students with Low and High Educated Parents
Outcome means
Low Educ.
High Educ.
Parents
Parents
(1)
(2)

Effect of Proportion Repeaters
Low Educ.
High Educ.
Parents
Parents
(3)
(4)

Average Score

63.1

73.1

-13.670
(6.834)

-9.830
(4.780)

Matriculation status

0.468

0.701

-0.268
(0.128)

-0.082
(0.112)

Number of credit units

18.581

23.423

-6.902
(2.719)

-2.814
(2.192)

Number of advanced level subjects
in math and science

0.356

0.795

-0.239
(0.126)

-0.128
(0.205)

Matriculation diploma that meets
university requirements

0.377

0.654

-0.234
(0.096)

-0.045
(0.110)

148,851
310

214,862
310

Number of students
Number of schools

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (columns 1 and 2) and school specific time trends
estimates (columns 3-4) of the effects of the proportion of repeaters on matriculation outcomes of regular students.
Column 3 reports estimates on students with low parental education (one of their parents has less than 12 years of
schooling). Column 4 reports estimates on students with high parental education (both their parents have at least 12
years of schooling). All regressions include school and year fixed effects and school specific time trends. The
regressions also control for students background characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in Table 3.
Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table 5: Estimates of the Effects of the Proportions of Repeaters on Bagrut Outcomes of Regular Students
by Groups Defined on Enrollment in Advanced Math and Science Courses

0 advanced courses
Outcome
means
(1)
Effect on Probability to Enroll in
Advanced Science Courses
Outcomes:
Average Score

Prop. of
Repeaters
(2)

2+ advanced courses
Outcome
means
(3)

0.022
(0.081)

Prop. of
Repeaters
(4)

3+ advanced courses
Outcome
means
(5)

-0.030
(0.053)

Prop. of
Repeaters
(6)

0 advanced courses,
restricted sample of schools
Outcome
means
(7)

-0.021
(0.033)

Prop. of
Repeaters
(8)
0.044
(0.106)

62.910

-12.525
(5.375)

84.347

-0.032
(4.140)

86.434

-2.257
(5.617)

63.752

-12.670
(6.582)

Matriculation status

0.460

-0.216
(0.109)

0.953

0.104
(0.122)

0.972

0.048
(0.168)

0.479

-0.262
(0.143)

Number of credit units

18.109

-5.804
(2.126)

29.790

1.309
(2.741)

31.402

2.333
(3.526)

18.279

-6.121
(2.991)

Number of advanced level
subjects in science

0.125

-0.059
(0.060)

2.051

-0.407
(0.327)

2.320

-0.499
(0.446)

0.134

-0.100
(0.080)

Matriculation diploma that
meets university requirements

0.377

-0.184
(0.079)

0.942

0.141
(0.138)

0.968

0.090
(0.173)

0.405

-0.236
(0.112)

Number of students in group

243,321

60,506

24,683

202,183

Number of schools in group

310

276

235

235

Notes: The table reports means of the dependent variables (odd columns) and estimates (even columns) of the effects of the proportion of repeaters on matriculation outcomes of
regular students stratified by their enrollment in advanced courses in math and science. The sample for columns 1-2 includes students who were not enrolled in any advanced math or
science course. The sample for columns 3-4 report includes students enrolled in least two advanced courses and the sample for columns 5-6 includes students enrolled in three or more
courses. The sample for columns 9 and 10 includes students not enrolled in any of these courses who attend the same school as the students included in columns 7-8. The first row of
the table reports the effect of repeaters on the likelihood of being included in each of the samples. All regressions include school and year fixed effects and school specific time trends.
The regressions also control for students background characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in Table 3. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are
reported in parentheses.

Table 6. Balancing Tests for the Proportion of Repeaters
in Secular Middle Schools (7 th through 9th grades)
Outcome means

Effect of Proportion of Repeaters

Repeaters
(1)

Others
(2)

OLS
(3)

School
fixed effects
(4)

Male

0.648
[20.123]

0.496

0.089
(0.073)

0.126
(0.078)

Father's years of schooling

11.921
[-20.441]

13.007

-13.158
(2.339)

-0.679
(0.728)

Mother's years of schooling

12.095
[-22.329]

13.183

-11.738
(2.159)

-0.750
(0.695)

Number of siblings

2.461
[10.485]

2.212

2.540
(0.803)

-0.194
(0.542)

**

0.140

0.331
(0.235)

-0.071
(0.064)

Ethnic origin from Israel

0.489
[-1.290]

0.498

-0.732
(0.262)

-0.041
(0.071)

Ethnic origin from Asia or Africa

0.258
[10.392]

0.180

0.754
(0.185)

0.032
(0.059)

Ethnic origin from Europe, the
Americas or Oceania

0.227
[6.315]

0.174

-0.386
(0.155)

0.075
(0.061)

Ethnic origin from Ethiopia

0.026
[4.725]

0.014

0.063
(0.042)

0.005
(0.023)

Ethnic origin from the former
Soviet Union

**

0.120

0.347
(0.229)

-0.061
(0.062)

Immigrant from country other than
Ethiopia or former Soviet Union
nations

**

0.014

-0.046
(0.025)

-0.010
(0.018)

8,541
0.0357

240,506

Immigrant

Number of students
Proportion of students in grade

240,506

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report means for repeaters and regular students. T-statistics for differences in means between
repeaters and regular students adjusted for clustering at the school level are reported in squared brackets. Columns 3
and 4 report OLS and school fixed effects estimates from separate regressions of the relevant variables on the
proportion of repeaters. The sample includes regular students in grades 7-9. The regressions control for grade and
year fixed effects. Standard errors adjusted for clustering at the school level are reported in parentheses.
**: By definition, immigrants are never repeaters.

Table 7. Effects of Repeaters on the Learning and Classroom Environment
in Secular Middle Schools (7th through 9th grades)
Repeaters relative to others

Raw diffs. Controlled diffs.
(1)
(2)
Pedagogy
1 Instilment of knowledge and
enhancement of comprehension

Treatment effects:
Proportion of repetares
(3)

0.025
(0.009)

0.038
(0.009)

-0.542
(0.186)

2

Instilment of analytical and critical skills

0.006
(0.004)

0.014
(0.004)

-0.204
(0.068)

3

Transparency, fairness and feedback

0.042
(0.010)

0.029
(0.009)

-0.410
(0.193)

4

Individual treatment of students

0.154
(0.009)

0.124
(0.008)

-0.417
(0.173)

5

Instilment of capacity for individual
study

0.111
(0.009)

0.109
(0.009)

-0.634
(0.201)

-0.048
(0.007)

-0.016
(0.007)

-0.409
(0.158)

Classroom environment
6 Discipline and lack of violence

7

Student-teacher relationships

0.065
(0.009)

0.077
(0.008)

-0.622
(0.230)

8

Inter-student relationships

-0.025
(0.010)

-0.025
(0.010)

-0.331
(0.194)

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report controlled differences between repeaters and regular students on their views on the
learning and classroom environment. The estimates are from regressions that control for year and grade effects. In
addition, regressions in column 2 control for individual background characteristics and include grade, year and schoolgrade-year fixed effects. Column 3 reports school fixed effects estimates of the proportion of repeaters on the learning
and classroom environment. The estimates are for the average effects of the individual items reported in table A2 and
come from the sample of regular students. The regressions control for student background characteristics (a female
dummy, both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, ethnic origin and indicators for missing
values in these covariates), cohort mean characteristics (students individuals controls averaged by school and year), a
quadratic function of enrollment, year and grade dummies, and school fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at
the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table A1: Estimates of the Effects of Proportions of Repeaters on Test Scores of 8th Graders
in Secular Middle Schools
Outcome means
(3)

Treatment effects:
Proportion of repeaters
(4)

(5)

Repeaters
(1)

Others
(2)

Math

-0.666
[-30.751]

0.018

-4.225
(0.641)

-1.162
(0.668)

-1.075
(0.665)

Science and Technology

-0.568
[-22.383]

0.017

-2.670
(0.602)

-0.606
(0.751)

-0.388
(0.748)

Hebrew

-0.646
[-28.695]

0.021

-3.275
(0.595)

-1.057
(0.629)

-0.968
(0.628)

English

-0.676
[-28.800]

0.018

-4.326
(0.663)

-0.756
(0.524)

-0.597
(0.530)

Mean of Four Subjects

-3.662
(0.561)

-0.937
(0.519)

-0.812
(0.528)

Common Time Trend

3

3

3

School Fixed Effects

3

3

Enrollment (2nd Poly.)

3

3

Individual Pupil Controls

3

Cohort Mean Controls

3

Number of students
Proportion of students in grade
Number of schools

3,475
0.0350

96,763
354

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report means the dependent variables for repeaters and regular students. T-statistics for differences in
means between repeaters and regular students adjusted for clustering at the school level are reported in squared brackets. Column 3
report OLS and Columns 4 and 5 report school fixed effects estimates of the proportion of repeaters on the standardized tests scores
of regular students in 8th grade. Repeaters themselves are excluded from the sample. Individual controls include: a female dummy,
both parents' years of schooling, number of siblings, immigration status, and ethnic origin. Cohort mean controls include students
individual controls averaged by school and year. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table A2: Estimates of the Effects of the Proportion of Repeaters on the Learning and Classroom Environment
in Secular Middle Schools (7th through 9th grades)

(1)

Treatment: Proportion of
repeaters
(2)

0.047
(0.013)

-0.676
(0.240)

Controlled difference in means
relative to regular students

Instilment of knowledge and enhancement of comprehension
1
The teachers give exercises and assignments that
help memorize the material
2

The teachers ask many questions in class that check
whether we know the material well

0.047
(0.013)

-0.756
(0.247)

3

The teachers commend students who know the
material well

0.054
(0.014)

-0.364
(0.239)

4

The teachers provide many examples that help
understand the material

0.071
(0.013)

-0.668
(0.234)

5

The teachers hold discussions in class that help
understand the material

0.063
(0.013)

-0.525
(0.229)

6

During lessons, the teachers ask many questions that
check whether we understand the material well

0.028
(0.013)

-0.581
(0.245)

7

I understand the teachers' scholastic requirements
well

-0.043
(0.013)

-0.194
(0.217)

-0.016
(0.019)

0.734
(0.312)

0.043
(0.012)

-0.270
(0.221)

10 The teachers ask that we find new examples by
ourselves for the material we have studied

0.088
(0.019)

-0.415
(0.287)

11 The teachers ask that we try to find several ways to
solve a certain problem

0.058
(0.013)

-0.544
(0.186)

12 The teachers teach us to find a single common
explanation for different phenomena

0.075
(0.017)

-0.559
(0.263)

13 The teachers give assignments where it is required to
analyze material and to relate it to other things we
have studied
14 When there are several ways to solve a problem, the
teachers require that we check them all and find the
best one
15 The teachers expect us to ask ourselves whether what
we have learned is correct

0.054
(0.013)

-0.291
(0.217)

0.085
(0.012)

-0.448
(0.218)

0.180
(0.018)

-0.109
(0.322)

16 The teachers teach us how to know whether
information we have found is important, relevant and
can be used

0.104
(0.013)

-0.521
(0.208)

Instilment of analytical and critical skills
8 The teachers give exercises and assignments whose
answers have not been studied in class and are not in
the textbooks
9 The teachers require that we use what we have
studied to explain various phenomena

Note: Column 1 reports the controlled differences between repeaters and other students on their reports about the classroom
environment. The estimates come from regressions that control for the full set of individual covariates detailed in Table 7 and include
also year, grade, school-grade-year fixed effects. Column 2 reports school fixed effects estimates of the proportions of repeaters on
classroom environment where repeaters themselves are excluded from the sample. The regressions control for students background
characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in Table 7. The regressions also include school fixed effects and grade and year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table A2 (cont.): Estimates of the Effects of Proportion of Repeaters on the Learning and Classroom
Environment in Secular Middle Schools (7th through 9th grades)

Transparency, fairness and feedback
17 The teachers explain to me exactly what I have to do
to improve my studies

Controlled difference in
means relative to regular
students
(1)

Treatment: Proportion of
repeaters
(2)

0.112
(0.013)

-0.561
(0.219)

18

The teachers explain according to what they
determine the grades / assessments

-0.059
(0.012)

-0.288
(0.260)

19

The teachers often tell me what my situation is
regarding schoolwork

0.033
(0.012)

-0.362
(0.239)

0.080
(0.013)

-0.622
(0.236)

21 When a student has difficulty with a certain topic the
teachers give him more time to study it

0.122
(0.012)

-0.367
(0.219)

22 The teachers give every student homework according
to his place in the material

0.224
(0.015)

-0.086
(0.209)

23 The teachers help every student to learn topics
interest him

0.176
(0.014)

-0.163
(0.202)

24 The teachers give me a feeling that if I make an
effort I will succeed more at studies

0.090
(0.013)

-0.556
(0.236)

25 When a student fails, the teachers encourage him to
try again and again

0.097
(0.012)

-0.537
(0.238)

26

0.082
(0.012)

-0.542
(0.247)

0.124
(0.012)

-0.574
(0.214)

0.073
(0.012)

-0.800
(0.272)

0.130
(0.013)

-0.509
(0.228)

Individual treatment of students
20 The teachers know what the educational difficulties
of each student are

The teachers always assist me when I need help with
studies

Instilment of capacity for individual study
27 The teachers teach us how to learn new topics by
ourselves
28 The teachers require students to utilize many and
varied sources of information (newspapers, books,
databases etc.)
29 The teachers teach us to observe our environment
and to follow phenomena that occur in it

Note: Column 1 reports the controlled differences between repeaters and other students on their reports about the classroom
environment. The estimates come from regressions that control for the full set of individual covariates detailed in Table 7 and include
also year, grade, school-grade-year fixed effects. Column 2 reports school fixed effects estimates of the proportions of repeaters on
classroom environment where repeaters themselves are excluded from the sample. The regressions control for students background
characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in Table 7. The regressions also include school fixed effects and grade and year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parentheses.

Table A2 (cont.): Estimates of the Effects of Proportion of Repeaters on the Learning and Classroom
Environment in Secular Middle Schools (7th through 9th grades)

Violence and discipline
30 I know what behavior is allowed or forbidden in
school

Controlled difference in
means relative to regular
students
(1)

Treatment: Proportion of
repeaters
(2)

0.033
(0.012)

-0.436
(0.217)

31

Student discipline is strictly maintained at school

0.058
(0.013)

-0.695
(0.267)

32

The classroom is frequently noisy and non-conducive
to learning

-0.031
(0.015)

0.617
(0.333)

33

Students are frequently late or truant

-0.012
(0.017)

0.087
(0.385)

34

There are many fights among students in my class

0.057
(0.018)

0.784
(0.449)

35

I was involved in violence many times this year
(physical fights)

0.107
(0.016)

0.355
(0.248)

36

Sometimes I am scared to go to school because there
are violent students

0.123
(0.016)

0.318
(0.243)

-0.010
(0.016)

0.863
(0.404)

Sometimes the teachers treat me in an insulting or
hurtful way

-0.090
(0.021)

0.733
(0.406)

39 There are good relationships between the teachers
and the students

0.117
(0.012)

-0.812
(0.302)

40 There is mutual respect between the teachers and the
students

0.108
(0.013)

-0.838
(0.281)

41 When I have a problem I have whom to turn to at
school (teachers, advisor)

0.102
(0.011)

-0.324
(0.281)

-0.104
(0.013)

-0.112
(0.197)

43 Students in my class help each other

0.054
(0.011)

-0.520
(0.253)

44 I am generally well off at school

-0.023
(0.013)

-0.348
(0.236)

Student-teacher relationships
37 Students are frequently rude to the teachers
38

Inter-student relationships
42 I feel well adjusted socially in my class

Note: Column 1 reports the controlled differences between repeaters and other students on their reports about the classroom
environment. The estimates come from regressions that control for the full set of individual covariates detailed in Table 7 and include
also year, grade, school-grade-year fixed effects. Column 2 reports school fixed effects estimates of the proportions of repeaters on
classroom environment where repeaters themselves are excluded from the sample. The regressions control for students background
characteristics and school time varying controls detailed in Table 7. The regressions also include school fixed effects and grade and year
dummies. Robust standard errors clustered at the school level are reported in parentheses.

