NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING WELFARE IN INSURANCE MARKETS USING VARIATION IN
PRICES
Liran Einav
Amy Finkelstein
Mark R. Cullen
Working Paper 14414
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14414

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We are grateful to Felicia Bayer, Brenda Barlek, Chance Cassidy, Fran Filpovits, Frank Patrick, and
Mike Williams for innumerable conversations explaining the institutional environment of Alcoa, to
Colleen Barry, Susan Busch, Linda Cantley, Deron Galusha, James Hill, Sally Vegso, and especially
Marty Slade for providing and explaining the data, to Tatyana Deryugina, Sean Klein, Dan Sacks,
and James Wang for outstanding research assistance, and to Kate Bundorf, Raj Chetty, Peter Diamond,
Hanming Fang, David Laibson, Jonathan Levin, Jim Poterba, Jonathan Skinner, and seminar participants
at MIT, Stanford, Yale, the NBER Health Care Meeting, and SITE 2008 for helpful comments. The
data were provided as part of an ongoing service and research agreement between Alcoa, Inc. and
Yale, under which Yale faculty and staff perform jointly agreed-upon ongoing and ad-hoc research
projects on workers' health, injury, disability and health care, and Mark Cullen serves as medical director
for Alcoa, Inc. We gratefully acknowledge support from the National Science Foundation grant #SES-0643037
(Einav), the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (Finkelstein), and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur
Foundation Network on Socioeconomic Status and Health, and Alcoa, Inc. (Cullen). The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Welfare in Insurance Markets Using Variation in Prices
Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark R. Cullen
NBER Working Paper No. 14414
October 2008
JEL No. C13,C51,D14,D60,D82,I11
ABSTRACT
We show how standard consumer and producer theory can be used to estimate welfare in insurance
markets with selection. The key observation is that the same price variation needed to identify the
demand curve also identifies how costs vary as market participants endogenously respond to price.
With estimates of both the demand and cost curves, welfare analysis is straightforward. We illustrate
our approach by applying it to the employee health insurance choices at Alcoa, Inc. We detect adverse
selection in this setting but estimate that its quantitative welfare implications are small, and not obviously
remediable by standard public policy tools.

Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu
Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics
MIT E52-350
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

Mark R. Cullen
Department of Internal Medicine
Occupational and Environmental Medicine
Yale University School of Medicine
135 College Street, Room 366
New Haven, CT 06510-2283
mark.cullen@yale.edu

1

Introduction

The welfare loss from selection in private insurance markets is a classic result in economic theory. It
provides, among other things, the textbook economic rationale for the near-ubiquitous government
intervention in insurance markets. Yet there has been relatively little empirical work devoted to
quantifying the ine¢ ciency that selection causes in a particular insurance market, or the welfare
consequences of alternative potential policy interventions in that market. This presumably re‡ects
not a lack of interest in this important topic, but rather the considerable challenges posed by
empirical welfare analysis in markets with hidden information.
Recently, there have been several attempts to estimate the welfare costs of private information
in particular insurance markets, speci…cally annuities (Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf, 2007)
and health insurance (Carlin and Town, 2007; Lustig, 2007; Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney, 2008).
These papers specify and estimate a structural model of insurance demand that is derived from the
choices of optimizing agents, and recover the underlying (privately known) information about risk
type and preferences. This allows for rich, out of sample, counterfactual welfare analysis. However,
it requires the researcher to make critical assumptions about the nature of both the utility function
and individuals’ private information. These modeling choices can have non-trivial e¤ects on the
welfare estimates. Moreover, they are often speci…c to the particular market studied, making it
di¢ cult to meaningfully compare welfare estimates across di¤erent insurance markets. Technical
estimation challenges further impairs the ability of researchers to readily adapt these approaches
to other insurance market, or even to other data sets in the same market.
This paper therefore develops an alternative approach to empirical welfare analysis in insurance
markets. We show how standard consumer and producer theory –familiar to any student of intermediate micro – can be applied to empirical welfare analysis of insurance markets with selection.
As emphasized by Akerlof (1970) and Stiglitz (1987) among others, the key feature of markets
with selection is that …rms’costs depend on which consumers purchase their products; as a result
market costs are endogenous to price. Empirical welfare analysis therefore requires not only the
usual estimation of how demand varies with price, but also estimation of how the costs of insuring
the (endogenous) market participants vary with price.
This suggests a straightforward empirical approach to welfare analysis of selection in insurance
markets. The same pricing variation that is needed to estimate the demand curve (or willingness
to pay) in any welfare analysis – be it the consequences of tax policy, the introduction of new
goods, or selection in insurance markets –can also be used to trace out how costs vary as the set of
market participants endogenously changes. With these two curves in hand, welfare analysis of the
ine¢ ciency caused by selection – or of the consequences of a range of alternative potential public
policy interventions –is simple and familiar.
Our approach has several appealing features. First, it does not require the researcher to make
assumptions about consumer preferences or the nature of their ex ante information about their
ex post risk. As long as we accept revealed preference, the demand and cost curves are su¢ cient
statistics for welfare analysis of the pricing of existing contracts. In this sense, our approach is quite

1

similar in spirit to Chetty (2008) who shows how key ex-post behavioral elasticities are su¢ cient
statistics for welfare analysis of the optimal level of unemployment insurance bene…ts.
Second, our approach is relatively straightforward to implement, and likely to be widely applicable. In particular, while cost data are often quite di¢ cult to obtain in many product markets
(so that estimation of the cost curve is often not feasible), this is less likely to be a problem in insurance markets. Cost data tend to be much easier to obtain in insurance markets since they require
information on accident occurrences or insurance claims, rather than insight into the underlying
production function of the …rm. In addition, the omnipresent regulation of insurance markets o¤ers
many potential sources of the exogenous pricing variation needed to estimate the demand and cost
curves.
Third, the approach is fairly general as it does not rely on speci…c institutional details. This
suggests that it may be informative to compare estimates of the welfare cost of adverse selection
obtained by this approach in di¤erent contexts, such as di¤erent populations, or di¤erent insurance
markets.
The chief limitation of our approach is that counterfactual welfare analysis is limited to changes
to the prices of existing contracts (for example, through mandates or price subsidies). Analysis
of counterfactuals that would introduce di¤erent products than those observed in the data is not
feasible. Such analysis requires estimation of the structural primitives underlying the demand and
cost curves in the insurance market, as the recent papers mentioned above have done.
Given these trade-o¤s, we see our approach as highly complementary to – rather than competitive with – these earlier papers. The trade-o¤ is a familiar one in economics. It is somewhat
analogous to the trade-o¤s in demand estimation between product-space approaches (e.g. the Almost Ideal Demand System of Deaton and Muelbauer, 1980; see, e.g., Hausman (1997) for an
application) and characteristic-space approaches (Lancaster, 1966; see, e.g., Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes (1995) for an application). The latter can evaluate welfare from new goods, while the former
can only do this after these goods have been introduced.
Finally, we note that beyond estimating welfare, an additional considerable appeal of our proposed approach is that the shape of the estimated cost curve provides a direct test of the existence
and nature of selection. Speci…cally, rejection of the null hypothesis of a constant (i.e. horizontal)
marginal cost curve allows us to reject the null hypothesis of no selection, while the sign of the
slope of the marginal cost curve tells us whether the resultant selection is adverse (if marginal
cost is increasing in price) or advantageous (if marginal cost is decreasing in price). This is quite
important, since the existence of selection is a necessary precursor to analysis of its welfare e¤ects.
Importantly, our “cost curve” test of selection is una¤ected by the existence (or lack thereof) of
moral hazard. This is a distinct improvement over the important and widely used “bivariate probit”
(a.k.a. “positive correlation”) test of Chiappori and Salanie (2000) which jointly tests for the existence of either adverse selection or moral hazard (but not for each separately). The improvement
comes at the cost of an additional data requirement, namely pricing variation that is exogenous to
individual demand and insurer’s costs.
The rest of the paper is divided into two main parts: framework and application. Section 2
2

describes our framework and provides some graphical intuition for the e¢ ciency costs of selection
in insurance markets. Section 3 shows how the framework translates naturally into a series of
estimable equations, and discusses the data requirements.
Section 4 illustrates our approach by applying it to the market for employer-provided health
insurance in the United States. This is a market of substantial interest in its own right. The
workplace is the primary source of private health insurance in the United States, covering about
90 percent of the privately insured non-elderly, or about 160 million Americans (Fronstin, 2003).
Government intervention in health insurance markets is widespread but also considerably varied
in its choice of instrument, which includes both subsidies for private insurance purchases and
mandatory coverage by a single public insurance contract. A standard economic rationale for these
various programs is as a counterweight to adverse selection pressures in private health insurance
markets.
The existing empirical evidence on this market is consistent with asymmetric information (see
Cutler and Zeckhauser (2000) for a review). However, until recently there has been relatively little
empirical work on the welfare consequences of the detected market failure. Cutler and Reber (1998)
is a notable exception. Like us, they analyze the welfare cost of adverse selection in the setting of
employer-provided health insurance. A key distinction, however, is that while they estimate the
demand curve, they do not estimate the cost curve, which is crucial for welfare analysis. We outline
an approach for estimating the cost curve and implement it in our application.
We analyze individual-level data from Alcoa, Inc., a large multinational private producer of
aluminum and related products. We observe the health insurance options, choices, and medical
expenditures of its employees in the United States. We use the fact that, due to Alcoa’s organizational structure, employees doing similar jobs in di¤erent sections of the company face di¤erent
employee premiums for purchasing more comprehensive relative to less comprehensive insurance.
We verify that pricing appears random with respect to the characteristics of the employees that
the managers setting employee premiums can likely observe.
Using this price variation, we estimate that marginal cost is increasing in price, and thus detect
adverse selection in this market. We estimate that in a competitive market the annual e¢ ciency
cost of this selection would be about $10 per person, or about 3 percent of the total surplus at
stake from e¢ cient pricing. Our …ndings also suggest that there is limited scope for standard policy
instruments to produce welfare gains over the equilibrium outcome. For example, we estimate that
the social cost of public funds for the price subsidy that would be required to move from the
(ine¢ cient) competitive equilibrium to the e¢ cient outcome is about …ve times higher than our
estimate of the welfare gain from achieving the e¢ cient allocation. These results are robust across
a range of alternative speci…cations.
It is important to emphasize that there is no general lesson in our empirical …ndings for the
welfare consequences of government intervention in other insurance contexts. Our estimates are
speci…c to our population and to the particular health insurance choices they face. Nonetheless,
at a broad level, they highlight the importance of moving beyond detection of market failures to
quantifying their welfare implications, and the welfare achievable under potential public policy
3

interventions. Our particular …ndings provide an example of how it is possible for adverse selection
to exist, and to impair market e¢ ciency, without being easily remediable through standard public
policies. We conclude the paper by discussing a wide range of settings in which the approach we
propose could be possibly applied. We view this as a promising direction for further work.

2

Theoretical framework

2.1

Model

Setup and notation We consider a situation in which a given population of individuals is allowed
to choose from exactly two available insurance contracts, one that o¤ers high coverage (denoted
by H) and one that o¤ers less coverage (denoted by L). As we discuss in more detail below, it is
conceptually straightforward to extend the analysis to more than two contracts, but substantially
complicates the graphical illustrations. To further simplify the exposition, we assume that contract
L is no insurance and is available for free, and that contract H is full insurance; these are merely
normalizations (and we relax them in our empirical application).
A more important assumption is that we take the characteristics of the insurance contracts
as given, although we allow the price of insurance to be determined endogenously. This seems a
reasonable characterization of many insurance markets; it is often the case that the same set of
contracts are o¤ered to observably di¤erent individuals, with variation across individuals only in
the pricing of the contracts, and not in o¤ered coverage. Our analysis is therefore in the spirit of
Akerlof (1970) rather than Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), who endogenize the level of coverage as
well.
We de…ne the population by a distribution G( ), where is a vector of consumer characteristics.
A key aspect of the analysis is that we do not need to specify the nature of ; it could describe
multi-dimensional risk factors, consumers’ ex ante information about their ex post risk, and/or
preferences. We denote the (relative) price of contract H by p, and denote by v H ( i ; p) and
v L ( i ) consumer i’s (with characteristics i ) utility from buying coverages H and L, respectively.
Although not essential, it is natural to assume that v H ( i ; p) is strictly decreasing in p and that
v H ( i ; p = 0) > v L ( i ). Finally, we denote the expected monetary cost associated with the insurable
risk for individual i by c( i ).1
Demand for insurance We assume that each individual makes a discrete choice of whether
to buy insurance or not. Since we take as given that there are only two available contracts and
their associated coverages, demand is only a function of the (relative) price p. We assume that
…rms cannot o¤er di¤erent prices to di¤erent individuals. To the extent that …rms can make
prices contingent on observed characteristics, one should think of our analysis as applied to a set of
individuals that only vary in unobserved (or unpriced) characteristics. We assume that if individuals
1

These costs may potentially depend on the coverage the individual chooses (i.e., there may be moral hazard
e¤ects). As we discuss in more detail in Section 2.4 below, this does not a¤ect the analysis.

4

choose to buy insurance they buy it at the lowest price at which it is available, so it is su¢ cient to
characterize demand for insurance as a function of the lowest price p.
Given the above assumptions, individual i chooses to buy insurance if and only if v H ( i ; p)
v L ( i ). De…ne ( i ) max p : v H ( i ; p) v L ( i ) . That is, ( i ) is the highest price of insurance
at which individual i is willing to buy insurance. Aggregate demand for insurance is therefore given
by
Z
D(p) =

1( ( )

p) dG( ) = Pr ( ( i )

p) ;

(1)

and we assume that the underlying primitives imply that D(p) is strictly decreasing, continuous,
and di¤erentiable.
Supply and equilibrium We consider N
2 identical risk neutral insurance providers, who
set prices in a Nash Equilibrium (a-la Bertrand). Although various forms of imperfect competition
may characterize many insurance markets, we choose to focus on the case of perfect competition
as it represents a natural benchmark for welfare analysis of the e¢ ciency cost of selection; under
perfect competition, symmetric information leads to e¢ cient outcomes, so that any ine¢ ciency can
be attributed to selection and does not depend on the details of the supply side model. We note
however that it is straightforward to replicate the theoretical and empirical analysis for any other
given model of the insurance market, including models of imperfect competition.
We further assume that when multiple …rms set the same price, individuals who decide to
purchase insurance at this price choose a …rm randomly. We also assume that the only costs of
providing contract H to individual i are the insurable costs c( i ), although this assumption is
straightforward to relax. The foregoing assumptions imply that the average (expected) cost curve
in the market is given by
Z
1
c( )1 ( ( ) p) dG( ) = E (c( )j ( ) p) :
(2)
AC(p) =
D(p)
Note that the average cost curve is determined by the costs of the sample of individuals who
endogenously choose H. The marginal (expected) cost curve2 in the market is given by
M C(p) = E (c( )j ( ) = p) :

(3)

In order to straightforwardly characterize equilibrium, we make two further simplifying assumptions. First, we assume that there exists p such that D(p) > 0 and M C(p) < p for every p > p. In
words, we assume that it is pro…table (and e¢ cient, as we will see soon) to provide insurance to
those with the highest willingness to pay for it.3 Second, we assume that if there exists p such that
M C(p) >p then M C(p) > p for all p <p. That is, we assume that M C(p) crosses the demand curve
2

Note that there could be multiple marginal consumers. Because price is the only way to screen in our setup, all
these consumers will together average (point-by-point) to form the marginal cost curve.
3

This assumption seems to hold in our application. Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2008) make the interesting
observation that there are contexts where it may not hold.

5

at most once.4 It is easy to verify that these assumptions guarantee the existence and uniqueness
of equilibrium.5 In particular, the equilibrium is characterized by the lowest price that implies zero
pro…ts, that is:
p = min fp : p = AC(p)g :
(4)

2.2

Measuring welfare

We measure consumer surplus by the certainty equivalent. The certainty equivalent of an uncertain
outcome is the amount that would make an individual indi¤erent between obtaining this amount for
sure and obtaining the uncertain outcome. An outcome with a higher certainty equivalent therefore
provides higher utility to the individual. This welfare measure is attractive as it can be measured
in monetary units. Total surplus in the market is the sum of certainty equivalents for consumers
and pro…ts of …rms. We perform our welfare analysis in partial equilibrium; we ignore any income
e¤ects associated with price changes.6
Denote by ceH ( i ) and ceL ( i ) the certainty equivalent of consumer i from an allocation of
contract H and L, respectively; under the assumption that all individuals are risk averse, the
willingness to pay for insurance is given by ( i ) = ceH ( i ) ceL ( i ) > 0. We can write consumer
welfare as
Z
CS =
ceH ( ) p 1 ( ( ) p) + ceL ( )1 ( ( ) < p) dG( )
(5)
and producer welfare as

PS =

Z

(p

Total welfare will then be given by
Z
T S = CS + P S =
ceH ( )

c( )) 1 ( ( )

c( ) 1 ( ( )

p) dG( ):

p) + ceL ( )1 ( ( ) < p) dG( ):

(6)

(7)

It is now easy to see that it is socially e¢ cient for individual i to purchase insurance if and only if
( i)

c( i ):

(8)

In other words, in a …rst best allocation individual i purchases insurance if and only if his willingness
to pay is at least as great as the expected social cost of providing the insurance to individual i:
4

In the most basic economic framework of insurance the di¤erence between (p) and M C(p) is the risk premium and
is non-negative if all individual are risk averse, implying that M C(p) will never cross the demand curve. In practice,
however, there are many reasons for such crossing. Those include, among others, loading factors on insurance, moral
hazard, and horizontal product di¤erentiation. As a result it may not be socially e¢ cient for all individuals to have
insurance, even if they are all risk averse.
5

This is a similar result to the “buyers’equilibrium” in the (richer and more complex) setting analyzed by Wilson
(1980).
6

For standard consumer goods, this amounts to assuming that utility is quasi-linear in all other goods. In a
textbook insurance context, the assumption that the income e¤ects associated with changes in the premium do not
change the willingness to pay for insurance amounts to assuming that the utility function exhibits constant absolute
risk aversion (CARA), or that CARA is a reasonable approximation when the premium changes are small relative to
the individual’s income, as in the choice we study in our empirical application below.

6

In many contexts (including our application below), the only instrument available to a¤ect the
insurance allocation is through the price. In such cases, achieving the …rst best may not be feasible
if there are multiple individuals with di¤erent c( i )’s who all have the same willingness to pay for
contract H (see footnote 2).
It is therefore useful to de…ne a constrained e¢ cient allocation as the one that maximizes social
welfare subject to the constraint that price is the only instrument available for screening. Using
our notation, this implies that it is (constrained) e¢ cient for individual i to purchase insurance
if and only if ( i ) is at least as great as the expected social cost of providing the insurance to
all individuals with willingness to pay ( i ). That is, it is constrained e¢ cient for individual i to
purchase insurance if and only if
( i)

E(c(e)j (e) = ( i )):

(9)

We use this constrained e¢ cient benchmark throughout the paper, and hereafter refer to it simply
as the e¢ cient allocation.7

2.3

Graphical illustration

We use the framework sketched about to provide a graphical illustration of adverse and advantageous selection. Although the primary purpose of doing so is to motivate and explain the empirical
estimation strategy, an ancillary bene…t of these graphs is that they provide helpful intuition for
the e¢ ciency costs of di¤erent types of selection in insurance markets.
Adverse selection Figure 1 provides a graphical analysis of adverse selection. The relative price
(or cost) of contract H is on the vertical axis. Quantity (i.e., share of individuals in the market
with contract H) is on the horizontal axis; the maximum possible quantity is denoted by Qmax .
The demand curve denotes the relative demand for the H contract. Likewise, the average cost
(AC) curve and marginal cost (M C) curve denote the average and marginal incremental costs to
the insurer from coverage with the H contract relative to coverage with the L contract.
The key feature of adverse selection is that the individuals who value insurance the most (i.e.,
have the highest willingness to pay) are those who, on average, have the highest expected costs.
This is equivalent in Figure 1 to a declining M C curve (i.e., that marginal cost is increasing in
price and decreasing in quantity); as the price falls, individuals with lower willingness to pay select
contract H, and bring down average costs. The essence of the private information problem is that
…rms cannot charge individuals based on their (privately known) marginal cost, but are instead
restricted to charging a uniform price, which in equilibrium implies average cost pricing. Since
average costs are always higher than marginal costs, adverse selection creates under-insurance, a
familiar result …rst pointed out by Akerlof (1970). This under-insurance is illustrated in Figure 1.
The equilibrium share of individuals who buy contract H is Qeqm (where the AC curve intersects
7

See Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) who analyze e¢ ciency in an environment with a similar constraint. See also
Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2008) who investigate the e¢ ciency consequences of relaxing this constraint.

7

the demand curve), while the e¢ cient number of insurance buyers (where the M C curve intersects
the demand curve) is Qef f > Qeqm .
The welfare loss due to adverse selection is represented by the shaded region CDE in Figure
1; this represents the lost consumer surplus from individuals who are not insured in equilibrium
(because their willingness to pay is less than the average cost of the insured population) but whom it
would be e¢ cient to insure (because their willingness to pay exceeds their marginal cost). One could
similarly evaluate and compare welfare under other possible allocations. For example, mandating
that everyone buy H generates welfare equal to the area ABE minus the area EGH. This can be
compared to welfare at the competitive equilibrium (area ABCD), welfare at the e¢ cient allocation
(area ABE), welfare from mandating everyone to buy L (normalized to zero), or the welfare e¤ect
of policies that subsidize (or tax) the equilibrium price. The relative welfare rankings of these
alternatives is an open empirical question. A primary purpose of the proposed framework is to
develop an empirical approach to assessing welfare under alternative policy interventions (including
the no intervention option).
Advantageous selection The original theory of selection in insurance markets emphasized the
possibility of adverse selection, and the resultant e¢ ciency loss from under-insurance (Akerlof,
1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1976). Consistent with this theory, the empirical evidence points
to several insurance markets, including health insurance and annuities, in which the insured have
higher average costs than the uninsured. However, a growing body of empirical evidence suggests
that in many other insurance markets, including life insurance and long-term care insurance, there
exists “advantageous selection”; those with more insurance have lower average costs than those with
less or no insurance. Cutler, Finkelstein, and McGarry (2008) provide a review of the evidence of
adverse and advantageous selection in di¤erent insurance markets.
Our framework makes it easy to describe the nature and consequences of advantageous selection.
Figure 2 provides an illustration. In contrast to adverse selection, with advantageous selection
the individuals who value insurance the most are those who have the least expected costs. This
translates to upward sloping M C and AC curves. Once again, the source of market ine¢ ciency
is that consumers vary in their marginal cost, but …rms are restricted to uniform pricing, and in
equilibrium price is based on average cost. However, with advantageous selection the resultant
market failure is one of over-insurance rather than under-insurance (i.e., Qef f < Qeqm in Figure
2), as has been pointed out by de Meza and Webb (2001), among others. Intuitively, insurance
providers have an additional incentive to reduce price, as the infra-marginal customers whom they
acquire as a result are relatively good risks. The resultant welfare loss is given by the shaded area
CDE, and represents the excess of M C over willingness to pay for individuals whose willingness to
pay exceeds the average costs of the insured population. Once again, we can also easily evaluate
welfare of di¤erent situations in Figure 2 including mandating insurance contract H (the area
ABE minus the area EGH), mandating insurance contract L (normalized to zero), competitive
equilibrium (ABE minus CDE), and e¢ cient allocation (ABE).

8

Su¢ cient statistics for welfare analysis These graphical analyses illustrate that the demand
and cost curves are su¢ cient statistics for welfare analysis of equilibrium and non-equilibrium
pricing of the existing contracts. In other words, di¤erent underlying structures (i.e., vectors of
preferences and private information as summarized by ) have the same welfare implications if they
generate the same demand and cost curves.8 This in turn is the essence of our empirical approach.
We estimate the demand and cost curves, but remain agnostic about the underlying preferences
that determine the demand curve and the underlying nature of the individuals’behavior that gives
rise to the cost curve. As long as individuals’revealed choices can be used for welfare analysis, the
precise source of the selection (i.e., the ) is not germane for analyzing the e¢ ciency consequences
of the resultant selection, or the welfare consequences of public policies that change the equilibrium
price (e.g., by mandating or subsidizing a particular policy).9 By the same token, the precise source
of the cost curve –such as any e¤ect that moral hazard plays in determining costs –is not germane
for analyzing the e¢ ciency consequences of selection that occurs as a result of the given cost curve.
Likewise, the demand and cost curves are also su¢ cient statistics for welfare analysis of equilibrium allocations of existing contracts generated by models other than the one we have sketched.
This includes, for example, welfare analysis of other equilibria such as those generated by imperfect
competition rather than our benchmark assumption of perfect competition. It also includes welfare
analysis of markets with other production functions, which may include …xed or varying administrative costs of selling more coverage, rather than our benchmark assumption of no additional costs
beyond insurable claims.
The key to any counterfactual analysis that uses the approach we propose is that insurance
contracts are taken as given, and only their prices vary. Thus, for example, the estimates can
be used to analyze the e¤ect of a wide variety of standard government interventions in insurance
markets which change the price of insurance. These include mandatory insurance coverage, taxes
and subsidies for insurance, regulations that outlaw some of the existing contracts, regulation of
the allowable price level, or regulation of allowable pricing di¤erences across observably di¤erent
individuals. However, more structure and assumptions would be required if we were to analyze the
welfare e¤ects of introducing insurance contracts not observed in the data.

2.4

Comment: moral hazard

Incorporating moral hazard Thus far we have not explicitly discussed any potential moral
hazard e¤ect of insurance. This is because moral hazard does not change the analysis, but slightly
complicates the presentation. We illustrate this by returning to the original framework in which
8

Note that we have placed no restrictions in Figures 1 or 2 on the nature of the underlying consumer characteristics
Individuals may well di¤er on many unobserved dimensions concerning their information and preferences. Nor
have we placed any restriction on the nature of the correlation across these di¤erent unobserved characteristics.
i:

9

Needless to say, the source of selection – for example, whether selection is driven by unobserved preferences for
insurance such as risk aversion or by heterogeneity among individuals as to how much they know about their risks –
may be of independent interest; for example, it would be of interest for counterfactuals that stipulate changing the
information structure.

9

we de…ned H to be full coverage and L to be no coverage, but an analogous extension applies to
any of the variants discussed above.10
With moral hazard, the expected insurable cost for individual i is now a function of his insurance
coverage because his insurance coverage may a¤ect behavior. We therefore de…ne two (rather than
one) expected monetary costs for individual i; let cH ( i ) and cL ( i ) be individual i’s expected
insurable costs when he has full and no coverage, respectively. We assume throughout that cH ( i )
cL ( i ); if moral hazard exists this inequality will be strict, while without moral hazard cH ( i ) =
cL ( i ). As a result, we now have two marginal cost curves, M C H and M C L and two corresponding
average cost curves AC H and AC L (with M C H and AC H always higher than M C L and AC L ,
respectively).
In contrast to the selection case, a social planner generally has no potential comparative advantage over the private sector in ameliorating moral hazard (i.e., in encouraging individuals to choose
socially optimal behavior). Our primary welfare analysis of selection therefore takes any moral
hazard e¤ect as given. We investigate the welfare cost of selection or the welfare consequences of
particular public policy interventions given any existing moral hazard e¤ects, just as we take as
given other features of the environment that may a¤ect willingness to pay or costs.
In order to explicitly recognize moral hazard in our foregoing equilibrium and welfare analysis
one can simply replace c( i ) everywhere above with cH ( i ), and obtain the same results. Recall, as
emphasized earlier, that the cost curve is de…ned based on the costs of individuals who endogenously
choose H (see equation (2)); in the new notation their costs are given by cH ( i ) since they are
covered by the H contract (and behave accordingly). Thus, cL ( i ) is largely irrelevant. The
intuition from the …rm perspective is clear: the insurer’s cost is only a¤ected by the behavior of
insured individuals. What uninsured individuals do has no implications to insurers. From the
consumer side cL ( i ) does matter. However, it matters only because it is one of the components
that a¤ect the willingness to pay ( ) for insurance. As we showed already, willingness to pay ( )
and cost to the insurer (cH ) are su¢ cient statistics for the equilibrium and welfare analysis. Both
can be estimated without knowledge of cL ( i ). Therefore, as long as moral hazard is taken as given,
it is inconsequential to break down the willingness to pay for insurance to a part that arises from
reduction in risk and a part that arises from a change in behavior.
Welfare analysis with behavior-contingent insurance contracts As a brief digression, it
might be interesting to consider the welfare cost of adverse selection when moral hazard is not taken
as given. In other words, how does the welfare cost of adverse selection change if the insurer (or
the social planner) could provide insurance that is contingent on behavior? While largely irrelevant
from a policy perspective –as noted the social planner is unlikely to have a comparative advantage
in ameliorating moral hazard –this type of conceptual exercise may shed some insight on how the
welfare cost of adverse selection might change as technological progress allows insurers to write
10

We note that if the lower coverage contract includes some coverage, then the market equilibrium should be
thought of as one in which …rms o¤ering H only compete on the incremental coverage.

10

contracts that are increasingly contingent on (previously unobservable) behavior.11
We consider the (counterfactual) case in which the insurer provides the H contract, but can force
consumers to not change their behavior (that is, to behave as if they are under L). Our framework
allows us to bound the demand curve for such a contract. To see this, denote by ( i ; L) the
willingness to pay for a High coverage contract which is contingent on L-like behavior. A simple
revealed preference argument implies that
( i ; L) 2

( i)

cH ( i )

cL ( i ) ; ( i ) :

(10)

The upper bound is clear: willingness to pay for a constrained contract cannot be higher than for
an unconstrained contract. The lower bound is driven by the observation that if individuals change
their behavior from cL ( i ) to cH ( i ) only in response to the change in coverage, then it must be
that they value this change in behavior by less than the cost of the change. Together with the
relevant cost curves for such a contract (AC L and M C L ), these bounds on the demand curve can
provide bounds on the welfare costs of adverse selection under such a contract. Figure 3 presents
one special case of this exercise, where the moral hazard e¤ect is homogeneous. In this case, triangle
CMN provides an upper bound of the welfare cost of adverse selection, and the area of the lower
bound is the same as that of triangle CDE, since all 3 curves are just shifted down in parallel.

3

Estimation

Applying our framework to estimating welfare in an insurance market requires data that allows
estimation of the demand curve D(p) and the average cost curve AC(p). The marginal cost curve
can be directly backed out from these two curves and does not require further estimation. To see
this, note that
M C(p) =

@ (AC(p) D(p))
@T C(p)
=
=
@D(p)
@D(p)

@D(p)
@p

1

@ (AC(p) D(p))
:
@p

(11)

With these three curves –D(p), AC(p), and M C(p) –in hand, we can straightforwardly compute
welfare under various allocations.
As is standard, estimating the demand curve requires data on prices and quantities (i.e., insurance coverage), and price variation that is exogenous to demand which can be used to trace
out the demand curve. To estimate the AC(p) curve we need, in addition, data on the expected
costs of those with contract H, such as data on subsequent risk realization and how it translates
to insurer costs. With such data we can then use the very same variation in prices to trace out
the AC(p) curve. Because expected cost is likely to a¤ect demand, any price variation that is
exogenous to demand is also exogenous to insurable cost. That is, we do not require a separate
source of variation.
11

For example, there are new in-car devices that allow auto insurance companies to monitor driving behavior, so
that in principle it is possible for contracts to now be written contingent on this behavior.

11

With su¢ cient price variation, no functional form assumptions are needed for the prices to
trace out the demand and average cost curves. For example, if the main objective is to estimate the
e¢ ciency cost of selection, then price variation that spans the range between the market equilibrium
price (point C in Figures 1 and 2) and the e¢ cient price (point E) allows us to estimate the welfare
cost of selection (area CDE) non-parametrically (that is, without any functional form assumptions
regarding the shape of the demand or average cost curves). With pricing variation that does not
span these points, the area CDE can still be estimated, but will require functional form assumptions.
It is also worthwhile to observe that –although this is not the focus of our paper –we could make
some progress toward bounding the e¢ ciency cost of selection with fewer data requirements. We use
Figure 1 (adverse selection) for this discussion (it is easy to imagine an analogous discussion which
uses Figure 2). Suppose we observe only the relative price of insurance. If we are willing to assume
that the price we observe is the competitive equilibrium price Peqm , we can obtain a (presumably
not very tight) upper bound of the welfare cost of selection, given by Peqm Qmax (rectangle IJKO
in Figure 1).12 If we also observe the market share of contract L, denoted (Qmax Qeqm ), this
upper bound can be tightened to Peqm (Qmax Qeqm ) (rectangle CJKL in Figure 1). Finally, if
we also have data on the average insurable costs of the individuals choosing contract L, denoted
AC L , we can further tighten up the upper bound to be Peqm AC L (Qmax Qeqm ) (equal to
area CJGD in Figure 1).13 Anything tighter will probably require price variation, which provides
more information about the marginal cost and marginal willingness-to-pay for individuals currently
not covered by H.
An example We illustrate the spirit of our empirical approach with a simple example. Consider
a population of individuals making a binary choice of whether to fully insure or not to insure at
all. Each individual is characterized by two parameters: his willingness to pay for insurance
and his expected costs to the insurer c.14 Suppose individuals are uniformly drawn from a discrete
distribution of three types, such that
( ; c) 2 f(2; 1); (4; 3); (6; 5)g :

(12)

Note that these types exhibit adverse selection in the sense that individuals who value insurance
more (i.e., higher ) are expected to cost more to the insurance company (i.e., higher c). The
competitive (i.e., zero pro…t) equilibrium price would be p = 4, at which price is equal to average
costs. Because > c for all types, an e¢ cient allocation requires that everyone purchases insurance,
or that p 2. Thus, we have the well-known result that adverse selection results in under-provision
of insurance.
12

This upper bound is what we used in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2007) to de…ne the Maximum Money at
Stake (MMS) concept, as a way to quantify the relevant size of an insurance market.
13

To see this, note that Peqm (Qmax Qeqm ) is equal to area CJKL, while AC L (Qmax
DGKL because AC L is the average value of the M C curve between Qeqm and Qmax .
14

Qeqm ) is equal to area

Characterizing individuals using these two dimensions of willingness-to-pay and expected costs is similar to the
framework proposed by Feldman and Dowd (1982) and more recently used by Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney (2008).

12

Of course, the econometrician does not directly observe an individual’s willingness to pay , or
his individual-speci…c cost c. However, these can be recovered, and welfare analysis performed, if
there exist data on the fraction insured and the average costs of the insured at di¤erent (exogenously
generated) insurance prices.
For example, consider data on insurance coverage and costs for three di¤erent prices of p =
2; 4; 6. Given the assumptions above, the data available to the econometrician would consist of
(p; Q; AC) =

1
2
(2; 1; 3) ; 4; ; 4 ; 6; ; 5
3
3

;

(13)

where AC is the average costs of the insured. For example, the case of p = 4 will result in insurer
share of 23 (individuals with = 4 or = 6 will purchase, but individuals with = 2 will not), and
average costs of those who purchase insurance of 3+5
2 = 4. Similarly, the case of p = 2 will result in
insurer’s market share of 1 and average costs of 3, and the case of p = 6 will result in insurer share
of 31 and average costs of 5.
Using these three data points on the triplet (p; Q; AC), and in particular assuming that prices
are exogenous with respect to both demand and insurable costs, we can immediately see that
the competitive equilibrium price (i.e., where price is equal to average cost) is p = 4. We can
also back out the cost c of the marginal individual whose allocation is a¤ected when the price
changes. For example, when the price is raised from p = 2 to p = 4 the marginal cost is given
31 4 2
AC(p=4)Q(p=4)
= 1 2 3 = 1. Likewise, the willingness to pay for
by (ACQ Q) = AC(p=2)Q(p=2)
Q(p=2) Q(p=4)
3

the marginal individual is equal to the price, 2,15 and the mass of such individuals is equal to the
change in market share associated with this price change: Q(p = 2) Q(p = 4) = 1 23 = 13 . Using
such estimates of the expected cost and willingness to pay for insurance of the marginal individual,
we can now compute total surplus for any given price. For example, we can conclude that it is
ine¢ cient for the marginal individual at p = 2 to not have insurance, that each such individual
would gain a surplus (i.e.,
c) of 2 1 = 1, and that there is a mass of 31 such individuals in
the market. Thus, the e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection in such a market would be 13 per market
participant.
Extensions to the basic framework As mentioned, the basic framework we described in Section 2 made a number of simplifying assumptions for expositional purposes which do not limit the
ability to apply this approach more broadly. It is straightforward to apply the approach to the case
where the high coverage contract provides less than full coverage and/or where the low coverage
contract provides some coverage; in such settings we must simply be clear that the cost curve of
interest is derived from the average incremental costs to the insurance company associated with
providing H coverage rather than providing L coverage. We discuss a speci…c example of this in
our application below.
15

This is not completely precise. Given the example, all we would know is that the willingness to pay by the
marginal guy is 2
< 4. We would know that = 2 with more continuous variation in price, or if we knew that
the support of the willingness-to-pay distribution is 2, 4, and 6.

13

Likewise, while it was simpler to show the analysis graphically with only two coverage choices,
estimation with more than two coverage choices is straightforward. The data requirements would
simply extend to having price, quantity, and costs for each contract, as well as pricing variation
across all relevant relative prices so that the entire demand and average cost systems can be estimated. Speci…cally, with N available contracts, one could normalize one of these contracts to
be the reference contract, de…ne incremental costs (and price) of each of the other contracts relative to the reference contract, and estimate a system D(p) and AC(p), where demand, prices,
and average costs are now N 1 dimensional vectors. As in the two-contract case, competitive
equilibrium (de…ned by each contract breaking even) will be given by the vector of prices that
solves p = AC(p). From the estimated systems D(p) and AC(p) one can also back out the system
of marginal costs M C(p) which de…nes the marginal costs associated with each price vector. We
can then solve p = M C(p) for the e¢ cient price vector and integrate D(p) M C(p) over the
(multi-dimensional) di¤erence between the competitive and the e¢ cient price vectors to obtain the
welfare cost of selection.
A direct test of selection Although the focus of our paper is on estimating the welfare cost
of selection, a very nice feature of our proposed framework is that it simultaneously provides a
direct test of selection. This test is based on the slope of the estimated marginal cost curve. A
rejection of the null hypothesis of a constant marginal cost curve (i.e., slope of zero) allows us to
reject the null of no selection.16 Moreover, the sign of the slope of the estimated marginal cost curve
informs us of the nature of any selection; a downward sloping marginal cost curve (i.e., a cost curve
declining in quantity and increasing in price) indicates adverse selection, while an upward sloping
curve indicates advantageous selection.17
An appealing property of this selection test is that it allows a distinct test for selection that
is not a¤ected by the existence of moral hazard (or lack thereof). To see this, note that the AC
curve is estimated (and hence the M C curve is derived) using the sample of individuals who choose
to buy contract H at a given price; as we vary price we vary this sample, but everyone in the
sample always has the same coverage. Since coverage is held …xed, our estimate of the slope of the
M C curve (our test of selection) is not a¤ected by moral hazard (which determines how costs are
a¤ected as coverage changes).
By contrast, the in‡uential and widely used “positive correlation” test (see, e.g., Cawley and
Philipson, 1999; Chiappori and Salanie, 2000; and Finkelstein and Poterba, 2004), which compares
realized risks of individuals with di¤erent insurance contracts, jointly tests for the existence of either
16

Using the terminology we de…ned in Section 2.2, a ‡at marginal cost curve implies that the equilibrium outcome
is constrained e¢ cient. It does not however imply that the equilibrium is …rst best. Finkelstein and McGarry (2006)
present evidence on an insurance market that may exhibit a ‡at cost curve (no selection) but is not …rst best.
17

Conceptually, adverse selection refers to a monotonically declining marginal cost curve, and advantageous selection
to a monotonically increasing marginal cost curve. In practice, most empirical tests of selection look globally at average
costs under di¤erent insurance contracts rather than locally at the marginal costs for the marginal market participant
(see, e.g., Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) for a case of adverse selection, or Fang, Keane, and Silverman (2008) for a
case of advantageous selection). As long as the marginal cost curve is monotone, the inferences are valid.

14

selection or moral hazard (but not for each separately). Exogenous pricing variation –which is not
required for the “positive correlation” test –is the key to a distinct test for selection. It allows us
to analyze how the risk characteristics of the sample who selects a given insurance contract varies
as we vary the price of that contract.
Estimating moral hazard As discussed in Section 2.4, our main analysis remains the same with
or without moral hazard. Nonetheless, we note here that our framework also allows us to test for
and quantify moral hazard. One way to measure moral hazard is by the di¤erence between cH ( i ) –
individual i’s expected insurable cost when he has H coverage –and cL ( i ) –individual i’s expected
insurable cost when he has L coverage. That is, cH ( i ) cL ( i ) is the moral hazard e¤ect from the
insurer’s perspective, or the increased cost to to the insurer from providing H that arises from the
e¤ect of coverage by H on the behavior of covered individuals. We already discussed above how
price variation can be used to estimate what we previously referred to as the AC and M C curves,
which are denoted by AC H and M C H when moral hazard is explicitly recognized. With data on
the costs of the uninsured (or less insured, if L represents lower but not zero coverage), we can
repeat the same exercise to obtain an estimate for AC L and M C L . That is, we can use the very
same price variation to estimate demand for the L contract and to estimate the AC L curve from
the (endogenously selected) sample of individuals who chose L. We can then back out an M C L
curve analogously to the way we backed out the M C H curve, using of course the demand curve for
L rather than for H and AC L rather than AC H in translating average costs into marginal costs (see
equation (11)). The (point-by-point) vertical di¤erence between M C H and M C L curves provides
an estimate of moral hazard (see Figure 3). A test of whether this di¤erence is positive is a direct
test for moral hazard, which is valid whether adverse selection is present or not.18
Of course, it is not a new observation that if we have an exogenous shifter of insurance coverage
(which in our context comes from pricing) we can estimate the moral hazard e¤ect of insurance.
However, one attractive property of our proposed approach to estimating moral hazard (rather
than, say, a more standard instrumental variable framework) is that (with su¢ ciently rich price
variation) we can see how moral hazard varies across individuals with di¤erent willingness to pay
( i ), or di¤erent expected costs to the insurer cH ( i ).
18

This would give an estimate of the moral hazard e¤ect from the insurer’s perspective. One might be interested in
other measures of moral hazard (such as the e¤ect of insurance on total spending rather than insurer costs). The test
of moral hazard can be applied in the same manner using other de…nitions of c( i ): The same statement of course
applies to our “cost curve” selection analysis; for the purpose of analyzing equilibrium and market e¢ ciency, we have
estimated selection from the insurer perspective, but again the approach could be used to measure selection on any
outcome of interest.

15

4

Empirical application: employer-provided health insurance

4.1

Data and environment

We implement and illustrate the approach we have just outlined using individual-level data from
2004 on the U.S.-based workers (and their dependents) at Alcoa, Inc. In 2004, Alcoa had approximately 45,000 active employees in the U.S. working at about 300 di¤erent job sites in 39 di¤erent
states. At that time, in an e¤ort to control health care spending, Alcoa introduced a new set of
health insurance options to virtually all its salaried employees and about one-half of its hourly
employees. We analyze the choices of employees o¤ered the new set of options in 2004.19
The data contain the menu of health insurance options available to each employee, the employee
premium associated with each option, the employee’s health insurance choice from the menu, and
detailed information on his (and any covered dependents’) medical expenditures for the year.20
Crucially, the data also contain plausibly exogenous variation in the prices of the insurance contracts o¤ered to otherwise similar employees within the company. Finally, the data contain rich
demographic information, including the employee’s age, race, gender, annual earnings, job tenure
at the company, and the number and ages of other insured family members.
We suspect that we observe virtually everything about the employee that the administrators
setting insurance prices can observe without direct personal contact, as well as some characteristics
that the price setters might not be able to observe (such as detailed health care utilization and
expenditure information from previous years). This is important because it allows us to examine
whether the variation in contract pricing across employees appears random with respect to the
characteristics that could potentially in‡uence the price setters’decisions.
We make a number of sample restrictions. First, we make a number of restrictions for purposes
of data purity, which brings the original sample of about 45,000 active workers down to about
37,000 active workers.21 Second, because the new set of health insurance options we study did not
apply to many hourly workers and because (as we discuss below) the pricing variation is cleaner
for the salaried workers, we further limit the analysis in this paper to salaried employees, who are
19

Over the subsequent several years, most of the remaining hourly employees were transitioned to the new health
insurance options as their union contracts expired. The variation over time in the contracts o¤ered is not well suited
to the approach developed here, which relies on variation in the pricing of the same set of contract o¤erings. Busch
et al. (2006) study the e¤ect of the change in plan options between 2003 and 2004 on the use of preventive care.
In Einav et al. (in progress) we use the staggered timing across hourly employees in the transition from one set of
contract o¤erings to another to study the impact of consumer cost sharing on medical expenditures.
20

Health insurance choices are made during the open enrollment period at the end of 2003 and apply for all of
2004. The medical expenditure data cover all of 2004. We also observe medical expenditure in 2003 if the employee
worked at the company for all of 2003.
21

The biggest reduction in sample size comes from excluding workers who are not at the company for the entire
year (for whom we do not observe complete annual medical expenditures, which are necessary for estimating the
cost curve). In addition we exclude employees who are outside the traditional bene…t structure of the company
(for example because they were working for a recently acquired company with a di¤erent (grandfathered) bene…t
structure); for such employees we do not have detailed information on their insurance options and choices. We also
exclude a small number of employees because of missing data or data discrepancies.

16

approximately one third of the employees.
Third, to illustrate most easily how the theoretical framework maps to the empirical strategy,
we limit the analysis to the two modal health insurance choices: a higher and a lower level of
PPO coverage; we refer to these hereafter as the “High” coverage and “Low” coverage options.
Approximately two-thirds of salaried workers chose one of these two PPO options. In Section 4.5
we describe the other options in more detail and show that the pricing of the two PPOs we focus on
does not a¤ect the probability of the employee choosing one of the other options we do not analyze.
This helps to alleviate concerns about potential biases from our sample selection.
Finally, for simplicity, our baseline speci…cation further limits our sample of salaried workers
who choose the High or Low coverage options to the slightly over one half of employees who chooses
the most common coverage tier, which is family coverage.22 In Section 4.5 we show that our results
are similar when we include employees in all coverage tiers. We assume throughout that the choice
of coverage tier is unrelated to the pricing variation.23
Table 1 provides some descriptive statistics on the employees. Column (1) presents descriptive
statistics for the sample of 37,000 active workers for whom we have complete data. Column (2)
limits the sample to the approximately one third of the sample who are salaried workers. Column
(3) makes the further (minimal) restriction to the salaried workers who face the new bene…t design.
Column (4) further limits the sample to workers who choose High or Low coverage and column (5)
further limits the sample to those in family coverage. Column (5) represents our baseline sample
that we use for most of the empirical analysis; Section 4.5 presents analyses using all coverage tiers
(column (4)) and using all plan options (column (3)). For comparison, columns (6) through (8) of
Table 1 present statistics from the 2005 March Current Population Survey (CPS) on characteristics
of various types of full time employees in the United States.

4.2

Empirical strategy and relationship with the theoretical framework

Notation Following our earlier nomenclature, we will use the notation H and L to re‡ect the
High and Low coverage PPO options, respectively. We denote the relative price (i.e., premium)
j
employee i faces for the H contract relative to the L contract to be pi = pH
pL
i
i , where pi is
employee i’s annual premium if she chose coverage j. Crucially for our approach, pi varies across
individuals in a plausibly random way; we defer a detailed discussion of the nature and source of
this variation to Section 4.3. We de…ne Di to be equal to 1 if employee i chooses coverage H and
0 if employee i chooses coverage L. Finally, mi is a vector representing total medical expenditures
22

Employees always have a choice of four di¤erent tiers for health insurance coverage: employee only, employee
plus spouse, employee plus children, and family coverage.
23

A priori, this seems a reasonable assumption given that coverage tier options are limited by the demographic
composition of the family, and that the price multiplier across coverage tiers is the same for all employees. Speci…cally,
for any health insurance coverage option, for all employees the family price is always triple the “employee only”price,
1.58 times the “employee plus children” price, and 1.43 times the “employee plus spouse” option. Consistent with
our assumption, we …nd that the relative price of High coverage compared to Low coverage in the family coverage
tier does not predict (either economically or statistically) which coverage tier the employee chooses.

17

of employee i and any covered family members in 2004.24
Construction of the cost data ci In our theoretical discussion in Section 2 we de…ned (for
simplicity) H to be full coverage and L to be no coverage; as a result we could refer to ci as the
total cost to the insurance company from covering employee i. In more general settings (such as
our current application), when H may not be full coverage and L may provide some coverage, the
generalization requires us to de…ne ci to be the incremental cost to the insurer from providing higher
coverage relative to providing lower coverage, holding mi constant. In particular, let c(mi ; H)
and c(mi ; L) denote the cost to the insurance company from medical expenditures totalling mi
under coverages H and L, respectively. Thus, the incremental cost is given by ci
c(mi ) =
c(mi ; H) c(mi ; L). The AC curve is computed by calculating the average ci for all individuals
who choose H at a given relative price p (see equation (2)) and estimating how this average ci varies
as the relative price varies. We can observe c(mi ; H) directly in the data, but c(mi ; L) must be
computed counterfactually from the rules of the Low coverage plan. For consistency, we therefore
calculate both c(mi ; H) and c(mi ; L) from plan rules.
Construction of ci requires detailed knowledge of each plan’s bene…ts as well as individuals’
realized medical expenditures. This allows us to construct the cost to the insurance company of
insuring medical expenditures mi under any particular plan j (i.e., c(mi ; j)).25 Our two plans
vary only in their consumer cost sharing rules; speci…cally, the L coverage has higher deductibles
and higher out of pocket maximums.26 We believe we can calculate c(mi ; j) with a great deal of
accuracy. For example, for individuals with High coverage the correlation between their actual share
of spending out of pocket and our calculated share of spending out of pocket is over 97 percent.
Figure 4 illustrates the major di¤erences in consumer cost sharing between the two coverage
options –and the construction of ci –graphically. Cost sharing rules di¤er depending on whether
spending is in network or out of network. Figure 4(a) shows the annual out-of-pocket spending (on
the vertical axis) associated with a given level of total medical spending m (on the horizontal axis)
for each coverage option, assuming the medical spending is in-network. In network, the H plan has
no deductible while the L plan has a $500 deductible; both have a 10 percent coinsurance rate, and
the out of pocket maximum is $5,000 for H and $5,500 for L: Figure 4(b) presents the analogous
graph for out-of-network spending, which has higher cost sharing requirements under both plans.
Although the vast majority of spending (96%) occurs in network, 25% of the individuals in our
24

While it is easy to think of mi as a scalar, the speci…c details of the coverage often make the analysis depend
on how the overall expenditure is allocated among family members and between in-network and out-of-network care.
See Figure 4 and footnote 28 for more details.
25

For example, in our setting, coverage rules vary depending in whether the claim occurs in or out of network,
therefore to construct c(mi ; j) we must observe whether each claim occurs in or out of network. In the context of
a choice between an HMO and a PPO, construction of c(mi ; j) would require (among other things) information on
plan j’s coverage rules for di¤erent medical providers, as well as data on the medical provider for each claim.
26

The plans are similar in all other features, such as the network de…nition and the bene…ts covered. As a result,
we do not have to worry about di¤erences between H and L in plan features that might di¤er in unobservable ways
across di¤erent workers (for example, di¤erences in the relative network quality across di¤erent parts of the country).

18

baseline sample …le at least one claim out of network, making the out-of-network coverage an
important part of the analysis.27
Figures 4(c) and 4(d) show the implied di¤erence in out-of-pocket spending between the Low
and High coverage, for a given level of annual total medical spending mi ; by construction, this is
equal to ci .28 Figure 5(a) presents the empirical distribution of the ci variable. The distribution of
ci re‡ects the various kinks in the coverage plans illustrated in Figure 4. The most visible example
is that about two thirds of the individuals in our baseline sample have ci = 450. This represents
individuals who had between $500 and $50,000 in-network (total) medical expenditures and less
than $500 out-of-network (total) medical expenditures.
The nature of the plan di¤erences is important for understanding the margin on which we may
detect selection (or moral hazard). Empirically, because very few people spend anywhere close to
the out of pocket maximum of even the H contract, the di¤erence in insurer’s cost between the
plans occurs mainly because of di¤erences in the deductible. In terms of selection, this suggests
that the di¤erences in the plans could matter for the insurance choice of anyone with positive expected expenditures, and is increasing as expected expenditures increase. In terms of moral hazard,
this suggests that if individuals are forward looking and have perfect foresight then di¤erences in
behavior for people covered by the di¤erent plans should be limited to the small percentage of
employees (see footnote 48) who have total medical expenditures that are either less than the Low
coverage deductible or fall exactly in the small range that makes only the out-of-pocket maximum
of High coverage (but not of Low coverage) apply.
Finally, Figure 5(b) shows the distribution of ci separately for those who choose High coverage
and those who choose Low coverage. It shows important heterogeneity in the cost distribution
between the two plans. In the spirit of the “positive correlation” test (Chiappori and Salanie,
2000), the higher average costs for those in H coverage compared to those in L coverage indicates
that either moral hazard or adverse selection is present. Detecting whether selection is present,
and if so what its welfare consequences are, requires the use of our pricing variation, to which we
now turn.
27

There is no interaction between the in-network and out-of-network coverages; each deductible and out of pocket
maximum must be satis…ed separately.
28

Figure 4 and the description of the plans in the …gure notes and text above abstract from a few details, all of
which are accounted for in our construction of ci . First, both plans (identically) specify certain expenditures that
are fully covered (such as various types of preventive care). Second, we have described the rules for any coverage
tier that covers multiple individuals (i.e., family coverage, employee plus children coverage, and employee plus spouse
coverage). Employees who choose the employee only coverage tier face deductibles and out of pocket maxima that
are one half of what is described in Figure 4 and in the preceding text above. Third, as is typical of most health
insurance plans, the cost sharing rules in a plan that covers more than two family member can vary depending on
how the spending is distributed among family members. In particular, a given individual in a family can exhaust his
deductible or reach his out-of-pocket maximum either by spending the requisite amount that is required by employee
only coverage or by having the cumulative spending of other members of the family reach the family deductible or
the family out-of-pocket maximum. We account for the composition of spending within the family in generating the
predicted consumer cost sharing under the di¤erent plans. Fourth, in addition to the in-network and out-of- network
options, a very small number of employees are eligible for a “network not available” status, which allows them to go
out of network at a lower cost (but still higher than the in-network cost).

19

Baseline estimating equations For our baselines speci…cation, we estimate the demand and
average cost functions using OLS, assuming that the demand and cost curves are each linear in
prices. That is, we estimate the following two equations
Di =

+ pi +

ci =

i

(14)

+ pi + u i

(15)

where Di , ci , and pi are de…ned earlier. We adjust the standard errors to allow for an arbitrary
variance-covariance matrix within each state. Following the theoretical framework, the demand
equation is estimated on the entire sample, while the (average) cost equation is estimated on the
sample of individuals who (endogenously) choose the High coverage contract.
Using the point estimates from the above regressions, we can construct our predicted demand
and average cost curves and other estimates of interest. Following equation (11), the marginal cost
curve is given by
M C(p) =

1

@ ( + p) ( + p)
@p

=

1

(

+

+2

p) =

+

+ 2 p:

(16)

With the demand curve, AC curve, and M C curve in hand, we can …nd where they intersect and
compute any area of interest between them. In our baseline (linear) speci…cation, the intersection
points and areas of interest can be computed using simple geometry. The equilibrium price and
quantity are given by equating AC(p) = D(p), resulting in Peq = 1 and Qeq = + 1 : The
e¢ cient price and quantity are given by equating M C(p) = D(p), resulting in Pef f =

1
1 2

+

1
1 2

( + ). The e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection (measured by the area of
and Qef f = +
triangle CDE in Figure 1) is then given by
CDE

=

1
(Qef f
2

2

2

Qeq ) (Peq

M C(Peq )) =

2 (1

2 )

+

1

:

(17)

When the model is not linear, we compute these estimates numerically based on the point estimates
from the demand and cost curves.

4.3

Variation in prices

Company structure as the source of variation An essential element in the analysis is
that there is variation across workers in the relative price they face for the High coverage option,
and that this variation is unrelated to the workers’willingness to pay for High coverage or to his
insurable costs. Alcoa’s business structure provides a credible source of such pricing variation across
di¤erent workers in the company.
In 2004, company headquarters o¤ered a set of seven di¤erent possible pricing menus for employee bene…ts. The coverage options are the same across all the menus, but the prices (i.e.,
employee premiums) of the options can vary. For our purposes, the key element of interest is the
incremental premium the employee must pay for the High coverage option relative to the Low
coverage option, p = pH pL ; we refer to this relative price of High coverage as the “price” in
20

everything that follows. There were six di¤erent values of p in 2004 (as two of the seven menus
were identical in this respect), ranging (for family coverage) from $384 to $659.29
Which price menu a given employee faces is determined by the president of his business unit.
Alcoa is divided into approximately forty business units. Each business unit has essentially complete
independence to run their business in the manner they see …t, provided that they do so ethically
and safely, and at or above the company’s normal rate of return; failure on any of these dimensions
can result in the replacement of the unit’s president. Business units are typically organized by
functionality – such as primary metals, ‡exible packaging materials, rigid packaging materials, or
home exterior – and are independent of geography; there are often multiple business units in the
same state. The number of active employees in a business unit ranges from the low teens (in
“government a¤airs”) to close to 6,000 (in “primary metals”). The median business unit has about
500 active employees. The business unit president may choose di¤erent price menus for employees
within his unit based on their location (i.e., job site) and their employment type (salaried or hourly
worker and, if hourly, which union if at all the worker is in).
As a result of this business structure, workers doing the same job in the same location may face
di¤erent prices for their health insurance bene…ts due to their business unit a¢ liation. A priori, it
struck us as more plausible that the pricing variation across salaried workers in di¤erent business
units is more likely to be exogenous – re‡ecting idiosyncratic characteristics of the business unit
presidents rather than di¤erences in the salaried workers in the di¤erent business units – than
the pricing variation across hourly workers. Many of the jobs that salaried workers do are quite
similar across business units. Thus, for example, accountants, paralegals, administrative assistants,
electrical engineers, or metallurgists working in the same state may face di¤erent prices because
their bene…ts were chosen by the president of the “rigid packaging”business unit, rather than by the
president of “primary metals.”By comparison, the nature of the hourly workers’work (which often
involves the operation of particular types of machinery) is more likely to di¤er across di¤erent units,
and may depend on what the business unit is producing. For example, the work of the potroom
operators stirring molten metal around in large vats in the “primary metals”business unit is likely
to be di¤erent from the work of the furnace operators in the “rigid packaging” unit.
Examination of assumption of exogenous pricing The available data are consistent with
this basic intuition. Table 2 compares mean demographic characteristics of workers in our baseline
sample who face di¤erent relative prices. Importantly, we observe all of the characteristics of the
employee that the business unit president (or his human resource director) is likely to observe.
In general, the results look quite balanced. There is no substantive or statistically signi…cant
di¤erence across employees who face di¤erent prices in average age, fraction male, fraction white,
29

The price to the employee of the High coverage options was around $1,500 for family coverage although of course
it ranged across the di¤erent menus. The incidence of being o¤ered a menu with a lower average price level (across
di¤erent options) may well be passed on to employees in the form of lower wages (Gruber, 1994). This is one reason
why it makes sense to focus the analysis on the di¤erence in prices for the di¤erent coverage options, rather than the
level of prices.

21

average (log) wages, average age of spouse, number of covered family members, age of the youngest
child, or in the average (log) 2003 medical spending. The two possible exceptions to this general
pattern are average job tenure and average (log) 2003 medical expenditures when restricted to
employees in the most common plan in 2003 (to avoid potential di¤erences in spending arising from
moral hazard e¤ects of di¤erent 2003 coverages).30 A joint F test of all of the coe¢ cients leaves
us unable to reject the null that they are jointly uncorrelated with price; when we examine the eight
contemporaneous characteristics (age, job tenure, gender, race, wages, age of spouse, number of
covered family members, age of youngest child), we estimate an F stat of 1.71 (p value = 0:14).31
We also examined if covariates appear balanced when we condition on state …xed e¤ects, to
allow for the possibility that prices – which can vary by job site and therefore by state within a
business unit – may vary non-randomly across states (for example, re‡ecting di¤erent health care
utilization patterns or costs). With state …xed e¤ects, the value of the F stat declines to 1.16
(p value = 0:35). There is still substantial variation in prices across workers within state; in
our baseline sample, the overall standard deviation in price is $60 and the within-state standard
deviation is $48.32 We present results below both with and without state …xed e¤ects and show
that they are quite similar. We also present results below when all four coverage tiers are pooled
and again …nd that covariates appear balanced for salaried workers in this pooled sample (F stat
of 1.46, p value = 0:21).33 Finally, we present results below in which we include all salaried
workers, rather than just the two-thirds who chose H or L; the covariates still appear balanced in
this expanded sample (F stat of 1.70, p value = 0:14).
By contrast, similar analysis of covariates for hourly workers suggests statistically signi…cant
di¤erences across employees who face di¤erent prices; the p value on the joint test of covariates
is less than 0.01 for hourly workers with family coverage (with or without state …xed e¤ects). As
noted, this is not surprising given the institutional environment, and motivates the restriction of
our analysis to salaried employees.

4.4

Baseline results

Our baseline speci…cation estimates the linear demand and cost curves shown in equations (14)
and (15) on our baseline sample of 3,779 salaried workers in the family coverage tier who choose
30

The p value on each of these two variables is 0.08. We should note, of course, that when testing 10 di¤erent
variables the p value should be adjusted upward to take account of the multiple hypothesis testing, so that the
p values we report are too small.
31

When we also include 2003 spending for those in the same plan as a ninth covariate (so that our sample size falls
by about 25 percent) we obtain an F stat of 0.98 (p value of 0.48).
32

While there are instances of multiple business units within the same job site, so that in principle there could even
be within-job site variation in prices across salaried workers, in practice in our data the multiple business units in
the same job site always chose the same pricing menu for their salaried workers.
33

As we discuss in more detail in Section 4.5, in all analyses of a sample with more than one coverage tier (including
the analysis just described) we include tier dummies –since prices vary with coverage tier –and we double the price
of the “employee only” coverage to account for the fact that its deductible and out-of-pocket maximum are half that
of the other three coverage tiers.

22

either High or Low coverage. This allows us to walk through the main conceptual points of interest
involved in applying our proposed approach. We then turn in Section 4.5 to a more thorough and
detailed discussion of empirical issues speci…c to our context, including alternative samples and
speci…cations.
Table 3 shows the raw data for our key variables. The relative price of the high coverage ranges
from $384 to $659, with about three-quarters of the sample facing the lowest price. Column (3)
shows that the market share of the High coverage option is generally declining with price, and
ranges from 0.67 to 0.43. Column (4) shows that the average costs of the (endogenously selected)
individuals who select High coverage is generally increasing with price (or equivalently, declining
in quantity) as we would expect with adverse selection (Figure 1). Column (5) shows the same
for the individuals who (endogenously) select Low coverage. Recall that cost is de…ned as the
di¤erence in costs to the insurer associated with a given employee’s family’s medical spending if
those expenditures were insured under the High coverage option relative to the Low coverage option;
as shown in Figure 4, this di¤erence is a non-linear function of the family’s medical spending.
Table 4 reports our baseline results from these data. Column 1 shows our estimate of the demand
curve. We estimate a downward sloping demand curve, with a coe¢ cient on price of -0.00070
(standard error = 0.00032). This implies that a $100 increase in price reduces the probability that
the employee chooses the higher coverage plan by a statistically signi…cant 7 percentage points, or
about 11 percent.34
Column (2) shows our estimate of the average cost curve. As noted, the estimated slope of
the cost curve represents a new test for the existence and nature (adverse or advantageous) of
selection. The coe¢ cient on price is 0.155 (standard error = 0.064). The positive coe¢ cient
on price indicates the presence of adverse selection. That is, the average cost of individuals who
purchased High coverage is (statistically signi…cantly) higher when the price is higher. In other
words, when the price selects those who have, on average, higher willingness to pay for High
coverage, the average costs of this group are also higher. The average cost curve is therefore
downward sloping (i.e., decreasing in market share; see Figure 1).
The point estimate from our baseline speci…cation suggest that a dollar increase in the relative
price of the High coverage is associated with an increase in the average cost of the (endogenous)
sample selecting High coverage at that price of about 16 cents (Table 4, column (2)). By itself, this
estimate of the cost curve can only provide evidence of the existence of adverse selection. Without
knowledge of the demand curve, it does not allow us to form even an approximate guess of the
associated e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection. A central theme of this paper is that we can combine
the estimates from the demand curve and the cost curve to move beyond detecting selection to
34

This semi-elasticity has been estimated in several other health insurance contexts. Di¤erences in the contract
choices across these di¤erent settings mean that comparisons of these semi-elasticities across di¤erent contexts are not
very meaningful. Nonetheless, we note for completeness and casual interest that our estimate of a semi-elasticity (with
respect to a $100 increase in premium) around -11 is somewhat larger than the typical semi-elasticities estimated
(which tend to be around -3 to -4) although by no means the highest in the literature; Bundorf, Levin, and Mahoney
(2008) and Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Scanlon (2008) provide summaries of the existing studies.

23

quantifying its e¢ ciency cost and, relatedly, to calculating the welfare bene…ts from alternative
public policy interventions in the market.
In this spirit, Figure 6 shows how to translate the baseline empirical estimates of the demand
and cost curves in Table 4 into the theoretical welfare analysis shown in Figure 1. That is, Figure
6 is the empirical analog to Figure 1. It graphs the estimated demand curve and average cost
curve shown in Table 4. It also shows the marginal cost curve implied by these estimates (see
equation (16)). Based on these estimates, it is straightforward to calculate the implied welfare
cost of adverse selection (i.e., the area of CDE in Figure 6 (and 1); see also equation (17)). It
should be readily apparent from the …gure that, holding the cost curve constant, shifting and/or
rotating the demand curve could generate very di¤erent welfare costs (that is, areas of the triangle
CDE). This underscores the observation that merely estimating the slope of the cost curve (i.e.,
detecting adverse selection) is not by itself informative about the likely magnitude of the resultant
ine¢ ciency.
We estimate that the welfare cost of adverse selection (i.e., area of CDE) is $9.55 per employee
per year. Adverse selection raises the equilibrium price by almost $200 above the e¢ cient price
(compare the estimated e¢ cient price at point E to the estimated equilibrium price at point C),
and correspondingly lowers the market share of High coverage by 14 percentage points. The social
bene…t of providing H coverage to the marginal employee who buys L in equilibrium (i.e., the
vertical distance between point C and point D in Figure 6) is $138.
Figure 6 also provides some useful information about the …t of our estimates, and where our
pricing variation is relative to the key prices of interest for welfare analysis. The circles superimposed on the …gure represent the actual data points (from Table 3), with the size of each circle
proportional to the number of individuals who faced that price. The …t of the cost curve appears
quite good. The …t of the demand curve is also reasonable, although the scatter of data points led
us to assess the sensitivity of the results to a concave demand curve (see Section 4.5).
The price range of $384 to $659 in our data brackets our estimate of the equilibrium price (point
C) of $463. The lowest (and modal) price in our sample of $384 is about 45 percent higher than
our estimate of the e¢ cient price (point E) of $264. Thus, while in principle our approach does
not require parametric assumptions – with a wide enough span of prices we could estimate the
demand and cost curves non parametrically – in practice the span of the pricing variation in our
particular application requires that we impose some functional form assumptions to estimate the
area of triangle CDE. In the robustness analysis below we examine alternative functional forms.
Benchmarks for the welfare cost of adverse selection We can also use the demand and
cost curves shown in Figure 6 to calculate various benchmarks that provide some context for our
estimate of the welfare cost of adverse selection (i.e., triangle CDE) of $9.55 per employee. An
important consideration in choosing a benchmark is how out of sample we must take the demand
and cost estimates in order to form it; again, Figure 6 is informative on this point.
We calculate two useful denominators to scale our estimate of the welfare cost of adverse selection. One is a measure of how large this cost could have been before we started the analysis. Here
24

we follow the upper bound discussed in Section 3 which can be derived without having exogenous
variation in price. While there we assumed that we observed only the equilibrium price, it is easy
to show that the bound is valid as long at we are willing to assume that the observed price is at
or above the e¢ cient price, so that the ine¢ ciency generated by selection is one of under-insurance
(which is consistent with the adverse selection we detect in the data). The thought experiment
is to assume that we observe data (on price, quantity, and costs) from only one of the rows of
Table 3, so there is no price variation; we assume we observe the weighted average price of $414.
Since individuals have the option to buy High coverage at this price but choose not to do so, their
welfare loss from being ine¢ ciently uncovered by this option cannot exceed $414. Our estimate of
the e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection of $9.55 is therefore 2.3 percent of this “maximum money at
stake,” as Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2007) term this construct.
A second useful denominator is to scale the welfare loss from adverse selection by the total
surplus at stake from e¢ cient pricing or, in other words, the maximum welfare loss that could have
occurred given our estimates of the demand and cost curves. We therefore calculate the ratio of
triangle CDE (welfare loss from adverse selection) to triangle ABE (welfare from e¢ cient pricing) in
Figure 1. To enhance readability, points A and B are not shown in Figure 6, but of course are easily
calculated from the demand and cost estimates in Table 4. They are, however, fairly out of sample
relative to our data. For example, at point A we estimate price to be about $1,350, which is more
than twice the highest price we observe in the data. In our particular application therefore, this
benchmark raises concerns about extrapolating too far out of sample (although we show below that
the result is relatively robust to alternative functional forms for that extrapolation). We estimate
that the welfare loss from adverse selection (area CDE) is about 3 percent of the surplus at stake
from e¢ cient pricing (area ABE).
Welfare under other market allocations Although our welfare analysis has focused on the
e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection in a competitive equilibrium, the fact that we observe prices
varying – and this is how we identify the demand and cost curves – underscores the point that
to generate pricing variation we observe a market that is not in equilibrium. Our analysis of
“equilibrium”pricing –like our analysis of “e¢ cient”pricing –is therefore based on counterfactuals.
By the same token, our analysis of the e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection in this market is not an
analysis of the realized e¢ ciency cost for our sample but rather what this e¢ ciency cost would be
if, contrary to fact, these options were o¤ered in a competitive market setting.
Since our demand and cost curves are su¢ cient statistics for welfare analysis of the pricing of
existing contracts, we can use them to compute the welfare cost of adverse selection under any
other assumption about pricing. For example, we estimate that the weighted average of the welfare
cost of adverse selection given the observed pricing in our sample (see Table 3, columns (1) and
(2)) is $6.26 per employee per year. Moreover, as we noted in Section 2, we could also use the
estimated demand and cost curves to estimate welfare under alternative assumptions about the
market equilibrium, including imperfect competition.
One interesting alternative is to compute what the welfare cost of adverse selection would be if –
25

contrary to what happens in the employment context –in a free market setting prices were set based
on some observable characteristics of the employees. To do so, we simply estimate the demand and
cost curves separately for each “cell” of individuals who – based on their characteristics – would
be o¤ered the same price. As an example, we consider what would happen to the welfare cost of
adverse selection if prices were set di¤erently based on whether the family coverage applied to 3
individuals, 4 individuals, or 5 or more individuals; roughly half of our baseline sample has 4 covered
members, and the remaining sample is roughly evenly split between the other two categories. We
maintain the assumption that the equilibrium would involve average cost pricing, although now
the equilibrium is determined separately in each of the three market segments. We detect adverse
selection in each sub-sample separately, and estimate that the (weighted average) welfare cost of
this selection would be $12.92 if prices were set di¤erently by market segment, compared to our
estimated welfare cost of $9.55 when family size is not priced.
Welfare consequences of government intervention Adverse selection provides the textbook
economic rationale for government intervention in insurance markets. We therefore show how we
can use our framework to estimates the welfare cost of standard public policy interventions in
insurance markets with adverse selection and compare this to our estimate of the welfare cost of
adverse selection. Our preferred policy analysis is to compare the social welfare gain from e¢ cient
pricing (triangle CDE) to the social welfare cost of the price subsidy required to achieve this
e¢ cient price. Such a calculation provides a guide to whether there is scope for welfare improving
government intervention in the form of price subsidies; moreover, it does not require further out of
sample extrapolation beyond what is needed to compute the welfare cost of adverse selection itself.
The social cost of the optimal subsidy is given by (Peqm Pef f )Qef f where is the marginal
cost of public funds. Given our estimates of the e¢ cient and equilibrium outcomes (Figure 6), and
using a standard estimate of the marginal cost of public funds of about 0.3 (e.g., Poterba, 1996), we
calculate the social cost of the price subsidy needed to achieve the e¢ cient allocation to be $45. In
other words, we estimate that the social cost of a price subsidy that achieves the e¢ cient allocation
is about …ve time larger than the social welfare (of $9.55) it gains.
We also compared welfare in the competitive equilibrium with adverse selection to welfare
when everyone is mandated to be covered by the High coverage plan. Mandatory insurance is the
canonical solution to the problem of adverse selection in insurance markets (e.g., Akerlof, 1970).
This makes the analysis of the mandate of considerable interest.35 However, in our application, the
welfare cost of mandating coverage by H (i.e., area EGH in Figure 1) requires calculating points
which are reasonably far out of sample. This suggests that more caution is warranted with this
analysis (although again we will show below that the estimate is reasonably robust). With this
important caveat in mind, we estimate that the welfare cost from mandatory coverage by H is
about three times higher than the equilibrium welfare cost of adverse selection.
35

Footnote 4 discussed some of the possible factors that may make it ine¢ cient to allocate the H contract to the
entire market.

26

4.5

Robustness and extensions

In this section we explore the sensitivity of our welfare estimates to a number of alternative speci…cations, and consider several extensions to our analysis. Our overall …nding is that the magnitude of
the various welfare estimates discussed above –even those that involve extrapolation considerably
out of sample –are quite robust. In particular, across various alternative speci…cations, the welfare
gain from a price subsidy that achieves the e¢ cient price is always substantially below the social
cost of the required price subsidy, the welfare loss from adverse selection when choice over contracts
is allowed is always lower than the welfare loss from mandatory coverage by the H contract, and
the welfare cost of adverse selection is always less than 10 percent of the surplus that could be
generated from e¢ cient pricing.
Functional form and theoretical restrictions on the demand curve Table 5 summarizes
some of the sensitivity analyses. Panel A summarizes the implied welfare implications of each
speci…cation. For completeness, Panel B shows the corresponding parameter estimates from each
speci…cation (from which the welfare estimates shown in Panel A are derived). In the interest
of brevity we focus our discussion primarily on the robustness of the resultant welfare estimates
(columns 6 through 8 of Panel A), which are our main interest. The …rst row of Table 5 presents
the results from our baseline speci…cation (Table 4). Subsequent rows reports results from a single,
speci…ed departure from this baseline.
Rows 2-5 in Table 5 explore the sensitivity of our results to our functional form assumptions.
Row 2 shows the results from our baseline speci…cation (row 1) are quite similar if we estimate a
probit for the demand equation rather than a linear demand. Quadratic demand (not reported)
behaves very badly out of sample and is therefore not shown (but in row 5 we report and discuss
a restricted speci…cation that includes a quadratic demand curve). As can be seen in Figure 6, the
linear speci…cation …ts the cost data very well.36
We also experimented with imposing restrictions on the demand curve that are implied by basic
price theory. Willingness to pay is (theoretically) bounded from above at $1,500 (the maximum
possible out-of-pocket savings from High coverage; see Figure 4) and (theoretically) bounded from
below by 0 (any rational individual should always prefer more coverage to less if the former is o¤ered
for free). Our baseline demand estimate (Table 5, row 1) satis…es the …rst constraint (market share
for High coverage becomes 0 at a price of $1,350), but not the second; at a price of 0, market share
for High coverage is only 0.94.37 The results in row 3 show that constraining market share to be 1
36

We explored alternative functional forms for the cost curve –such as a quadratic, log-log, and log-linear functions.
Not surprisingly, the results (not shown) were very similar in sample. However, curvature (concavity in particular) in
the estimated AC curve sometimes led to an implied non-monotone MC curve (out of sample), which led to strange
out-of-sample predictions.
37

One reason why we may estimate demand below 1 for a price of 0 is that our functional form assumption of
linear demand is not appropriate for extrapolating this far out of sample. Another possible explanation may be that
the L option was the default in 2004. We suspect that default may be less important in our setting than in others
because 2004 was the …rst year in which the new bene…ts were o¤ered. These new bene…ts came with much e¤ort by
the company to advertise and explain the new options to its employees, making it likely that most individuals were

27

when price is 0 does not noticeably a¤ect our welfare estimates. Row 4 shows the results are also
similar if we impose the constraint that willingness to pay is bounded at $800, which may be a
more reasonable upper bound in practice than the theoretically possible $1,500.38 Row 5 estimates
a quadratic demand curve, imposing both the (1,$0) and the (0,$800) constraints on (Q,P), and
again the welfare estimates are quite stable.
Tax treatment of employee premiums We also considered the sensitivity of our results to
the tax treatment of employee contributions to health insurance and to out-of-pocket medical
expenditures. Employee premium contributions are made pre-tax. Employees can pay their out-ofpocket medical spending pre-tax as well, by contributing to a Flexible Spending Account (FSA). If
all out-of-pocket expenses were paid pre-tax, the tax treatment of employee premiums and employee
medical spending would be symmetric, and ignoring the tax subsidy to employee premiums (as we
do in our baseline speci…cation) would be appropriate. However, in practice, less than a quarter
of employees contribute to an FSA. It is of course unclear whether employees who do not take
advantage of the tax subsidy to out-of-pocket medical spending o¤ered by FSAs are cognizant of
the tax subsidy to employee premiums. However, to investigate the sensitivity of our …ndings to the
tax subsidy, we consider the e¤ect on our estimates of assuming that all employees (including those
who contribute to FSAs) make their health insurance choices based on the pre-tax price.39 We
calculate the average tax subsidy (i.e., one minus the average marginal tax rate) for our sample to
be 65 percent.40 In row 6, we therefore re-estimate the baseline speci…cation with the price variable
in both the demand and cost equations multiplied by 0.65. Once again the core welfare estimates are
not noticeably a¤ected, although naturally our estimates of the equilibrium and e¢ cient allocations
(see columns 1 through 4) shift considerably.
“active”choosers. Moreover, it is possible to have a model of defaults in which our welfare anlaysis is una¤ected. We
discuss this in a little more detail below.
38

Out of pocket savings from H of $1,500 is only hit if the covered family members spend enough in-network
and out-of-network to hit the (separate) out of pocket maximums; in practice, this never occurs (indeed, none of the
employees in our sample hits the out of pocket maximum out-of-network and only about 1 percent hits the in-network
out-of-pocket maximum). A potentially more reasonable constraint therefore is that willingness to pay for H should
not exceed $800, which is the reduction in out-of-pocket expenditures associated with H if the family spends more
than the deductible in-network and more than the deductible out-of-network but less than the amount that would
cause them to hit the out-of-pocket maximum (see Figures 4(c) and 4(d)).
39

We do not observe in the data which individuals participate in the FSA.

40

The tax subsidy is given by (1
s
ss
mcr ) where f is the federal marginal tax rate, S is the state
f
marginal tax rate, ss is the marginal Social Security (FICA) payroll tax on the employee, and mcr is the marginal
Medicare payroll tax on the employee. We estimate these marginal tax rates using the NBER’s TAXSIM model, which
takes as inputs the major determinants of marginal tax rates and computes the various marginal rates just mentioned.
Many of the required data elements (or reasonable proxies for them) are available in our company’s data, including
annual wage and salary income, state, marital status, number of dependents and ages of family members. We assume
all employees with family coverage …le jointly and do not itemize. We impute wage and salary income of spouse,
property income, and dividend income based on the ratio of each of these variables to own income for the sample
of full time, white collar manufacturing workers in the March CPS; we pool the 2004 - 2007 March CPS to increase
sample size (Table 1, column 8 presents descriptive statistics for this sample in the March 2005 CPS). All other inputs
required by TAXSIM are assumed to be zero. For more information on TAXSIM, see www.nber.org/taxsim.

28

Additional covariates and alternative samples Our baseline estimates of the demand and
cost curves include no covariates in the analysis besides the relative price. Only variables that are
priced should be controlled for in our analysis of selection and its welfare costs. The fact that, for
example, individuals of, say, di¤erent incomes or di¤erent ages may have di¤erent expected medical
costs – and that this may a¤ect which plan they choose – is part of the endogenous selection we
wish to study, rather than control for, since these characteristics are not priced. However, to allow
for the possibility that the price menu may be selected di¤erently across states in a non random
fashion (e.g., re‡ecting di¤erences in health care costs across states), in row 7 we include state …xed
e¤ects in the demand and cost estimates. Although our estimates become somewhat less precise
(Panel B), the welfare implications remain quantitatively similar (Panel A). In row 8 we add all of
the contemporary employee characteristics (Table 2) as covariates to the demand and cost curves
(in addition to the state …xed e¤ects).41 Once again the results are very similar. The fact that the
slope of the estimated demand curve remains similar is unsurprising given the evidence in Table 2
that pricing is orthogonal to these employee characteristics. The fact that the slope of the estimated
cost curve remains similar suggests that the adverse selection we detect is not driven by the fact
that in our setting the observable characteristics of employees are not priced.42
Finally, in row 9 we estimate our baseline speci…cation using all four coverage tiers rather than
just employees with family coverage. Since prices vary by coverage tier, we include (de-meaned)
indicator variables for the coverage tier in both the demand and cost estimates.43 The parameter
estimates and welfare implications are quite similar to our baseline results.
Possible sample selection An important potential concern with all of the foregoing analyses
is that we limit the sample to only those who choose High and Low coverage PPO options, and
exclude the approximately one-third of salaried workers who chose one of the …ve other available
options. These …ve other options are an HMO (about 7% of salaried workers choose this), opting
out of any employer-provided coverage (about 8%), two even lower coverage PPO options (3% in
the two of them combined), and a Health Reimbursement Account (HRA) PPO option, which
combines a high deductible health insurance policy with tax preferred employer contributions that
can be used to pay out-of-pocket expenses (approximately 17%).44
41

In both rows 7 and 8 the covariates are demeaned so that the constant term is comparable across speci…cations.

42

In this sense, the robustness test on the cost curve is one sided; had we found that the slope of the cost curve
changed once we controlled for unpriced observables, this would not necessarily be a cause for concern. It could
simply re‡ect the fact that much of the selection in our setting is driven by these unpriced observables.
43

The price variable is de…ned for the chosen coverage tier. As noted in footnote 23, for all employees the prices of
contracts in the other coverage tiers are always the same …xed multiple of the prices in the family coverage tier. To
account for the fact that for “employee only” coverage the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum is half of what it
is for the other three coverage tiers (see footnote 28), we multiply price (pi ) and cost (ci ) by two for the 16 percent
of employees with “employee only” coverage.
44

The in-network deductibles for the two lower coverage PPO options are $1,000 and $1,500. The high deductible
HRA PPO has a $3,000 in-network deductible, but the employee receives $1,250 tax free from the company each year
which can be spent on eligible medical expenses (including but not limited to the plan’s cost sharing provisions).
Unspent funds in the HRA can be rolled over the subsequent years, but any unspent balance is forfeited upon

29

In practice, however, our analysis suggests that our sample selection is unlikely to have important e¤ects on our demand estimates (and, of course, it is irrelevant for the estimate of the cost
curve which by design is run on the endogenously selected sample of individuals choosing High
coverage). In particular, we found that the price of the High coverage option relative to the Low
coverage option (our key right-hand-side variable) does not predict whether or not the employee
“opts in” to one of High or Low coverage – as opposed to “opting out” into one of the remaining
options. We suspect that this in part re‡ects the fact that many of the other options (in particular
the three with non trivial market share, the HMO, opting out of insurance, and the HRA) are quite
horizontally di¤erentiated.
Table 6 presents some of these …ndings. The dependent variable in the reported linear regressions
is an indicator variable that takes the value 1 if the employee chose one of the “outside goods”and
0 if he chose either High or Low coverage. The right-hand-side variable p is (as before) the relative
price of High coverage compared to Low coverage. Column (1) reports the results for employees
with family coverage. We …nd that a $100 increase in the relative price of High coverage compared
to Low coverage is associated with an economically and statistically insigni…cant decline (of 0.09
percentage points) in the probability of choosing one of the outside goods. Column (2) shows
similar results when all coverage tiers are pooled. A complication with both of these analyses is
that because coverage tier is not available for the 8 percent of the sample who opt out of coverage,
these employees are excluded from the analysis. In column (3) therefore we include in the sample
the employees who opt out of coverage; however, since coverage tier is not known for these employees
we cannot control for coverage tier and, moreover, we can no longer de…ne the price variable based
on the coverage tier; we instead assign all employees the family prices regardless of what coverage
tier they actually chose (if known).45 Once again there is no evidence that the relative price of
High coverage compared to Low coverage has an economically or statistically signi…cant e¤ect on
the probability of choosing the outside good.
More than two coverage choices As noted in Section 2, it would be conceptually straightforward to extend our empirical analysis to consider more than two choices. However, we face practical
obstacles to doing so in our setting. In particular, as is typical in data sets like ours, we do not
observe medical expenditures for employees covered by an HMO or who opted out of employerprovided coverage; we therefore cannot estimate the cost curve for these options. It is also di¢ cult
to model the demand for these two options, since the prices are not known, nor is it entirely clear
how to de…ne the “good” being purchased.46 We experimented with estimating demand and cost
separation from the company. The out-of-pocket maximums of all these options are also higher, but this is largely
irrelevant empirically since it is extremely rare (less than 1%) for any employee to hit the out-of-pocket maximum of
even the most generous option. Coinsurance rates are the same across all PPOs.
45

Since, as noted, the prices of other coverage tiers are proportional to the family tier, this is not an unreasonable
approach.
46

The price of the HMO is literally not known, and likely varies across geographic areas. Employees receive a
$1,000 “credit” if they opt out of any coverage. However, without knowing what price they face for purchasing
insurance outside of the company it is not clear what the true price is. Relatedly, in contrast to the PPO options,

30

systems for the remaining …ve PPO options. However, the relatively small sample sizes on the other
three PPO options combined with the relatively high multi-collinearity in relative prices among the
di¤erent PPO options resulted in fairly imprecise (and therefore relatively uninformative) estimates
of the demand and cost systems for more than the two PPOs we focus on.
Moral hazard As we discussed in Section 2.4, our framework also allows us to easily test for and
quantify moral hazard, which is de…ned by the vertical distance between M C H and M C L (Figure
3). With two partial coverage contracts, cH is de…ned as the incremental cost to the insurer of
covering the employee with H rather than with L assuming he behaves as if he is covered by H.
Analogously, cL is the incremental cost to the insurer of covering the employee with H rather than
with L assuming he behaves as if he is covered by L. Our foregoing estimates of AC –which were
estimated on the sample of individuals who chose H –therefore gives us AC H . And our estimate
of M C –using our estimate of AC H and our estimate of the demand curve for H (equation (14))
– similarly gives us M C H . To estimate AC L we estimate the same cost equation (equation (15))
but now estimate it on the sample of individuals who chose L: To back out M C L from AC L we
use the demand curve for L, i.e. equation (14) estimated with Di replaced by 1 Di .
In practice, in our setting, we were unable to reject the null of no moral hazard (i.e. H0 :
M C L = M C H ). Our estimates were quite imprecise, suggesting that we may lack su¢ cient power
in our setting to detect moral hazard.47 This may not be surprising given that the design of the
insurance contracts in our setting (see Figure 4) should make moral hazard only a¤ect those people
who expect to spend less than the Low coverage deductible or expect to fall exactly in the range
that makes only the High coverage (but not the Low coverage) out-of-pocket maximum binding.
In practice, this is likely to be a small fraction of our data.48 As a di¤erent way to make this
point, we applied the widely used moral hazard estimate of Manning et al. (1987) from the RAND
Health Insurance Experiment to the total spending of each employee with High coverage based
on the realized change in the marginal cost-sharing he would face with L coverage compared to
H coverage, holding his behavior (i.e., mi ) …xed. This back-of-the-envelope calculation led to an
average change in insurer’s cost of 3%, driven by the fact that three quarters of the employees did
not experience any change in marginal cost sharing. In light of this, we …nd it unsurprising that it
is hard to detect moral hazard in this setting.
the characteristics of the HMO option and any coverage o¤ered outside the …rm are not known.
47

The variation required to be able to detect moral hazard is greater than that required to be able to estimate
the demand curve or the cost curve. A useful analogy is to an instrumental variable setup in which the demand
analysis (how demand varies with price) serves as the …rst stage in the moral hazard estimate (how costs vary with
demand). The F statistic on price in the demand equation in our baseline speci…cation is only 4.8 (Table 4, column
1) suggesting that we do not have enough power for a second stage analysis of the impact of demand on costs. By
contrast, our test of adverse selection (the analysis of the slope of the cost curve) is more in the spirit of our demand
analysis – analyzing how a characteristic varies with price. Loosely, with this kind of variation, detecting adverse
selection requires less power than detecting moral hazard.
48

Considering in-network spending, there are 9% of the employees in our baseline sample who spend less than the
Low coverage (in-network) deductible of $500 and none for whom only the High coverage out-of-pocket maximum is
binding. Out-of-network spending would increase this share (but not by much).

31

Departures from revealed preference As we noted at the outset, our approach to welfare
analysis has relied on revealed preferences. It is possible to use our framework for welfare analysis
when we are not willing to assume revealed preferences, although this would require speci…cation
of the precise alternative choice model and how it maps to welfare. Some “behavioral” models are
easily translated to our approach. Consider, for example, the possible role of defaults; the default
option in our setting is the L contract. If one believes that there is a (constant) fraction
of
the population who always chooses the default option of L, then it is possible to implement our
approach, and perform welfare analysis on the remaining 1
population (of “active” choosers).

5

Conclusions

This paper proposed a simple approach to estimating welfare in insurance markets. As indicated
by the title, the key to the approach is the existence of variation in prices across individuals that
is unrelated to their demand for coverage or to their expected insurable costs. Applied welfare
analysis usually relies on pricing variation that allows the researcher to trace out a demand curve.
The de…ning feature of selection markets is that costs vary endogenously as market participants
respond to the price of insurance. Welfare analysis of selection markets therefore requires that we
also trace out the (endogenous) cost curve. We show how we can estimate the cost curve as well as
the demand curve, and then proceed with welfare analysis in a familiar and straightforward fashion.
In addition, the slope of the estimated cost curve provides a direct test of the existence and nature
of selection.
We illustrated our framework by applying it in the particular context of the employer-provided
health insurance at Alcoa, Inc., a large private employer in the United States. Alcoa’s business
structure generates plausibly exogenous variation in the price of more comprehensive relative to
less comprehensive health insurance for otherwise similar workers. Using this variation, we …nd
evidence of adverse selection in the market. However, we estimate that its e¢ ciency implications
are quantitatively small in both absolute and relative terms. Our central estimate implies a welfare
cost of adverse selection of about $10 per employee or about 3 percent of the total surplus at stake
from e¢ cient pricing. Moreover, standard policy instruments do not appear able to improve upon
the adverse selection equilibrium. For example, we estimate that the social cost of the price subsidy
required to achieve the e¢ cient allocation is about …ve times higher than the social welfare gain
from doing so.
It is important to emphasize that our empirical estimates are speci…c to a particular subsample
of workers in a particular …rm choosing between two speci…c coverage options. There is no reason
to think our results are representative of the welfare cost of selection in other populations, other
institutional environments, or other insurance markets. Our …ndings illustrate, however, that it is
empirically possible to …nd markets in which adverse selection exists and impairs market e¢ ciency,
but where these e¢ ciency costs may not be large, or obviously remediable using standard public
policy tools. Whether the same is true in other markets and in which is an important area for
future work. We hope that future work will apply the framework and strategy we have developed
32

here to welfare analysis in other insurance settings.
We believe that the approach we propose in this paper is likely to be broadly applicable (and
that this is one of its attractions). It requires three essential data elements: insurance options and
choices, subsequent risk realization, and variation in prices that is exogenous to demand and to
insurable costs. These data requirements are not particularly stringent. Researchers have already
demonstrated considerable success in obtaining insurance company data that contain the …rst two
essential elements in a wide range of di¤erent insurance markets.49 Indeed, a nice feature of welfare
analysis in insurance markets is that cost data are much easier to obtain than in many other product
markets, since they involve information on accident occurrences or insurance claims, rather than
insight into the underlying production function of the …rm. Further reducing the data hurdles, our
approach can be implemented using aggregate (as opposed to individual) level data, as long as the
coverage rules are simple enough that the cost data can be constructed from aggregate data on risk
realization.50
The near-ubiquitous regulation of insurance markets provide numerous instances of the third
essential data element: the exogenous pricing variation that is essential for estimating the demand
and cost curves. Changes in state regulations of private insurance markets create variation in
the prices charged to di¤erent individuals at a point in time as well as over time.51 Tax policy
is another useful source of pricing variation; for example, a large literature has documented (and
used) the substantial variation across space and time in the tax subsidy for employer-provided
health insurance and hence the price that individual employees face for this bene…t.52 Beyond
the myriad opportunities provided by public policy, researchers have also found useful pricing
variation stemming from the idiosyncrasies of …rm pricing behavior.53 More generally, any of the
standard instruments used in demand analysis - such as “cost shifters” to the production function
for insurance or exogenous changes in market competition – can serve as the requisite pricing
variation for welfare analysis in insurance markets.
A key issue is the validity of the pricing instruments. This can be evaluated in speci…c applications. Indeed, we see the transparency of the approach as one of its key attractions. It is also
relatively straightforward to implement, and fairly general. As a result, comparisons of welfare estimates obtained by this approach across di¤erent settings may be quite informative. For example,
49

Examples in property-casualty insurance markets include Chiappori et al. (2006) and Cohen and Einav (2007) for
automobile insurance and Sydnor (2006) for home owner’s insurance. In health- and life-related insurance markets,
examples include Finkelstein and Poterba (2004) for annuities, Cutler and Reber (1998) and Eichner, McLellan, and
Wise (1998) for health insurance, and Finkelstein and McGarry (2006) for long-term care insurance.
50

This would be the case, for example, if one were analyzing a full coverage compared to a no coverage option, or
if in all the contracts the insurer costs were a linear function of risk realization.
51

See Buchmueller and DiNardo (2002) or Bundorf and Simon (2006) for examples in health insurance markets,
and Blackmon and Zeckhauser (1991) for an example from automobile insurance.
52

See Gruber (2002) for a review of this large literature.

53

Examples include …rm experimentation with their pricing policy (Cohen and Einav, 2007), discrete pricing policy
changes (Adams, Einav, and Levin, forthcoming), out of equilibrium pricing decisions made by human resource
managers for employee insurance bene…ts (Cutler and Reber, 1998), and the rules …rms use to adjust individuals’
prices in response to their prior claims experience (Abbring, Chiappori, and Pinquet, 2003; Israel, 2004).

33

they can be used to try to assess in which settings – e.g., particular insurance markets, products,
or populations – the welfare gains from government intervention are more likely to be substantial
(relative to the costs).
A …nal feature of our empirical approach to welfare analysis in insurance markets that deserves
emphasis is that it does not require the researcher to make assumptions about the underlying
nature of individuals’information or preferences that gives rise to the estimated demand and cost
curves. As long as we are willing to use the individuals’ revealed choices for welfare analysis,
the precise source of the selection (for example, the role of unobserved preferences for insurance or
private information about risk type) is not germane for analyzing the e¢ ciency cost of the resultant
selection, or the welfare consequences of public policies that change the price (for example, through
mandating or subsidizing a particular policy). Since such modeling assumptions are often ad hoc,
and may have non trivial e¤ects on the welfare estimates, we view the ability to avoid them as
a key feature of our proposed approach. It is not, however, without cost; it restricts our ability
to analyze the welfare consequences of counterfactual policies to those that change the prices of
existing products. Our approach is unable to shed light on the welfare consequences of introducing
products that are not observed in the data. Analysis of such questions would require that we model
the primitives underlying the revealed demand and cost curves; this is an important and useful
complement to the empirical approach outlined in this paper.

6

References

Abbring, Jaap, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, and Jean Pinquet (2003), “Moral hazard and Dynamic
Insurance Data.” Journal of the European Economic Association 1(4): 767-820.
Adams, William, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin (forthcoming), “Liquidity Constraints and
Imperfect Information in Subprime Lending,” American Economic Review, forthcoming, available
at http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/contents/accepted.html.
Akerlof, George (1970), “The market for ’lemons’: quality uncertainty and the market mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3): 488-500.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes (1995), “Automobile Price in Market Equilibrium,” Econometrica 63: 841-890.
Blackmon, Glenn B. and Richard Zeckhauser (1991), “Mispriced Equity: Regulated Rates for
Automobile Insurance in Masscahusetts”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 81(2):
65-69.
Buchmueller, Thomas C., and John E. DiNardo (2002), “Did Community Rating Induce an Adverse Selection Death Spiral? Evidence from New York, Pennsylvania, and Connecticut,”American
Economic Review 91(1): 280-294.
Bundorf, Kate M., and Kosali Simon (2006), “The Impact of Rate Regulation on Access to
Supplemental Health Insurance,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 96(2):.6771.

34

Bundorf, Kate M., Jonathan Levin, and Neale Mahoney (2008), “Pricing, Matching and E¢ ciency in Health Plan Choice,” mimeo, Stanford University.
Busch, Susan H., Colleen L. Barry, Sally J. Vegso, Jody L. Sindelar and Mark R. Cullen (2006),
“E¤ects of a Cost-Sharing Exemption on Use of Preventive Services At One Large Employer,”
Health A¤ airs 25(6): 1529-1536.
Carlin, Caroline, and Robert J. Town (2007), “Adverse Selection, Welfare and Optimal Pricing
of Employer-Sponsored Health Plans,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Cawley, John, and Tomas Philipson (1999), “An Empirical Examination of Information Barriers
to Trade in Insurance,” American Economic Review 89(4): 827-846.
Chernew, Michael, Gautam Gowrisankaran, and Dennis P. Scanlon (2008), “Learning and the
Value of Information: Evidence from Health Plan Reports Cards,”Journal of Econometrics 144(1):
156-174.
Chetty, Raj (2008), “Moral Hazard versus Liquidity and Optimal Unemployment Insurance,”
Journal of Political Economy 116(2): 173-234.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, Bruno Jullien, Bernard Salanie, and Francois Salanie (2006), “Asymmetric Information in Insurance: General Testable Implications,”Rand Journal of Economics 37(4):
783-798.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Bernard Salanie (2000), “Testing for Asymmetric Information in
Insurance Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 108(1): 56-78.
Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav (2007), “Estimating risk preferences from deductible choice,”
American Economic Review 97(3): 745-788.
Cutler, David M., and Sarah J. Reber (1998), “Paying for Health Insurance: The Trade-O¤
between Competition and Adverse Selection,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 433-466.
Cutler, David M., Amy Finkelstein, and Kathleen McGarry (2008), “Preference Heterogeneity
and Insurance Markets: Explaining a Puzzle of Insurance,”American Economic Review papers and
proceedings 98(2): 157-162.
Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser (2000), “The anatomy of health insurance,”in A.
J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, edition 1, volume 1, chapter
11, 563-643, Elsevier.
De Meza, David, and David C. Webb (2001), “Advantageous selection in insurance markets,”
Rand Journal of Economics 32(2): 249-262.
Deaton, Agnus, and John Muellbauer (1980), “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” American
Economic Review 70: 312-326.
Eichner, Matthew J., Mark B. McLellan, and David A. Wise (1998), “Insurance or SelfInsurance?: Variation, Persistence, and Individual Health Accounts,”in David Wise (ed.), Inquiries
in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Robin McKnight and Mark R. Cullen (in progress), “Estimating
the E¤ect of Cost-Sharing on Medical Spending,” manuscript in progress.
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf (2007), “The Welfare Cost of Asymmetric
Information: Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market,” NBER Working Paper 13228.
35

Fang, Hanming, Michael Keane, and Dan Silverman (2008), “Sources of Advantageous Selection:
Evidence from the Medigap Insurance Market,” Journal of Political Economy 116(2): 303-350.
Feldman, Roger D., and Bryan E. Dowd (1982), “Simulation of a Health Insurance Market with
Adverse Selection,” Operation Research 30(6): 1027-1042.
Finkelstein, Amy, and Kathleen McGarry (2006), “Multiple dimensions of private information:
evidence from the long-term care insurance market,” American Economic Review 96(4): 938-958.
Finkelstein, Amy, and James Poterba (2004), “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder Evidence from the U.K. Annuity Market,” Journal of Political Economy 112(1): 193-208.
Fronstin, Paul (2003), “Sources of Health Insurance and Characteristics of the Uninsured:
Analysis of the March 2003 Current Population Survey,”Employee Bene…t Research Institute Issue
Brief 264, available at http://www.ebri.org/pdf/briefspdf/EBRI_IB_10a-20061.pdf.
Greenwald, Bruce C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1986), “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect
Information and Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(2), 229-264.
Gruber, Jonathan (1994), “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Bene…ts,” American Economic Review 84(3): 622-641.
Gruber, Jonathan (2002), “Taxes and Health Insurance,” James Poterba (ed.), Tax Policy and
the Economy, Volume 16: 37-16. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hausman, Jerry (1997), “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,”
in Bresnahan and Gordon (eds.), The Economics of New Goods, NBER Studies in Income and
Wealth 58: 209-237.
Israel, Mark (2004), “Do We Drive More Safely When Accidents Are More Expensive? Identifying Moral Hazard from Experience Rating Schemes,”unpublished mimeo, available at http://www.
wcas.northwestern.edu/csio/Conferences/CSIO-IDEI-2004/moral_exp_paper1.pdf.
Lancaster, Kelvin J.(1966), “A New Approach to Consumer Theory,”Journal of Political Economy 74(2), 132-157.
Lustig, Joshua D. (2007), “The Welfare E¤ects of Adverse Selection in Privatized Medicare,”
mimeo, Yale University.
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz,
and M. Susan Marquis (1987), “Health insurance and the demand for medical care: Evidence from
a randomized experiment,” American Economic Review 77(3): 251-277.
Poterba, James (1996), “Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and Health
Care: How and Why?” in Victor Fuchs (ed.), Individual and Social Responsibility, University of
Chicago Press.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
90: 630-649.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1987), “The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence of Quality on
Price,” Journal of Economics Literature 25(1): 1-48.
Sydnor, Justin (2006), “Sweating the Small Stu¤: The Demand for Low Deductibles in Homeowners Insurance,”mimeo, Case Western University, available at http://www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/
36

…nance/faculty/seminars/Sydnor.pdf.
Wilson, Charles (1980), “The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets with Adverse Selection,” Bell
Journal of Economics 11(1): 108-130.

37

Figure 1: E¢ ciency cost of adverse selection

Price
A
Demand curve

B
Peqm

AC curve
C

J

I
MC curve

D

E

F

Peff
G
H
O

L
Qeqm

Qeff

K
Qmax Quantity

This …gure illustrates the theoretical e¢ ciency cost of adverse selection. It depicts a situation of adverse selection
because the marginal cost curve is downward sloping (i.e. increasing in price, decreasing in quantity), indicating that
the people who have the highest willingness to pay also have the highest expected cost to the insurer. Competitive
equilibrium is given by point C (where the demand crosses the average cost curve), while the e¢ cient allocation is
given by point E (where the demand crosses the marginal cost curve). The (shaded) triangle CDE represents the
welfare cost from under-insurance due to adverse selection.

38

Figure 2: E¢ ciency cost of advantageous selection

Price
A
Demand curve

D

MC curve

G

E

Peff

C

F

Peqm
H

B
AC curve
Qeff

Qeqm

Qmax Quantity

This …gure illustrates the theoretical e¢ ciency cost of advantageous selection. It depicts a situation of advantageous
selection because the marginal cost curve is upward sloping, indicating that the people who have the highest willingness
to pay have the lowest expected cost to the insurer. Competitive equilibrium is given by point C (where the demand
crosses the average cost curve), while the e¢ cient allocation is given by point E (where the demand crosses the
marginal cost curve). The (shaded) triangle CDE represents the welfare cost from over-insurance due to advantageous
selection.

39

Figure 3: Moral hazard

Price
Demand curve
A
Lower bound Demand for
constrained contract

ACH curve

B
Peqm

C

Peff

D
MCH curve

E

F

M
N

H

MCL curve
O

G

L
Qeqm

K
Qeff

Qmax Quantity

This …gure extends Figure 1 to illustrate moral hazard; it shows a special case of moral hazard with parallel

M CL

M C H curves. In the presence of moral hazard, the M C L curve lies strictly below the M C H curve. The
(point-by-point) vertical distance between M C H and M C L provides a measure of moral hazard. The e¢ ciency
and

cost of adverse selection still remains the area CDE (as in Figure 1).

40

Figure 4: Description of the High and Low coverages
Figure 4(b)
12,000

5,000

10,000

Associated Out-of-Pocket ($US)

4,000

Low coverage
3,000

2,000

High coverage
1,000

0

Low coverage
8,000

6,000

High coverage
4,000

2,000

0

40,000

50,000

0

10,000

Total In_Network Medical Expenditure ($US)

Figure 4(c)

Total In-Network Medical Expenditure ($US)

200

35,000

34,500

0
34,000

51,000

50,500

50,000

49,500

49,000

0

400

33,500

100

600

1,500

200

800

1,000

300

1,500

50,000

1,000

0

400

1,000

40,000

1,200

500

Associated Incremental Cost to Insurer ($US)

500

0

30,000

Figure 4(d)

600

500

Associated Incremental Cost to Insurer ($US)

20,000

Total Out-of-Network Medical Expenditure ($US)

33,000

30,000

32,500

20,000

32,000

10,000

31,500

0

31,000

Associated Out-of-Pocket ($US)

Figure 4(a)
6,000

Total Out-of-Network Medical Expenditure ($US)

Figures 4(a) and 4(b) present the main features of the High (dashed) and Low (solid) coverages o¤ered by the company,
which is based on a deductible and an out-of-pocket maximum. Figures 4(c) and 4(d) present the corresponding cost
di¤erence to the insurer by providing the High coverage instead of the Low coverage, for a given level of medical
expenditure; in other words, Figures 4(c) and 4(d) illustrate ci (m): Figures 4(a) and 4(c) describe the rules for
in-network medical spending (deductibles of $0 and $500, and out-of-pocket maximums of $5,000 and $5,500 for High
and Low coverage, respectively), and Figures 4(b) and 4(d) describe the rules for out-of-network medical spending
(deductibles of $500 and $1000, and out-of-pocket maximums of $10,000 and $11,000 for High and Low coverage
respectively). Coinsurance rates for both High and Low coverage are 10 percent (in network) and 30 percent (out of
network). There is no interaction between the in-network and out-of-network coverages (i.e. each deductible and out
of pocket maximum must be satis…ed separately). The rules graphed in the …gures and described in the foregoing
notes are for any coverage that covers multiple individuals (i.e. family coverage, employee plus children coverage,
or employee plus spouse coverage). Employees who purchase “employee only” coverage face deductibles and out of
pocket maxima that are one-half of what is graphed in the …gure (and described in the forgoing notes).

41

Figure 5: The distribution of the insurer’s incremental costs (ci )
Figure 5(a)

80%
68.0%
60%

40%

20%
6.6%
0.8%

1.5%

1.9%

2.1%

0

(0,100]

(100,225)

225

7.1%

5.6%
2.0%

1.4%

(650,800)

800

3.0%

0%
(225,350]

(350,450)

450

(450,650]

(800,1150)

Incremental insurer cost ($US)
Figure 5(b)

80%

Chose High Coverage
Chose Low Coverage
60%

40%

20%

0%
0

(0,100]

(100,225)

225

(225,350]

(350,450)

450

(450,650]

(650,800)

800

(800,1150)

Incremental insurer cost ($US)

This …gure presents the distribution of the incremental insurer cost (ci ). Figure 5(a) does so for all 3,779 employees
in our baseline sample (Table 1, column 5), while Figure 5(b) presents this separately for employees in High and Low
coverages (2,465 and 1,314 employees, respectively). Note that the distribution has several mass points which are
driven by the kinked formula of the coverages (Figure 4). The largest mass point is at $450, with about two thirds of
the sample. This point represents individuals who spent more than $500 and less than $50,000 in network, and less
than $500 out of network.

42

Figure 6: E¢ ciency cost of adverse selection - empirical analog

1000
900

Demand Curve

Annual Price and Cost ($US)

800

AC Curve
700

(Qeqm=0.617,Peqm=463.5)

600

CDE=$9.55

500

C

400

D

300
200

MC Curve

100
0

E

(Qeff=0.756,Peff=263.9)
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Share of High Coverage

0.8

0.9

This …gure is the empirical analog of the theoretical Figure 1. The demand curve and AC curve are graphed using
the point estimates of our baseline speci…cation (Table 4). The MC curve is implied by the other two curves, as
in equation (16). The circles represent the actual data points (Table 3) for demand (empty circles) and cost (…lled
circles); the size of each circle is proportional to the number of individuals associated with it. For readability we omit
the one data point from Table 3 with only 7 observations (although it is included in the estimation). We label points
C, D, and E, that correspond to the theoretical analog in Figure 1, and report some important implied estimates (of
the equilibrium and e¢ cient points, as well as the welfare cost of adverse selection).

43

Table 1: Summary statistics
2004 Company Data

March 2005 CPS

All employees

Only salaried
workers

Only salaried
workers with new
benefit design

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

36,814

11,964

11,325

0.78
0.77
0.33

0.73
0.87
0.00

0.73
0.86
0.00

44.24
9.86
45

44.51
9.22
45

Tenure with company (years)
Mean
13.23
Std. Deviation
10.28
Median
11
Annual Salary (current $US)
Mean
53,103
Std. Deviation
47,642
Median
47,283

Number of Individuals
Fraction Male
Fraction White
Fraction unionized

Col. (3) limited to
Col. (4) limited to
only workers who workers with family
chose High or Low
coverage

All full time workers

Only in
manufacturing

White collar
workers in
manufacturing

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

7,263

3,779

83,118

11,178

4,688

0.77
0.86
0.00

0.86
0.86
0.00

0.58
0.82
0.13

0.70
0.82
0.14

0.64
0.86
0.04

44.50
9.21
45

45.17
9.12
46

42.66
7.22
43

41.39
12.33
41

42.13
11.45
42

42.87
10.88
43

13.26
9.95
12

13.23
9.96
12

13.69
10.01
13

12.70
8.93
12

n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a

71,622
77,936
60,484

72,821
79,373
61,433

74,017
91,530
61,822

80,999
112,790
66,335

41,869
47,955
32,000

46,195
45,435
35,000

63,157
58,072
50,000

Age
Mean
Std. Deviation
Median

Columns 1 to 5 present summary statistics for di¤erent cuts of the 2004 employees at the company. Column 1 presents
statistics for all active employees in our sample, column 2 for salaried workers only. Column 3 looks at a slightly
smaller group of salaried employees who faced the new bene…t design, and column 4 further restricts attention to
salaried employees who chose Low or High coverage (who are the primary focus of our analysis). Column 5 further
limits the analysis to those who chose family coverage; this sample is used to generate our baseline estimates. For
comparison, columns 6 to 8 present summary statistics for workers employed full time (de…ned as those who on
average worked 35 or more hours per week in the previous year) in the March 2005 CPS. Column 6 shows all full time
workers, column 7 shows all full time workers in manufacturing industries, and column 8 shows all full time white
collar workers (de…ned based on occupation codes) in manufacturing industries; in these three columns we use CPS
sampling weights (“earning weights” for the union variable, and “person weights” for all others).

44

Table 2: Assessing the exogeneity of the price variation
Faced lowest Faced higher
relative price relative prices
(2,939 workers) (840 workers)
(1)
(2)
Age (Mean)
Tenure (Mean)
Fraction Male
Fraction White
Log(Annual Salary) (Mean)
Spouse Age (Mean)
Number of covered family members (Mean)
Age of youngest covered child (Mean)
Log(2003 Medical Spending + 1)
All
In most common 2003 plan

Difference

Coefficient

p-value

(3)

(4)

(5)

42.74
13.02
0.862
0.874
11.16
41.37
4.14
9.81

42.40
11.63
0.852
0.825
11.05
41.05
4.07
9.41

0.33
1.39
0.009
0.049
0.11
0.32
0.07
0.40

-0.245
-0.565
1.268
-6.998
-8.612
-0.200
-1.400
-0.3

0.31
0.08
0.79
0.40
0.17
0.41
0.36
0.26

8.13
8.21

7.79
8.08

0.32
0.13

-2.100
-1.700

0.15
0.08

a

The table reports average di¤erences in covariates (shown in the left column) across workers who face di¤erent relative
prices for the higher coverage option. Sample is limited to the 3,779 salaried workers with family coverage who choose
High or Low coverage (Table 1, column 5). The worker characteristics in the left column represent contemporaneous
2004 characteristics (except where noted). Note that everyone with family coverage has a covered spouse and at least
one covered child. Columns 1 and 2 present, respectively, average characteristics for the approximately three-quarters
of employees who faced the lowest relative price ($384; see Table 3) and the remaining one quarter who face one of
the …ve higher relative prices ($466 to $659; see Table 3). Column 3 shows the di¤erence between columns 1 and
2. Columns 4 and 5 report, respectively, the coe¢ cient and p-value from a regression of the (continuous) relative
price variable (in $US) on the characteristic given in the left column; we adjust the standard errors for an arbitrary
variance covariance matrix within each state.
a In the bottom two rows we look at 2003 medical spending for all the workers in the sample who were in the data in

2003 (2,602 and 658 workers in columns 1 and 2, respectively), and for all the workers who were in the data in 2003
in the most common 2003 health insurance plan (2,284 and 523 workers in columns 1 and 2, respectively). The latter
attempts to avoid potential di¤erences in spending arising from moral hazard e¤ects of di¤erent 2003 coverages.

45

Table 3: The e¤ect of price on demand and costs

Relative Price

Number of
Obs.

Fraction chose
High Coverage

(1)

(2)

(3)

$384
$466
$489
$495
$570
$659

2,939
67
7
526
199
41

0.67
0.66
0.43
0.64
0.46
0.49

Average Incremental Cost
High Coverage Low Coverage
(4)
(5)
$451.40
$499.32
$661.27
$458.60
$492.59
$489.05

$425.48
$423.30
$517.00
$421.42
$438.83
$448.50

The table presents the raw data underlying our estimates of the demand and cost curves in the baseline speci…cation.
Sample is limited to our baseline sample of salaried workers with family coverage who chose High or Low coverage
(Table 1, column 5). All individuals face one of six di¤erent relative prices, each represented by a row in the table.
Column 2 gives the number of employees facing each price, and column 3 reports the fraction of them who chose
High coverage. Columns 4 and 5 report (for High coverage and Low coverage individuals, respectively) the average
incremental costs to the insurer of covering the individuals with High coverage rather than with Low coverage, given
the family’s medical expenditures. The graphical analog to this table is presented by the circles shown in Figure 6.

46

Table 4: Baseline results
Dependent Variable
(Sample)

1 if chose High
(both High and Low)
(1)

Incremental Cost
(only High)
(2)

Relative Price of High ($US)

-0.00070
(0.00032)
[0.034]

0.15524
(0.06388)
[0.021]

0.940
(0.123)
[0.000]

391.690
(26.789)
[0.000]

0.652
3,779
0.008

455.341
2,465
0.005

Constant

Mean Dependent Variable
Number of Observations
R-Squared

The table reports the results from our baseline speci…cation. Sample is limited to salaried workers with family
coverage. Column 1 reports the results from estimating the linear demand
sample of employees who choose High or Low coverage;

D=

+ p (equation (14)) on the

D is an indicator variable for whether the employee chose

High coverage (as opposed to Low coverage). Column 2 reports the results from estimating the linear cost equation

c=

+ p (equation (15)) on the sample of individuals who choose High coverage; c is the incremental costs to

the insurer of covering a given employee’s (and covered dependents’) medical expenditures with High coverage rather
than Low coverage. The price variable (p) is the incremental premium to the employee for High (as opposed to
Low) coverage. There are no other covariates in the regression besides those shown in the table. All estimates are
generated by OLS. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for an arbitrary variance covariance matrix within each
state; p values are in [square brackets]. Results from alternative speci…cations are reported in Table 5.

47

Table 5: Robustness
Panel A: Welfare estimates from different specifications
Competitive
Equilibrium

Efficient Allocation

Welfare cost of Adverse Selection
Relative to
Relative to
In dollar terms
social cost of welfare cost of
(per market
efficient
High
coverage
a
participant)
b
c
subsidy
mandate
(5)
(6)
(7)

Relative to
total
achievable
d
welfare
(8)

Q

P

Q

P

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1 Baseline (family coverage, no state fixed-effects)

0.617

463.51

0.756

263.94

9.55

21.1%

32.4%

3.4%

Robustness to demand estimates
2 Probit demand
3 Linear demand, constrained to go through (Q,P)=(1,$0)
4 Linear demand, constrained to go through (Q,P)=(0,$800)
5 Quadratic demand, constrained to go through (1,$0) and (0,$800)

0.619
0.612
0.562
0.587

463.59
463.56
463.59
463.58

0.790
0.750
0.688
0.738

187.85
299.04
387.90
343.51

11.32
7.81
3.30
5.00

17.3%
21.1%
21.1%
18.8%

31.6%
30.2%
16.4%
45.6%

3.5%
3.4%
3.4%
4.5%

0.389

514.49

0.567

348.53

7.71

27.3%

16.8%

9.8%

0.622
0.641
0.593

460.16
440.00
434.20

0.699
0.724
0.704

341.40
306.67
244.83

3.65
4.42
7.67

14.6%
15.3%
19.2%

6.5%
9.2%
14.2%

1.2%
1.3%
2.5%

6

Robustness to tax subsidy
Baseline specification, but accouting for pre-tax premiums

Robustness to sample and source of variation
7 State fixed-effects included (in both demand and cost regressions)
8 State fixed-effects and demographics included (in both regressions)
e
9 All coverage tiers, no state fixed-effects

Panel B: Parameter estimates from different specifications
Demand Equation
alpha
beta
Coeff.
Std. Err.
Coeff.
Std. Err.

Average Cost Equation
gamma
delta
Coeff.
Std. Err.
Coeff.
Std. Err.

1 Baseline (family coverage, no state fixed-effects)

0.940

(0.123)

391.7

Robustness to demand estimates
2 Probit demand
3 Linear demand, constrained to go through (Q,P)=(1,$0)
4 Linear demand, constrained to go through (Q,P)=(0,$800)
f
5 Quadratic demand, constrained to go through (1,$0) and (0,$800)

1.149
1.000
1.333
1.000

(0.316)
(imposed)
(imposed)
(imposed)

0.940

(0.123)

-0.00107 (0.00048)

391.7

(26.8)

0.239

(0.098)

0.919
0.917
0.848

(0.167)
(0.170)
(0.109)

-0.00065 (0.00040)
-0.00063 (0.00040)
-0.00059 (0.00032)

414.8
394.5
374.8

(37.0)
(36.9)
(22.8)

0.099
0.104
0.137

(0.090)
(0.091)
(0.062)

6

Robustness to tax subsidy
Baseline specification, but accouting for pre-tax premiums

Robustness to sample and source of variation
7 State fixed-effects included (in both regressions)
8 State fixed-effects and demographics included (in both regressions)
e
9 All coverage tiers, no state fixed-effects

-0.00070 (0.00032)
-0.00183
-0.00084
-0.00167
-0.00039
-1.1E-06

(0.00080)
(0.00005)
(0.00005)
(imposed)
(1.2E-07)

(26.8)

0.155

(0.064)

------ same as Baseline ----------- same as Baseline ----------- same as Baseline ----------- same as Baseline ------

Table reports results from alternative speci…cations. Panel B reports parameter estimates, and Panel A reports the
(corresponding) implications for welfare analysis. Row 1 reports the baseline speci…cation (Table 4), rows 2-5 report
speci…cations that change the functional form of demand. Row 6 re-estimates the baseline speci…cation with the price
in both the demand and cost equation multiplied by 0.65 (one minus the average marginal tax rate in the sample).
Row 7 includes state …xed e¤ects in both the demand and cost equations, and row 8 also controls for employee
characteristics (see Table 2). Row 9 increases the sample to include employees in all four coverage tiers. Standard
errors (in parentheses) allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each state.
a Graphically, this is the area of triangle CDE (see Figure 1).
b This is triangle CDE divided by

0:3Qef f (P eq P ef f ).
c Graphically, this is the area of triangle CDE divided by the area of triangle EGH (see Figure 1).
d Graphically, this is the area of triangle CDE divided by the area of triangle ABE (see Figure 1).
e N=7,263 for demand analysis, 4,622 for cost analysis; mean dependent variables are 0.64 (D) and $424

(c),

respectively. We include (de-meaned) indicator variables for the coverage tier in both the demand and cost equations
(not shown); we multiply

p and c by two for employees in the “employee only” coverage tier.

f In the quadratic demand speci…cation, the top reported coe¢ cient of beta is the coe¢ cient on the linear term,

while the second is the coe¢ cient on the quadratic term.

48

Table 6: Potential sample selection
1 if "outside good" was chosen, 0 otherwise

Dependent variable:

"Outside Good" does not include "opt out"

Relative price

Constant

Mean dependent variable
Number of obs.

"Outside good" does
include "opt out"

Family coverage tier only
(1)

All coverage tiers
(2)

All coverage tiers
(3)

-0.0000093
(0.00035)
[0.98]

-0.000021
(0.00040)
[0.96]

0.000002
(0.000003)
[0.66]

0.287
(0.1580)
[0.08]

0.292
(0.1150)
[0.02]

0.296
(0.1580)
[0.07]

0.283
5,271

0.300
10,386

0.359
11,325

The table reports results of estimating a variant of the demand equation shown in equation (14). The dependent
variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the employee chose any of the “outside options” and 0 if
the employee chose either the High or Low coverage PPO. The “relative price” variable is, as in Table 4, the relative
price of the High coverage compared to the Low coverage. In columns 1 and 2 the “outside good” includes two lower
coverage PPOs, a Health Reimbursement Account PPO, and an HMO. The sample in column 1 is limited to family
coverage. The sample in column 2 includes all coverage tiers; we therefore include (de-meaned) indicator variables for
the coverage tier (not shown) and multiply the price variable

p by two for employees in the “employee only”coverage

tier. In column 3 the “outside good” de…nition is expanded to also include employees who opt out of coverage; since
coverage tier is not known for these employees, we include all employees regardless of coverage tier and do not include
indicator variables for coverage tier. We de…ne the price variable as the relative price of High coverage compared
to Low coverage if the employee chose the family coverage tier (regardless of the actual tier chosen, if known). All
estimates are generated by OLS. Standard errors (in parentheses) allow for an arbitrary variance covariance matrix
within each state; p values are in [square brackets].

49

