                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THEORIES OF WAGE RIGIDITY


                        Joseph E. Stiglitz



                     Working Paper No. 114b2




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                          September 198b




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations and project in Macroeconomics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #1442
                                       September 1984



                   Theories of Wage Rigidity

                            ABSTRACT




     This paper considers two sets of theories attempting to explain
wage rigidities and unemployment: implicit contract theory and the
efficiency wage theory. The basic thesis of the paper Is that the
former set of theories do not provide a convincing explanation of the
kind of wage rigidity which is associated with cyclical unemployment,
while the latter theories do. Several of the more recent versions of
implicit contract theory are considered: implicit contracts with
asymmetric information may give rise to over employment rather than
underemployment, and the forms of contracts to be expected, were
asymmetric information considerations paramount, are not observed.
Other versions of the asymmetric information implicit contract model,
explicitly long term in nature, may give rise to full employment. One
version of implicit contract theory which does give rise to lay—offs
arises when search is costly and cannot be monitored. But even this
extension does not explain certain important features of observed
patterns of unemployment.

     In contrast, the efficiency wage models not only provide an
explanation of the existence of unemployment equilibrium in competitive
economies, but they also provide part of the explanation of the observed
patterns of unemployment. They also explain why different firms may pay
similar workers different wages, why wages may be sticky, why firms may
not loose much if they fail to adjust their wages, and why, when they
adjust their wages optimally, they adjust them slowly.

     The policy implications of the efficiency wage model are markedly
different from those of models in which wages are absolutely rigid as
well as from those in which unemployment arises from asymmetric
information.




                                       Joseph E. Stiglitz
                                       Department of Economies
                                       Dickinson Hall
                                       Princeton University
                                       Princeton, NJ 08544
                       ThEORIES OF WAGE RIGIDITY

                                   by

                          Joseph E. Stiglitz'




     It is widely recognized that the assumption that wages are rigid is

central to Keynes' explanation of the persistence of unemployment.1

Indeed, in the fixed price (temporary equilibrium) models, which are

currently so much in fashion in Europe, it is the rigidity of wages and

prices which provides the sole explanation for unemployment in the

economy.2

  These theories have, however, simply assumed that wages and prices are

rigid; they have not attempted to explain the rigidity. This has left



'Paper prepared for presentation at a conference on Keynes' Economic
Legacy University of Delaware, January 12—13, 19811. Financial support
from the National Science Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This
paper was completed while I was a Visiting Fellow at the Hoover
Institution, Stanford. I am indebted to R. Arnott, C. Azariadis, G.
Akerlof, J. Butkiewicz, Russell Cooper, 0. Hart, S. Grossman, B.
Greenwald, A. Hosios, John Pencavel, A. Weiss, J. Yellen, and D. Newbery
for helpful discussions.




1We shall follow the well honored tradition in Keynesian' analysis of
obfuscating whether it is the rigidity in real or nominal wages which is
crucial for the analysis. Most of the theories that we discuss in this
paper are concerned with rigidities in real wages. In section II we
discuss alternative explanations of the rigidity of nominal wages.

2Among recent expositions include two books by Malinvaud (1977, 1980),
and one by Grandmont (1982). Earlier studies included those by Solow
and Stiglitz (1967) and Barro and Grossman (1971). Although most
studies in this tradition place primary emphasis on the rigidity of
wages and prices, other rigities may give rise to unemployment. For
instance, Neary and Stiglitz (1983) analyze the consequences of
rigidities in the rate of interest.
                                  —2—



these models open to charges of adhocery and inconsistency: why should

firms which are assumed to act in such a rational, profit maximizing,

competitive manner with respect to production and employment decisions,

not act in a similarly rational, profit maximizing, competitive manner

when it comes to decisions concerning wage and price determination?

Worse still, the models may not provide an adequate basis for policy

analysis: even it wage and prices are fixed in the very short run, might

they not be affected by policies, such as the level of unemployment

compensation?

     In this paper, I wish to discuss two sets of theories which attempt

to explain the observed rigidities in wages.3 The first, which I shall

refer to generically as "implicit contract theories," explain wage

rigidity as a consequence of implicit insurance provided to risk averse

employees by their employers. The second I shall refer to generically

as "efficiency wage" theories; these hold that workers' productivity

depends on the wage that they are paid; firms may not lower wages, even

in the presence of unemployment, because to do so would lower the

productivity of their labor force. The basic thesis of this paper is

that the former set of theories do not provide a convincing explanation

of the kind of wage rigidity which is associated with cyclical

unemployment, while the latter theories do.4

  Our discussion is not intended to be a survey of what have developed

into large literatures, but rather to provide a critical assessment of



3Elsewhere, I have addressed the question of price rigidity. (Stiglltz
(19810).

4As I note below, the two theories are not mutually inconsistent: a
full theory will need to incorporate elements of both approaches.
                                   —3—



the central issues associated with each of the theories.

     1. What It is that is to be Explained.

     A theory of unemployment must explain not only the level of

unemployment, but its form   and composition. For instance, workers may
be put on short weeks as well as laid off. If individuals have

quasi—concave indifference curves, they prefer work sharing to having

some probability of working a full week, and some probability of not

working at all.

     There are two easy explanations of the prevalence of lay offs in

the US (in Europe, work sharing seems to be more common). The first has

to do with unemployment compensation: an individual who is an halt time

cannot collect the public subsidy associated with unemployment

compensation. There are two basic objections to this "explanation":

First, given the limitation on the number of weeks which individuals can

collect unemployment compensation (and the fact that there is only a one

week waiting period for collecting it) firms should rotate individuals

who are laid off. The argument for job rotation is even more compelling

if the marginal utility of leisure diminishes significantly, the longer

the individual is unemployed.5 Moreover, the phenomenon of unemployment

pre—dated the extensive provision of unemployment insurance factors.

     Another explanation for lay—of'fs is that technologies require

individuals to work 8 hour days, can similarly be dismissed: in most



5There is, moreover, considerable evidence that being without work for
an extended period of time is extremely disruptive to the individual and
his family; the loss of income is only partially responsible; the loss
of sense of worth from not being gainfully employed, the loss of respect
from others, and the fear of this loss, are probably even more
important. Beyond some point, leisure appears to have negative value.
                                    —Il —




production    jobs, the economies of time—scale seldom extend beyond the

day, and certainly not beyond the week or month.

     It is not, however, enough to explain why firms might lay off

individuals: one must explain why other firms do not rehire them.

Unemployment arises when layoffs exceed hires. Most of the implicit

contract theories have called themselves theories of unemployment simply

by assuming that there is no labor mobility; in that case, obviously,

any worker who is laid off is unemployed. But even in the midst of the

Great Depression, there was a high job accession rate ——   not high enough
to compensate for the even higher lay off rate. Unemployment cannot be

explained on the basis of the behavior of a single firm, but only by the

analysis of the market as a whole. Any implicit contract theory which

purports to explain unemployment must, thus, be a part of a theory of

the market.

     Finally, any theory should be able to explain not only why certain

shocks give rise to unemployment (an increase In lay offs relative to

hires), but also why the unemployment should be concentrated within

certain parts of the labor force.

     Furthermore, any theory which we construct should be consistent

with certain other characteristics of economic fluctuations: among these

are (a) those who are unemployed often look very much like those who are

employed; individuals with similar qualifications seem to be treated

very differently; and (b) those who are unemployed are, for the most

part, unhappier than those who remain employed. For the most part,

individuals prefer not to be layed off, rather than to be layed off.6



6As we note below, there are a few instances where this is not true.
                                       -5-




     Of course, even were we able to explain why there are lay—oils, and

why those layed of I are   not   rehired, we would not have a complete

explanation of economic fluctuations. We would still need to explain

what are the sources of the disturbances to the economy. Our task, here

is the more limited one of explaining why certain shocks might lead to

unemployment, why the adjustment mechanisms, which in traditional

competitive analysis lead the economy to full employment7 seems to fail

so frequently.



                                        I


                 Implicit Contract Theories of Wage Rigidity



1. The Basic Theory8

      The basic hypothesis of implicit contract theory is.that workers

are risk averse, and have limited access to capital markets. They would

like to obtain insurance against flubtuations in their income. They

cannot obtain such insurance from conventional insurance companies;9



TVariations in economic circumstances may lead to variations in hours
worked, or to some individuals deciding not to seek work, even in a
Walrasian economy. We wish to explain why it appears to be the case
that variations in employment are greater than they would in a Walrasian
equilibrium.

 8The standard references for the Implicit Contract Theory are Azariadis
 (1975), Gordon (19711), and Bailey (197E. For two recent surveys, see
 C. Azariadis (1979) and C. Azariadis and Stiglitz (1983).

 9Most of the literature has not addressed the question of why
 individuals cannot or do not purchase wage and/or employment insurance
 companies. Arnott, Hosios, and Stiglitz (1983) provide a brief
 discussion; noting the central problems of moral hazard (to be discussed
 below), they observe that the employer has an informational advantage
 over other potential suppliers of insurance.
      Similarly the standard implicit contract models do not provide a
                            (Footnote continued)
                                    —6—



but their employers are less risk averse and have greater access to the

capital market than they do. As a result, employers provide some form

of wage and employment insurance as part of the employment package. To

put   it another way, a firm which offered such insurance as part of its
employment package would be able to attract workers at a lower (average)
wage than a firm which did not provide such insurance.



1.1 Simple Implicit Contract Theory May Explain Wage RLgidities

  But Not Unemployment

      If all states of nature are observable (and verifiable), then the

implicit contract would specify the amount of labor and the wage to be

paid in each state. In such circumstances, though there may be

relatively little fluctuations in wage (incomes), the implicit contract

would not give rise to unemployment: the marginal rate of substitution

of each individual between income and leisure would be equal to the

marginal rate of transformation, and there would be no lay—offs.10

Recall our original objective was to find an explanation of wage

rigidity which could help explain unemployment; the implicit contract

theory may provide us some insights into the movement of wages, but (at



9(continued)
good explanation of why access to the credit market is limited, or why
it is more limited for individuals than for firms. One explanation of
credit rationing in competitive markets with imperfect information has
recently been provided by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1983). Because the
firm is more informed about its employees' future income potential than,
say, a bank, it has a natural advantage in serving as an intermediary in
the provision of (possibly implicit) credit.

10Except if some individual would have remained voluntarily unemployed
in the corresponding Walrasian equilibrium, because his marginal role of
substitution exceeded his marginal rate of transformation at zero work.
                                 '-7—




least in the simple version) does not explain movements in employment.11

     This can be seen most easily if we think of the firm as having two

departments, an itLurance department and a production department. The

production department pays workers the ordinary "Walrasian" (spot)

wages, which may fluctuate considerably. The worker then takes this

wage to the insurance department; the insurance department agrees to

supplement his income in bad states, in return for a premium (payable

only in good states.) This results in the individual's take home pay

(his wage plus or minus payments to the insurance company) varying much

less than his Walrasian wage. What we observe, of course, is the take

home pay; butwhat enters into the analysis of the production decision

is the Walrasian (shadow or spot) wage; and since the Wairasian wage is

perfectly flexible, there is no unemployment.

     (If the marginal rate of substitution was less than the marginal

rate of transformation in some states of nature, so that the amount

individuals required to be compensated for an increase in work by an

hour was less than the value of the extra amount of output •they

produced, then it would pay the finn to ask the worker to work the

additional hour, and increase his pay accordingly; if the individual is

risk averse, and the utility function is separable in consumption and

leisure, he will increase his take—home pay equally in all states;12



11Even its implications for the movements in real wages may not be
totally convincing. If workers' utility functions are separable in
consumption and leisure (a case we shall discuss at greater length
below), and if workers' have no access to the capital market (so
consumption and income at each date are identical), then consumption of
all those retained throughout the business cycle should be constant,
i.e. real wages should move inversely to the number of hours worked. If
leisure and consumption are complements, real wages should increase even
more in a recession.
                                      —8—



more generally, the increase in pay will be spread among states to

equate his marginal utility of income.)13

     The result that implicit contracts do not give rise to unemployment

fluctuations4 should not come as a surprise: it has long been

recognized that insurance contracts (and recall, implicit contracts are

really nothing more than insurance contracts provided by the employer)

improve the functioning of competitive economies.

     Indeed, one of the basic results of Arrow and Debreu was to show

that a competitive economy would be pareto efficient if there were a

complete set of risk markets. Subsequently, Borch showed that the

absence of insurance markets may make all individuals worse off.15



1.2 Market Equilibrium Is Not Constrained Pareto Efficient

     More relevant for our purpose is the question of the consequences

of providing employment related insurance in economies in which there

are not a complete set of insurance contracts. As we have aruged, under

the conditions given above, such implicit contracts will be associated



12That is, the optimal contracts entails equal pay in all states;
without separability the level of pay depends on the level of work in
each state.

13Assuming that the firm   is   risk neutral.

11This view of the implicit contract, and the corresponding implication
that Implicit contract theory did not give rise to unemployment, was set
forth in Stiglitz (1978). See also Azarladis and Stiglitz (1983) and
Akerlof and Miyazaki (1980).

15For general results on the constrained inefficiency of competitive
economies with an incomplete set of markets, see Greenwald and Stiglitz
(1983), Hart (1975), Newbery and Stiglitz (1981,1982) and Stiglitz
(1973,1982); for a proof that competitive economies with implicit wage
contracts are inefficient, see Mewbery and Stiglitz (1983).
                                   —9—



with full employment (the marginal rate of substitution of each

individual is equal to the marginal rate of transformation); they are

"locally" efficient, in the sense that, given the distribution of

prices, employer's expected profits (or expected utility of profits) is

maximized, subject to the constraint that workers obtain a particular

level of expected utility. But the economy is not a constrained pareto

optimum; that is, given the limited set of insurance markets, there are

feasible interventions on the part of government (say taxes and

subsidies, on employment or output) which will make some individuals

better off without making others worse off. (Newbery and Stiglitz

(1983)).

      Our interest here, however, is more in the descriptive implication

of implicit contracts than its welfare consequences. But again, we

would have thought that, particularly if individuals have limited access

to the capital market, and their consumption is constrained by this,

that the provision of employment related insurance would have smoothed

out   variations in consumption, and hence would serve to dampen, rather
than to exacerbate, the cyclical fluctuations of   the ecomony.

       There have been several attempts to modify and extend Implicit

Contract Theory, to derive conditions under which such contracts might

give rise to unemployment.



1.3 Unemployment Compensation and Voluntary Unemployment

       The first, and most obvious, is a consequence of our system of

unemployment compensation: given that this is provided not on an

actuarially sound basis, it pays firms to devise employment strategies

to take advantage of the public subsidies. In the limiting case where
                                       —10--




the payments of the firm    are   not related at all to the experience of its

employees, the finn would lay off workers all states of' the world in

which worker's productivity is sufficiently low. The precise condition

depends on whether firms supplement the unemployment compensation of

individuals. Then the layed—off workers are, in a sense, all

voluntarily unemployed provided that leisure is normal: the level of

utility that they get from leisure together with the unemployment

compensation exceeds the level of utility they would have obtained if

they worked. (See Appendix A). Most (or at least many) of those who

are classified as unemployed do not fall within this category; and the

problems of unemployment with which we are concerned here antedated the

spread of unemployment compensation and welfare systems with more than

subsistence level   of   payments.

     Further evidence that there is more at issue is provided by the

fact that the pattern of unemployment does not conform to that which

would arise if lay—offs were simply a result of firms attempting to take

advantage of unemployment compensation. In particular, one would expect

to see more extensive use of job rotation, ensuring that no individual

exhausts his unemployment benefits.



1.11 The Theory of Insurance and Implicit Contracts

     A more   fundamental   approach is to ask, what are the generic

problems associated with insurance contracts, and implicit insurance

contracts in particular, and do any of these problems manifest

themselves as what might look like involuntary unemployment.

     FLare are at least six problems which are relevant for our

analysis:
                               —11—•




      (a) The observability problem: the insurance contract can only

     cover events which are observable to the insurance company.

      (b) The verifiability problem: even if the event can be

      observed, to enforce a contract through legal means requires

      that a third, outside party must be able to verify its

      existence.

      This is an example of a wider class of problems which we refer

      to generically as:

      Cc) The enforcement problem. Whenever the "trade" between two

      individuals does take place simultaneously, there must be some

      method of ensuring that the party which has agreed to make the

      later delivery lives up to his promise. This problem may be

      particularly acute, as we shall see, with implicit contracts.

       Cd) The complexity problem. Any insurance contract usually

       covers not a single event (state of' nature) but a range of

       events; writing contracts so that each contigency which should

       be distinguished from other contingencies is so distinguished is

       a difficult if not impossible task. Usually, several different

       contingencies are covered by the same set of clauses, though in

       the absence of "transactions costs" each would be treated

       differently.

       Ce) The moral hazard problem. The provision of insurance often

       affects the likelihood that the insured against event occurs.

       To avoid the resulting inefficiencies, (individual3 failing to



16A closely related pràblem is referred to as the Valuation problem:
even when it is possible to ascertain that some loss has occured, it may
be difficult to assess its magnitude.
                                         —12—



            take due care against the occurrence of the accident) insurance

            firms frequently insist on co—insurance clauses.

            (f) The adverse selection
                                         problem. When a group of individuals
            are Offered a given insurance
                                            policy, those among the group with
            the highest (subjective)
                                       probability of the occurrence of the
            accident are most likely to purchase
                                                   the policy. The insurance
            firm may attempt to design
                                         contracts which separate low risk
            individuals from high risk
                                         individuals, e.g. by offering
         policies with high deductibijities, limited
                                                          coverage, etc.
      Each of these problems has its
                                          manifestation in the provision of
 employment related insurance (Implicit
                                             contracts.) Surprisingly, it is
 only the first of these problems which
                                             has received much attention in
 the literature; and it does
                                not, in my view, provide a convincing
 explanation of unemployment.




3. The Observability Problem.1?

     The contracts we described above had hours and wages (income)

depending  on the state of nature, which we assumed was observable to
both the firm and the workers. What happens if the
                                                         state of nature is
observable   to the firm, but not to the worker?

     The firm wilY, not, in
                              general, have the incentive to tell the



T7lmplicit contracts with asymmetric and incomplete
                                                    information have
been analyzed by (among others)
                                Arnott, Hosios, and Stiglitz (1980),
Azariadis (1933). Chari (1983),
                                Cooper (1981), Green and Kahn (1983),
Grossman and Hart (1981, 1983),
                                Grossman, Hart, and Maskin (1983), and
Hart (1983). For a partial
                            survey, see Azariadis and Stiglitz, (1983).
                                     —1 3—




truth.     Consider the case discussed earlier, where individuals have

utility functions which are separable in consumption and leisure. The

optimal contract entailed equating consumption in all states, but

varying hours, with the individual working more hours in the bad state

than in the good. Clearly, the firm has an incentive to announce that

it is the good state, regardless of what the true state is: what it

pays the workers is the same, but the amount of work it extracts from

them is greater in the good state.

         It is easy, however, to design a contract which induces the (inn to

tell the truth. We restrict the choices of the firm: if it announces

 that it is a good state, we compel it to make the workers work more than

 they would in the Walrasian perfect information equilibrium and to pay

 their workers more. The extra output produced by a firm in the good

 state is much larger than that produced by one in the bad; for firms in

 the good state, the extra output is enough to compensate for the

 increased wages which they pay: for firms in the bad state, the extra

 output is not enough to compensate for the increased wages they would

 have to pay if they falsely announced it was a good state. Such a

 contrat introduces two inefficiencies relative to the first best

 contract (with perfect information.) Workers have to bear risks, and in

 the good state there is over—employment.

          Assume, in contrast, that firms are very risk averse, and

  individuals are risk neutral. Then the optimal contract would entail

  workers providing insurance to the firm; in the bad state, they would

  accept a wage below their marginal product, while in the good state,

  they would be paid more than their marginal product.     In that case,

  firms might have an incentive to announce that it is a bad state, to get
                                    —ill—




  workers to accept a low wage, when in fact it is a good state. Again,

  firms can be induced to tell the truth by restricting their choices.

 Now, we curtail the amount of employment which they can undertake in the

 bad state, relative to the Walrasian equilibrium. The "cost" of this

 reduction is greater in the good state than in the bad; indeed, if we

 curtail the maximum level of employment which we allow enough, the loss

 in profits in the good state exceeds the gains that it obtains from

 having lower wages, and thus it will pay the firm to tell the truth.

      Thus, the "theory" may explain either under or over employment.

 Which occurs depends on the specific
                                        assumptions concerning the utility
 functions of workers and risk aversion of finns. The assumptions under

which over employment occurs seem more plausible to me than those under

which under employment occurs; but we do not have to resolve the matter

here: the theory can be dismissed on other grounds, as we shall see

later.

     First, however, we turn to a more detailed analysis of the

conditions under which over or underemployment results. Which occurs

depends whether, in the first best equilibrium with complete

observability, the firm would, in the good state, prefer the hours and

wage associated with the low state, or vice versa. To ascertain which

occurs, we need to examine in greater detail the structure of implicit

contracts.



3.1 The Structure of Implicit Contracts.

     To examine the structure of implicit contracts, we assume that

there are only two states, each occurring with a probability of 1/2; we

shall denote the good and bad states
                                       by superscripts and subscript i and
                                                      —15—



2 respectively. We represent the individuals utility function by U =

tJ(y,h)   where y is income and Ii is hours                      The worker's

productivity in state I is denoted by 81 so finn prorits per worker, I,

are:

(1) oi(hy) —                    —
                         01h1
       We   begin our analysis by assuming firms are risk neutral, and

individuals have a reservation expected utility level of U.

       Formally, we can characterize the implicit contract with complete

observability as the solution to the following problem:

(2) max               + p2


(2a) subject to U + U2              - 2tJ


the solution to which satisfies the first order conditions:

                  +                    +          —
(3)
          °Oy1               = 82U2y        U2h

('4)
       Uly       tJ2y

       The first two conditions simply say that the marginal rate of

substitution equal the marginal rate of transformation (the full

employment condition while the third equation is the provision of

complete insurance (in the sense that the marginal utility of income of

the worker is equated in the two st. tes.) This follows from the risk

neutrality of the producer; it would not be true, as we shall see, if

the producer is risk averse.

       We have represented the equilibrium in figure 2.                 p1 represents a

 constant profit line in state 1, (i.e. eh—y=constant) and p2 in state 2.

 As we have drawn It, the firm makes a positive profit in state 1, but a

 loss in state 2. For any given level of profits, the hours-income

 package is efficient, i.e.                   =
                                                  1h1,y1} is the point where the worker's
 indifference curve between hours worked and is tangent to the iso—profit
                                           —16—



line, and similarly for E2 (Equation 3 is the mathematical

representation of this tangency condition). (We have not yet explained

how the levels of profits or losses in each state are determined.               These

are given by the solutions to (2a), (3) and (ii).              The diagram is useful

only in portraying certain conditions which the implicit contract must

satisfy.)

        There are three possible patterns which can emerge. Figure 1

illustrates the case where profits in state 1 are higher with
                                                                           E1 than
       i.e.

(5) p1(h1, y ) > p'(h21y )
                 1            2
and profits in state 2 are higher with S2 than     i.e.
                  2
(6) p2(h2,y ) > p (h1,y )
            2           1

     (5) and (6) are referred to as the self—selection constraints, and

in    figure 2a, both are satisfied.

        On the other hand, in figure 2b, in the good state the firm would

prefer E2 to E1, while in figure 2c, in the bad state the firm would

prefer        to £2.   In these cases, if the state of nature is not

observable, firms cannot be relied upon to tell the truth. The contract

must be modified to recognize this.



3.2 The Implicit Contract with Unobservability.

       The implicit contract with unobservability is the solution to the

following problem

(7) max p1 — p2

(8) subject to U1 + If2           LI,   utility   constraint

and

       sUbject to
                                         —17—



(9)   p1(h1 ,y)     >   p(h2,y2) self—selection constraints

(10) 02(h2,y2)          p2(h1y1).
      This problem is identical to the previous one, except that we have

appended the self—selection constraints.          Under fairly standard

conditions, one, and only one, of these constraints are binding. Which

depends on whether, in the absence of the constraint, firms would have

lied claiming it was a bad state when it was good, or a good state when

it is bad. Before turning to this, let us note diagramatically what the

self—selection constraints imply. When In the absence of the self

section constraint, the finn would have said it was bad when it was

good, then the finn can be induced to tell the truth by limiting the

 amount of labor that he can hire in the bad state. Thus, in figure 3a,

                                satsifies the self—selection constraint, but
 the contract {E1 .      g2'}
 entails underemployment in the bad state. (In the good state, the firm

 is just indifferent between E1 and E21). Similarly, in figure 3b, we

 show the equilibrium when the firm would have announced that it was a

 good state when it was bad. As we argued earlier, truth telling is

 induced by requiring the finn to hire additional hours; the contract

                induces truthtelling. Note that this contract entails
 (E1 ',   E2}
 overemploynient: the marginal rate of transformation is less than the

 marginal rate of substitution.



  3.3 Over Versus Underemployment.

          We now ask, which do we expect to occur, over or underemployment?

  To help fix our ideas, consider first the case where utility functions

  are separable in hours and income:

  (11) U-u(y) —v(h)
                                     —18—



 Thus, equality of marginal utility implies that      -
                                                            this, together
 with (3) Implies that h1 > h2 and firms always want to declare that it

 is a good state (to elucidate more effort). The equilibrium is always

 characterized by overemployment. (See figure 3).

      The result holds, a fortiori, if Uhy < 0: since increasing the

 number of hours worked decreases the marginal utility of income,

 individuals in the good state receive less than in the bad state. Thus,

 a necessary condition for implicit contracts with asymmetric information

to give rise to unemployment equilibria is that leisure and consumptions

good are strong Edgeworth substitutes.

     In Appendix B, we establish a somewhat stronger and more general

result:18 if firms are risk neutral and the two states of nature are

near each other, then there is under or over—employment as leisure is an

inferior or normal good. A sufficient condition for there to be over or

full employment is that leisure is a normal good. (Thus, a necessary

condition for under—employment is that leisure is inferior.)

     On the other hand, the over—employment equilibria have the

unattractive feature that individuals are always better off in the bad

state than in the good state. (See figure ic).19




18These results extend
                         results independently derived by Cooper (1983).
19This result does not depend upon any property of the individual's
utility function, other than quasi—concavity, Though there are some
instances in which workers complain about being forced to work more than
they would like, the result that workers are better off in the bad
state, suggests to me the inappropriateness of the model for
                                                             explaining
over—employment. One should not conclude that therefore, the relevant
equilibria are those entailing underemployment, but rather than the
model itself is at best of only limited relevance.
                                    —19—




3•14    Risk Averse Firms

        We argued in the preceding section that, with risk neutral firms,

there is a strong presumption that implicit contracts either entail full

employment or overemployment, but not underemployment.     One attempt to

obtain underemployment from the implicit contract theory entails

assuming risk averse firms.

        Consider the limiting case where finns are infinitely risk averse,

and individuals have a finite degree of risk aversion. Then, in

equilibrium, their profits in the two states must be the same, as

depicted in figure Ij It is immediately obvious that with infinitely

risk averàe firms, equilibrium will always be characterized by

 unemployment.

        In appendix B, we show that there is still a presumption that there

 will    be over—employment rather than underemployment. We show that a
 necessary condition for over—employment to result is that the finn's
 degree of risk aversion be large; in the case of separable utility

 functions, the critical value increases with the worker's risk aversion

 and decreases with the worker's elasticity of marginal disutility of

 labor (see figure 5).

         Curiously enough, while implicit contract theory began as a

 explanation of wage rigidity in which risk neutral firms provide

  insurance for risk averse workers, in this new version, underemployment

  only results when firms are very risk averse.

         Though the hypothesis of risk averse finns seems inconsistent with

  a well—working capital market, in the New Theory of the Firm, in which

  shareholders are imperfectly    informed concerning the actions of the

  mangers, firms do behave in a risk averse manner. The question is do
                                               —20—



 they behave in a sufficiently risk averse manner.



 3.5 Some Special Examples

        In this section, we present some simple utility functions, for

 which the first best equilibrium can be easily calculated; for these

 utility functions, it can easily be ascertained whether there will be

under or aver employment.

        (a) Separable utility functions.

          We have already noted that if the utility function is of the form

                  U =   u(y)   —    v(h)
then, if firms are           risk    neutral, there will always be aver—employment.

If firms are risk averse, the condition for
                                                         underemployment cit   the   two
states are near each other) is that


                  A a v > (1a) R

where

    A = A(Oh—y), the firm's measure of relative risk aversion

    R = —UyyY,
               the individual's measure of relative risk aversion

            iiy


    V
                        ,   the elasticity at marginal disutility of labor

            Uh
    a —   share of labor

    Since h1 increases with O, if the two states are far enough apart,

we will obtain over or full employment. (See
                                                          Appendix B).

    (b) Infinite elasticity of subsitution between leisure and

consumption. In this case, the utility function is of the form
                                          —21—




(12) Us u(y — ah), ItSI, 02< a <01

income and leisure are perfect substitutes. This peculiar utility

function gives rise to corner solutions, where either individuals do no

work or work to capacity. With this utility function, the

self—selection constraints are never binding if finns are risk neutral,

as illustrated in figure 6. (Note that equating the marginal utility of

income means that:

        —         —        —
            ah1       y2       ah2,
individual's utility in the two states are equalized.) This result does

not depend on assuming a linear technology, as figure 6b illustrates.20

The unconstrained implicit contract is described by the tangencies of

the iso—profit curves to the worker's indifference curve. The

iso—profit curve for the good state is assumed to be always steeper than

the corresponding iso—profit curve through the same point for the bad

state. (Because of diminishing returns, the extra income that the firm

can pay to a worker who works more diminish the more the individual

works). It is clear that the self—selection constraints are always

satisfied If h1 > h2.

     When firms are risk averse, the marginal utility of income of

workers in the two state will not be equalized. The implications of

this can be seen in figure 6c for the utility function (12). Assume

 first that the firm has a linear technology. Then again, it is easy to

 show (figure 6) that the self—selectibn constraint is always satisfied.

      If, however, we assume diminishing returns and risk averse firms,

 then, as figure6d illustrates, it is possible that in the good state,



 20Though the results that h1 =       1   and h2 — 0 clearly do.
                                              —22—



firms will announce that It is in tact the bad (E2 lies on a higher iso—

profit function for state 1 than does S1                entails fewer hours and
less Income than does                 but the decline in pay Is greater than the
loss in output.

     (c) A Slight Generalization

     If the individual has a utility function of the form

                  U -             —   v
                            U(y
the indifference curves between income and leisure are no longer

straight lines; however, the results obtained in the previous section

still hold. This utility function has the property that leisure is

neither normal or interior. In the first best equilibrium, with risk

neutral firms,

                            U,1 =

(where U'1 —
               i'(y1    —
                             v(h1))
so the individual is on the same indifference curve in both states.

Hence, so long as the iso—profit curves satisfy the single crossing

property, the self—selection constraints are satisfied in the first—best

equilibrium. (See figure 6e).

     (d) Risk Neutral Individuals

     If individuals are risk neutral, then the objective of a long term

contract is not to provide insurance to the worker.              (Nor is it

plausible to think of the function of the insurance contract as a

mechanism for insuring the firm.) For a variety of reasons, long term

contracts may save on transactions costs. Though the reason that

workers and employers engage in long term contracts may have little to

do with the provision of insurance, attitudes towards risk play an

important role in the design of efficient contracts, in the presence of
                                            —23—




asymmetric   information.

       With risk neutral individuals and finns, contracts which satisfy

the self—selection constraint are easy to construct. All we require is

that

                      >   —        )   92(h1—h2)
       Clearly, if the difference in productivity in the two states are

low, differences in income will be low. Note that in the case where
hours worked in the bad state exceed that in the good state, income paid

in the bad state must exceed that in the good state.



With risk neutral individuals, either there is full employment or

underemployment. 21

       Identical results obtain if there is a third party providing

insurance to the finn, and workers are risk neutral.22

       The hypothesis of low effective risk aversion on the part of



21For the case where the two states are near each other, the result
follows directly from the calculations of Appendix B. More generally,
with risk neutral individuals, the optimal employment contract is
described by the solution to the problem

        max p 1(91h1 —            + p2 (02h2 — y2)
s.t.

             u1           u
and s.t.

                  —
                      y1 > e1 h2 — y2

          e2h2—y2>oh1 y1
 Letting A1 and A be the Lagrange multipliers associated with the
 self—selection cgnstraints, we obtain
              e1 + 11         —                    —0
                                  A2 e2 +
                                    (Footnote   continued)
                                                                   —24—



workers is not as implausible as it might seem at first glance. Our

analysis has assumed that an individual's consumption is equal to his

wage payment; that he cannot save or borrow (or does not receive

implicit or explicit unemployment compensation.) In fact, most

fluctuations are sufficiently small that it is easy for individuals to

tide themselves over without any significant reduction in their

consumption. (There is some recent econometric evidence suggesting that

there is very limited variability in consumption, as opposed to the

purchase of consumer durables.) If that is correct, then the model we

have just presented seems more appropriate than one in which the worker

is risk averse. As we emphasized here, workers are not entering long

term contracts to have firms provide insurance, but to save on

transactions costs. If firms are also risk neutral, the efficient

contract give rise to neither unemployment or overemployment.

        If the motivation of long term contracts is to save on transaction



21
     (continued)

         p2' 02 —
                         (A1    0 —          A2 02) + i.iU2h
                                                            — 0

                 —
                     p1' — 201           +
                                              A2)
                                                          -0
          p1 '   — (A1 —             +                    =   0
                               A2)           Pty
                 +   (         A2)
                                     +       42           —    Q



Subtracting the last equation form the next to the last equation, we
obtain

              1,_ p2,     =                                   — U2
          P
                               2A1
                                     +       tilt)   1

                                                         y         y]     2A,

under the hypothesis that Uy =                                          Hence, if
                                                               Uy2
          A1 —0, pit             p2'; and thus A2 = 0

22The problem of the firm is identical to that described above, except
                          (Footnote continued)
                                    —25—




costs,   them simple contracts have a great advantage over complex

contracts;   the simplest contract is one which pre—specif ices wages and

hours.23 The welfare loss (relative to the Walrastan equilibrium) can

be shown to be of the order or magnitude (01 —

     The welfare loss relative to the self—selection equilibrium is

clearly smaller, and hence provided the fluctuat.ona in productivity are

not too large, it is plausible that a rigid wage—employment contract
dominates the self—selection contract.
     Though in the absence of enforcement problems (as we have assumed
thus far) such fixed wage—employment contracts cannot explain
unemployment, once we introduce enforcement problems, they may easily
give rise to unemployment.214

3.6 Interpretation

     The conditions which we have derived show, at the very least, that

the asymmetric information theory of implicit contracts does not     provide
a. robust. explanation of unemployment: whether there exists



22(continued)
now we write the self—selection constraints as

             61 h1 —y1 —   I> 81   h2—y2   +   I
             82
where I is the payment from the insurance company to the firm in the bad
state (from the firm to the insurance company in the good state).
231n the general theory of self—seleâtion, it is shown that with only
two states of nature, a self—selection equilibrium dominates a pooling
equilibrium, in the absence of transactions costs. See Stiglitz
(forthcoming).

2Z4see below, section 3.14. Note, however, that with enforcement problems
all the calculations concerning the relative merits of self—selection
equilibria versus rigid—wage employment equilibria need to be redone.
                                         —26—




underemployment     is sensitive to special assumptions concerning the
nature   of   the utility function and    the   degree of risk aversion of finns.
       The theory has several implications: first, it is reasonable to

assume different individuals and firms differ in their utility functions

and attitudes towards risk. Thus, if the theory provided the

explanation of unemployment, one should expect to find different firms

attracting different classes of workers. Risk neutral firms which

experienced limIted risk would always be characterized as having

over—employment in good states, full employment in bad; risk neutral

firms which had underemployment equlibria would have workers with

special attitudes towards risk. Firms whose behavior (in other

respects) seemed to indicate high degrees of risk aversion should

experience    under—employment in bad states.
       Notice too that when there is a dispute about how bad circumstances
are,   unions try to persuade the finn     to   hire more workers at the given

wage. Unions do not say to management, "we will be willing to accept a

further wage cut if you    prove   that the state of nature is so bad, by

throwing more of us out of work," but rather, "we will be willing to

accept a further wage cut if you reduce your planned level of lay—offs."

If these statements are to be taken at anything like their face value,

they suggest that what is at issue is not a question of inducing

truthful revelation of the state of nature.

       Notice that the theory of asymmetric information implicit contract

has turned the original theory of implicit contracts on its head. While

the original theory was based on risk averse workers, and risk neutral

firms, an essential part of the new theory is that firms are risk

averse. While the original theory was used to explain wage rigidities
(and was successful in this, but not in explaining unemployment), the

new theory entails greater fluctuations in employee's income than in the

Walrasian equilibrium.

        Though these obse'vations lead me to the view that this extension

(or reversal) of implicit contract theory does not provide an adequate

basis for understanding macro—economic fluctuations, there are other,

perhaps less contentious grounds on which to object to this version of

the Implicit Contract Theory as an      explanation   of unemployment.



3.14 Further Objections to the Assymetric Information Iwlicit Contract

Theory.

        There are several further objections to the theory. The first

concerns   what is observable. The theory assumes both too much and too
little.     The theory assumes that the   firm's hours and wage decisions are
observable    to   the worker, while the state of nature   (or other   surrogates

•for   the state   of nature) are not. Though there is some presumption        that
each   worker knows the amount of his own work and wages (though even
here, there may be ambiguities arising from changes in jobs and          the

complexity    of compensation packages), the worker is unlikely to be

informed    concerning total employment. The way that the underemployment
contracts "force" the firm to tell the truth is to restrict the amount
of labor the firm can hire. If profits depend on aggregate employment,
then the firm can evade the force of these restrictions by hiring

outside workers. The analysis, as presented, only applies if the firm

cannot hire workers (or if there are significant fixed costs per worker,

so that the restriction in hours worked per old worker is costly.)

        Not only are workers likely to be uninformed about the total number
                                     —28—



of employees, but even if they were informed about the total number of

employees, it would not convey all the requisite information; first, the

firm is concerned with the effective labor supply, and it can increase

that keeping the number of employees unchanged by increasing the quality

of the labor force; secondly, the boundaries of the firm are often

ill—defined. The firm could — and would have an incentive to —     sell   off

some of its underutilized assets to a subsidiary. Distinguishing such

transfers from "legitimate" transfers would seem a difficult task for

the average blue collar worker.

     Non—observability of hours (employment) and state of nature. If

hours (employment levels) as well as the state of nature are not

observable, (and there is nothing else relevant upon which to make wages

contingent) then the implicit contract will entail a fixed (wage,

employment (hours)) contract. Clearly, if the worker cannot be bound to

stay with the firm, and his productivity at different firms is perfectly

correlated, he will leave whenever his wage is less than his marginal

product; but in those states when the worker works for the firm his

average marginal product (plus any insurance premium paid initially)

must equal his wage. Thus, if there is no initial insurance premium.

the only viable markets are spot markets. (Insurance premiums may take

the form of the firm paying the individual less than his marginal

product during the initial period in which the worker is hired.)

Conversely, if firms cannot be bound not to fire workers, they will do

so whenever the workers marginal product is less than the wage, and

again, the only viable labor market is a spot market. When opportunity

costs are not perfectly correlated with the workers productivity in his

current   firm, then   there will exist a set of states of nature in which
                                   —29—




the   worker will not quit and the firm will not tire him.25 With

bilateral asymmetries of information, with hours worked and state of

nature not observable, with imperfectly correlated shocks, and with

contracts in which employment levels are not enforceable implicit

contracts can give rise to unemployment. Critical to this result is the

hypothesis that implicit contracts which specify wages are enforceable.

while those which specify employment levels are not; the reasonableness

of this hypothesis is addressed in section 3.5.26

       Contingent Contracts. In the previous paragraphs, we have argued

that the standard asymmetric information implicit contract theory

assumes that variables which are probably not observable are. It also

 (implicitly) assumes that variables which are observable are    not.
        Though the state of nature is not perfectly observable, there are

many good surrogates: Consider the recent recession in the car

 industry; sales of automobiles (of each firm),   inventories,   and foreign

 imports are readily observable. Moreover, aggregate variables, like

 unemployment, money supply, and the rate of inflation etc., which may be

 relevant to the demand facing an industry or firm are also readily

 observable. Direct indications of profits are    observable.    Though




 25See Hall and   Lazear.
 26 There are, of course, other versions of asymmetric information models,
 yielding somewhat different results. Cooper, for instance, has explored
 a model in which firms are uniformed concerning workers marginal rates
 of substitution. This model may easily give rise to under—employment
 equilibria. But the underlying assumption behind the analysis is
 unconvincing. While firms may plausibly be assumed to be imperfectly
 informed concerning an individual's opportunity costs, it is not
 plausible to assume, given that a worker remains on a job, that there
 are significant variations in his marginal rates of substitution between
                                                                     who
 leisure and income. (An exception would be provided by individuals
  hold second jobs, such as taxi—cab driving.)
                                                                           1
                                   —30—



 audited profits and true economic profits may well differ, and making

 wages contingent upon audited profits would result in incentives to

 distort audited profits there are ways around this problem.
                                                               First,
 wages may be made contingent upon profits of other firms (thus

 eliminating this "moral hazard problem", except if the finns collude

 together.). Secondly, wages may be made contingent upon the market

 value of the firm; in a well functioning capital market, these will

 reflect true profits, and not audited profits, and again, there will be

no incentive for a small investor to alter his market valuation because

of the wage consequences; thirdly, there may exist compensation plans,

in which workers are paid partly with the shares of the firm, where the

incentives for distorting behavior on the part of firm managers may be

mitigated. The fact of the matter is that relatively few firms have

(explicit) contracts employing such contingencies as part of wage

determination. (The difficulty with implicit contract is that, since

the terms are never explicit, one might claim that such contingencies

are implicitly there.) Of course, even if such information were

employed, there would be still a residual of imperfect information

concerning firm specific shocks (states of nature). Thus, it is

conceivable that the under or overemployment contracts we have described

above would still be employed. The question remains, of course, of the

extent of the unemployment which can be so explained.



3.6 Enforcement Problem.

     A second, and equally damaging criticism of the theory concerns the

Problem of Enforceability, which we noted earlier.   The contracts

described are one period contracts; yet the essence of the earlier
                                        —31—




(symmetric    information) implicit contract is the long term relationship

between the employer and the employee. Although the older theory slid

quietly over the issue of how such contracts were to be enforced, we can

no longer do so. The contracts we have described above make sense only

as one period explicit contracts, not as many period implicit contracts.

       The distinction between explicit and.implicit contracts has to do

with the enforcement mechanism. Explicit contracts are primarily

enforced     through the legal system (or the threat of resort to the legal
process..) Implicit contracts are enforced through two mechanisms:
firms that violate their implicit contract loose their reputation, and
rind   it difficult   to recruit additional workers; and workers within the
firm   who feel that they have been cheated against may reduce their

effort (or act in other ways which reduce the firm's profitability.) It

should be emphasized that one enforcement mechanism does not dominate

the other: to enforce a contract through the legal system requires that

the alleged breach of contract can be verified; both sides may know, in

their heart of hearts, that the contract has been breached, but the side

that   has   breached it may   also   know that the other side cannot establish

that fact to the court. In that circumstance, the firm may still loose

 its reputation; reputation may be an effective enforcement mechanism.

       On the other hand, when interest rates are positive, firms must

 balance the gains fran cheating (violating the implicit contract) with

 the losses (say from the loss of reputation); in sufficiently bad

 states, it may pay them to cheat, to violate the implicit contract.

 More accurately, the implicit contract must take into account the fact

 that certain contract provisions which could (under appropriate

 conditions of verifiability and observability) be enforced through the
                                        —32—



legal mechanism cannot be enforced by a reputation mechanism. The view

of implicit contracts we are putting forward is that they represent

perfect   equilibrium   (wage, employment) strategies in a repeated game

between   employers and employees. 27
     What do equilibrium contracts (implicit or explicit) between

workers and employers engaged in a long term relationship look like?

The answer depends on what is observable, what the rate of interest is,

and the structure of the shocks to the economy. Consider, for instance,

an infinite period contract with no discounting, in a world in which the

probability, each period, that the state of nature is good, is 1/2.

Then by standard arguments it can be shown that the employer can be

forced to tell the truth (almost) all of the time: in the long run,

unless he announces that it is good half the time and bad half the time,

he will be severely punished. And if he must announce good half the

time and bad half the time, he would announce good when it is good, and

bad when it is bad; moreover, the optimal contract under such

circumstances entails full employment. Once again, implicit contracts

(even under asymmetric information) have explained wage rigidity, but

failed to explain unemployment.28



27We have drawn the line between implicit and explicit contracts
sctewhat more finely that we should. Even when there is an explicit
contract, reliance may be placed on reputation as an enforcement
mechanism, both because of the costs of resorting to the legal mechanism
and because of the inevitable ambiguities assocated with the terms of
any contract. In addition, there is a long legal tradition stipulating
that not all the terms of the contract which can be enforced through
legal processes need to be made explicit, and not all the terms which
are made explicit can be enforced through the legal process.

28Obviously, if the shocks at date t and t+1 are perfectly
correlated, there is, in effect, only one shock; but then the assumption
that the worker remains uninformed about what the state of nature is
                          (Footnote continued)
                                  —33—




      Though the structure of the optimal multi—period contracts with
positive interest rates has not received detailed analysis, what is

known about multi—period self selection problems suggests that their

structure (entailing elaborate interperiod contingency provisions) will

be even more unlike what is observed than the one period structure.29

      Implicit contracts as perfect equilibria. One difficulty with

analyzing implicit contracts as perfect equilibria is that it appears

that there may be a superabundance of such equilibria. We are

particularly interested, however, in ascertaining whether there are

equilibrium which entail wage rigidity and unemployment. If contracts

which ensure that wages do not vary can be enforced, why cannot

contracts that ensure full employment be enforced? Let me suggest a

tentative answer: recall earlier that we distinguished two reputational

enforcement mechanisms, one based on the reaction of potential

employees, the other of current employees. If the firm believes that it

will be some time before it wishes to hire workers again, the present

 discounted value of the loss of the "outside" reputation may be

 relatively low; yet the firm may still be very concerned with the good

 will of its present employees, a central part of the efficiency wage



 28
   (continued)
 becomes implausible. Eventually, it should learn that the finn faces
 bad prospects. So long as the state of nature eventually becomes known,
 the asymmetric information restrictions are irrelevant.

 29From the general theory of self—selection, contracts may entail
 randomness (See Stiglitz (1982)); how such random contracts are to be
 enforced appears even more problematic than how the non—stochastic
 contracts discussed so far are to be enforced.
       For a discussion of optimal multi—period contracts, see Stiglitz
 and Weiss (1983). Note that since some of the shocks to the economy are
  common environmental shocks, the optimal contract should employ
  information from other firms, as in Nalebuffstiglitz (1983a, i983b).
                                    -.3" —




 hypothesis presented in Part II. Thus, an equilibrium contract         may
 entail the finn paying all retained employees a fixed wage which entails

 a subsidy in all states; it the state is bad enough, the firm will

 reduce its loses by firing (laying off) a fraction of its workers.30



 3.7 Lay—offs and Contract Complexity

      The version of the implicit contract theory with asymmetric

 information we have presented explains at best work reductions (work

sharing) but not layoffs, and not unemployment. Those versions of the

theory which attempt to explain layoffs usually simply assume it: the

worker is assumed either to work or not to work1 so that reductions in

work can only show up as layoffs. As we argued earlier, whether with

asymmetric or symmetric information efficient contracts should entail

work sharing. Moreover, since they do not provide an explanation of job

hiring,   knowing the determinants of job lay—offs provides an explanation
of unemployment only when it is assumed that labor is immobile.
     A final unattractive feature of most    versions   of asymmetric
information   implicit contracts is there complexity. If there are many

states of nature, the efficient contract will entail specifying, for

each set of observable variables, an hours, wage schedule; each schedule



30We have focused here on one side of the enforcement problem: ensuring
that the firm does not cheat on the worker. There is another side which
has received attention the worker who has been subsidized in the bad
state leaving the firm in the good state. If the worker always left the
firm whenever his wage was less than the value of his marginal product,
the finn would never be able to pay the worker more than his marginal
product in the good states. There is an obvious solution: make the
individual pay his insurance premium before he starts to work;
equivalently, since workers are normally hired in good states, pay the
worker less than his marginal product the first period of employment.
See }folmstrom.
                                    —35—



will have many points on it; the schedule is likely to be highly

non—linear. (Specifying the contract as an explicit contract seems hard

enough; knowing whether such an implicit contract had been broken would

seem nigh impossible.)

      In the next two sections, we present two models which remedy these

two deficiencies.



4. Complexity of Contracts.

      So far, we have not been able to elicit out of the implicit

contract theory a convincing basis of a theory of unemployment. The

explanations provided in this and the next section are, I think, more

convincing.

      The first is based on the problem noted earlier on the complexity

which can be encompassed within an (explicit or, a fortiori, implicit)

contract. The contracts described earlier resulting in full employment

required wage payments and hours to.vary from state to state. If we

restrict this even a little, we obtain the possibility of unemployment

 equilibria. For instance, Newbery and I have considered a simple

 macro—economic model in which the "shock" to the economy is the

 variability in export prices. All contracts are made contingent upon

 the export price. We show that with any linear indexing rule even when

 the level of indexing is optimally chosen there may be unemployment.

 Similar results obtain with other simple (log linear, quadratic, etc.)

 rules.



 5.   Theory of Moral Hazard and Labor Turnover.

       Layoffs   represent a non—price response to a market disturbance:
                                        36—




 rather than lowering wages in the face or a decrease in
                                                         demand,
 employment is rationed.      It is natural, thus, to   look for   an   explanation
 for   this in other instances where markets are characterized      by
 rationing; it   is by   now well known insurance markets in which adverse
 selection and   moral hazard problems arise are, in general, characterized

 by quantity rationing (See Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), Wilson

 (1977), Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), Arnott and Stiglitz (1983)).

       Recall earlier we argued that a theory (of implicit contracts)

which purports to explain unemployment must not only explain layoffs,

but also why those who are layed off are not rehired.        In general, the

shocks facing different finns are not perrectly correlated. If

information were costless, individuals who are at firms where the value

of the marginal productivity of those workers has decreased would move

to other firms; labor would be reallocated, until the value of the

marginal productivity of all workers at all firms was the same. Note in

this case the optimal contract would not require the finn provide any

unemployment insurance; individuals     would never be unemployed; the only
insurance   required would be wage insurance, and it need not be provided

by the firm. Now assume that information (search) is costly and the

process of gathering information is stochastic, so that some individuals

who search are unsuccessful.

       The risk that is to be insured is not just that the finn has a bad

state; it is the risk that the firm has a bad state, that the individual

searches, and is unsuccessful in finding a job.31



31Even if search were costly in time, but not in goods, and if it were
always successful, if individuals had a separable utility function, an
individual who happened to be in a low productivity firm and was layed
                          (Footnote continued)
                                   —37-.



     If   the finn provided complete wage and employment insurance, the

individual at the low productivity firm would have no incentive to

search. The more complete the insurance provided, the less incentives

for search, and the less efficient the resulting resource allocation.

The firm, of course, is not interested in the efficiency of the societal

resource allocation; but by inducing individuals to move elsewhere in

bad states, the firm saves the subsidy which is implicit in the wage

contract   in those states. If search were observable, the optimal
contract would provide for unemployment compensation which was
conditional   upon the level of search. But search is not observable, and

this is what gives rise to the moral hazard problem.           -



     There are two instruments which are available to the finn for

inducing search; one of them is to lower the wage of individuals who are

retained, and the other is to lay off workers. In general, Arnott,

Hosios, and Stiglitz (1983) show that both instruments will be employed.

The nature of the search process (the individual either does or does not

obtain employment) introduces   a natural non—convexity into the problem,
which implies that even if all individuals are identical, it pays to lay
off some workers; it is not optimal to rely simply on work sharing. But

in addition, some workers are better than others, and for a number of

reasons (both information, equity, and institutional) it may not be

possible to differentiate wages among them. Lowering wages results in a

differentially higher quit rate among the high quality workers; layoffs



31(continued)
off would not be compensated by any severance pay. Indeed, if leisure
and goods are complements, the optimal contract would entail negative
severance pay, were that feasible.
                                    —38--




do not have a corresponding   adverse effect on qualtity.
     On the other hand, when individuals differ in their search costs,

reduced wages have an advantage over layoffs. When wages are reduced,

those with lower search costs will be induced to search for a better job

(where they are more productive); layoffs force both high and low search

cost individuals to search.32

     This model thus has accomplished what the other theories of

implicit contracts could not do:    it has provided an explanation of the

simultaneous occurrence of wage reductions and layoffs (of on the job

and of f the job search); and it has provided a model of the labor market

in which there is an equilibrium level of unemployment. (The theory is,

of course, not inconsistent with the theories of implicit contracts with

asymmetric information; the structure of the implicit contracts

discussed by Arnott, Hosios, and Stiglitz, the specification of wages,

hours, and layoff rates in good and bad states, depends on whether the

state of nature is or is not observable by workers.)



Patterns of Unemployment

     We noted in section 2 that a "good" theory of unemployment should

explain not only the presence of unemployment, but also its pattern.

Thus, it should explain layoffs as well as work sharing. Our model does

this. It should also explain which workers get layed off. To some



32Several other papers have also focused on the issue of interfirm
mobility. Holmatrom (1983) has considered its implications for the
enforceability of contracts (with workers leaving in good states.) The
paper closest in spirit to the Arnott—Hosios—stiglitz paper is that by
Geanakoplos and Ito (1981), but they do not focus on the moral hazard
issues which are central to Arnott—Hosios—Stiglitz. For a partial
survey, see Ito (1982).
                                     —39..-




extent, our model     does this too. It is consistent with the use of the
seniority system of layoffs; younger individuals may have both    lower

costs and   greater   benefits from search. But it does not seem to explain
why certain groups, like woman and    minorities, should experience more
cyclical   unemployment that do white males. The model presented in Part

II does provide an explanation both for the use of layoffs and for the

concentration of layoffs among certain groups.



The Paradox of the Preference for Being Layed Off

     The model has one other failing: it does not provide a

satisfactory resolution of the seeming paradox which arises in many

implicit contract theories, in which the workers who are layed off are

better off than those who are not. Consider, for instance, the case of

a separable utility function; with full insurance, and no opportunities

for being rehired, the pay of those layed off must be the same as that

of those retained; but since    those layed off enjoy more leisure, their
total   utility is higher. All workers would be petitioning to be layed

0ff333U

        If U) there   is some probability that a worker3536 will be



33Obviously if U   is positive enough, the retained workers will be
better off than !yed off workers. In the terminology of Arnott and
Stiglitz, being layed off is a marginal utility increasing or decreasing
accident depending on whether Uvho; with full insurance, marginal
utility increasing accidents alCiays lead the individual experiencing the
accident to be better off.

31The result is even stronger if leisure and consumption, are
complements, in the sense that U   < 0. Those who are layed off have
more time to enjoy their goods, Xnd thus receive more goods than those
who are left to work. In Appendix A we show that if leisure is normal,
layed off workers will be better off.
                                         —i 0—




rehired, (ii) we ignore the      effect of    unemployment benefits on search;

and   (iii)    the firm cannot matitor whether or not the individual is

rehired,      and so must set its unemployment benefit as a fixed payment,
than the      payment will be set to equate the expected marginal utilities;

that is, if we assume a separable utility function, and let            be the

individual's income if he is retained (in the bad state), b be his

lay—oft benefit, and y be his income if he is rehired (a random

variable) then b is set so that

                              Eut (y +   b)      U




       Whether the expected utility of income is greater or less for the

laid off worker than the retained worker depends on the shape of the

utility function, on whether utility is a concave or convex function of

marginal utility. While with a quadratic utility functioi the retained

worker is better off, a necessary and sufficient condition for the

worker to be worse off is that there is decreasing absolute risk

aversion. (It is straightforward to derive more general conditions with

non—separable utility functions under which retained workers are better

off.)

        Now we must take into account the fact that, in the bad state, the

pay of the layed off worker affects their quit propensity. By



35Though there are a few instances of "inverse seniority" —— where
unemployment benefits plus layoff pay is sufficiently generous that
workers with greater seniority prefer to be layed off —— this is more
the exception than the rule. See, for instance, Bloom and Northrup
(1977).

     models with work sharing, the corresponding paradox is that
workers' utility is higher in the bad state than in the good.
                                       —41—




assumption, the firm is subsidizing workers in the bad state, so would

like to encourage them to leave. Thus, the firm lowers the pay of the

retained workers. This strenghtens the presumption that retained

workers   are worse off than laid off workers.
     We have established the   fact    that workers who     are layed   off may be
rehired means that it is possible that        retained   workers may be better
off than layed of f workers, under the plausible condition        that leisure

and consumption are complements   or independent.37 But whether retained
workers   are or are not better of f   remains   dependent on specific
properties   of the utility function, and plausible utility functions
                                                                             -
still lead to the seemingly paradoxical results.

     Our argument in favor of lowering wages for retained workers, to

encourage them to search, ignored the effect of lowering wages on their

productivity. This is not the first instance in which we have noted

indirect effects of current wages on the costs facing firms: we earlier

referred to the fact that to the extent that firms had to rely on

reputation mechanisms to enforce contracts, firms had two motivations

for paying high wages: to ensure the productivity of their current

workers and to lower future recruitment costs.

     These are but examples of a more general phenomena, which we refer

to as the Efficiency Wage Hypothesis, which provides an alternative, and

we believe more plausible, basis of the theory of unemployment, than the

implicit contract theory.



37There are other ways of resolving this seeming paradox. For instance,
as we noted earlier, if search is time intensive (but does not use
goods), but always successful, then layed off workers will not be
compensated for the loss of time associated with search. They will be
worse off than retained workers.
                                      —U2—




                                       II
                  Efficiency   Wage Theories of Unemployment



6. The Basic Argument.

        The basic hypothesis of the efficiency wage theories of

unemployment is that the (net) productivity of workers is a function of

the wage paid. It    that   is the case, then firms may be reluctant to

lower wages, even in the face of an excess supply of labor; to do so

might lower the productivity more than proportionately, so that total

labor costs are actually increased. Competitive equilibrium is thus
consistent with a situation in which there is an excess supply of
laborers. The Law of Supply and Demand has been Repealed.

        Moreover, since the relationship between productivity and wage may

differ from industry to idustry, wages (for similar laborers) may differ
across industries. The Law of the Single Price has also been repealed.
(Thus,   there may exist in equilibrium some sector in which these
efficiency wage considerations are not relevant, in which a conventional
competitive   wage is paid, while in some other sector(s), higher wages

are paid; these higher paid jobs are obviously rationed, and queues for

these jobs may serve as equilibrating mechanism,38 a substitute for the

adjustments in wages which do not take place because of the effect of

wages on productivity.)



381t seems to be merely a semantic quibble to claim that so long as
there is some industry in which rationing does not exist, there cannot
be involuntary unemployment. The models we construct have the property
that individuals who are identical (or nearly identical) are treated
differently, and have markedly different levels of expected utility.
        It is important to note that the, economy is not always
characterized by unemployment,39 only that     it may be. And changes in
the economy (the destruction of some capital, the change in technology,
etc.) may move the economy from a full employment regime to an
unemployment regime, or may change the equilibrium level of unemployment
in the economy.


7. Alternative Explanations of the Wage—Productive Relationship
        There are at least five different explanations of this phenomenona
which have been discussed in the literature.
        The earliest, noted in the development literature, was based on the
hypothesis that, at least at low levels of nutrition, individual's
productivity depended on their nutrition, which depended in turn an
their' pay. A productivity—wage curve of the form depicted in figure 6
was hypothesized by Leibenstein (1957) and subsequently analyzed in
greater detail by Mirrless (1975) and Stiglitz (1976). If A(w) is the
efficiency of a worker receiving a wage w, the firm chooses a wage which
minimizes the wage costs per efficiency unit,
(13)      mm     w/    A(w)

the solution to which entails
(114)     A' (w*) — A/iit
w*is referred to as the efficiency wage and is depicted in figure 7 as
the tangency between a line through the origin and the wage productivity
curve.
        Assume the aggregate production function of the industrial sector


39me Repeal of the Law of Supply and Demand is thus a selective repeal.
                                        —141j—




is   of the form

       Q   F( A L)

where L is the number of workers, and A is their efficiency. Let

output of the sector be our numeraire; firms in the sector will pay a

wage w, and hire workers up to the point where:
           *         *      *
(15)    A(w )F'(LA(w ))=w

the (value of the) marginal product equals the real wage. Let LD(w*) be

the solution to (15). If LD(w*) < t.., the supply of workers to the

industrial sector, there will be unemployment: no firm will have any

incentive to lower wages.

       This version of the theory is useful in helping to bring out the

basic structure of the argument, but nutritional considerations are of

limited relevance for wage determination in more developed countries.

       The second theory is based on labor turnover (Phelps (1970),

Stiglitz (19714, 1982)): the lower the wage, the higher the rate of

labor turnover; so long as the finn must bear some part of the turnover

costst° this lowers the net productivity of a worker.

       This can again easily give rise to unemployment. To see this most

simply, assume that individuals leave firms for two reasons: they die,

at an exponential rate, p       , or   they quit, to obtain a higher paying

job. Assume for simplicity, that they make s searches per unit time.

Assume all, firms paid the same wage w*. Then any firm which paid a wage

greater or equal to wM would have a quit rate of p         ,   while   any firm

which paid a wage less than w* would have a quit rate of p + s             (since



°So long as workers are risk averse, more risk averse than firms, firms
will bear some of these costs. See Arnott and Stiglitz (1983). See
also Hashimoto (1981).
                                   —145—




every firm that the searcher sampled would be paying a wage in excess of

the lower wage). The quit rate appears as in figure 8. The labor costs

of the firm (per unit time) are

       w +   (r   +   q)T
where r is the rate of interest and q is the quit rate, and T is the

training costs. ((rq)T represents the amortization of the training

costs.) Clearly, these are minimized at the wage w*. Thus, if the

economy experiences a shock (a war which decreases the capital stock),

and there is not a coordinated wage reduction, unemployment will

develop. It does not pay any firm to lower its wage, even in the

presence of unemployment (because ths unemployed workers, though

thankful now to get a lower paid job, will continue to search for a

still better job.)

      This model can easily be enriched to include individuals differing

in their attitudes towards non—pecuniary characteristics of the firm,

and searching for a good match between themselves and the firm. While

in the simple version presented in the preceding paragraph, there is

alway some full employment equilibrium (although many unemployment

equilibria), in a more general theory, the only equilibria may entail

unemployment. J4 1



141
  Uote that this problem could be resolved if individuals could be
forced to pay all of their training costs but this would give rise to a
moral hazard problem on the part of the firm: it would have an
incentive to charge individuals for allegedly training them, and then
fail to provide any training. This problem may be partly resolved by
use of contests (Bhattacharya (1983)) or promotion ladders (Carmichael
(1983)). Moreover, individuals may not have the capital to pay for all
of their training costs. In any case, as we have noted, if individuals
are risk averse, it is not optimal to force workers to bear the entire
brunt of the risk that he may be ill suited to the firm. As a factual
matter, firms do bear some of the turnover costs.
     The third theory (Stiglitz (1976), Weiss (1980) Nalebuff and

Stiglitz (fortircoming)) is based on imperfect information concerning

the characteristics of workers (and/or an inability for legal or

sociological reasons to differentiate wages among individuals whose

characteristics differ.) The quality mix of applicants depends on the

wages offered (and the quality mix of those who quit a firm depend on

the wages paid to its current employees). Ingeneral, by paying higher

wages, one obtains a higher quality labor force.12

     The fourth theory is based on imperfect information concerning the

actions of workers: the costs of. monitoring them perfectly in the

presence of such costs, firms must have some method of inducing "good

behavior", some threat against workers that are caught shirking. If

there were full employment, any worker who was fired would immediately

simply find another job (at the same wage). To induce workers not to

shirk, firms thus attempt to raise their wages relative to that paid by



     obtain an efficiency wage, one must show more than a dependence of
quality on wages, but that quality increases sufficiently fast with
wages that it does not pay firms to lower their wages in the face of
unemployment. Conditions under which this occurs have been derived in
Stiglitz (1976, 1982).
     Some have objected to this theory on the grounds that firms
eventually learn individual's abilities; hence workers could be required
to post a bond, which they would forfeit if it turned out later that
they were not as good as they claimed. The objections to this are
similar to those discussed earlier concerning the requirement to make
individuals pay all of their training costs. Individuals may not have
the capital to post the bond, and there is a moral hazard problem on the
part of the firm. Some effective bond posting does occur, when
individuals intially accept a lower wage, until they have proven
themselves; but this imposes a further' cost on individuals, in an
inefficient intertemporal pattern of consumption.
     Even when individuals are not well informed about their abilities,
it may pay a firm to offer an above market wage, to elicit a larger
applicant pool, among which it can select those which are best matched
with the firm.
     What is at issue here is in part an empirical question: do firms
                           (Footnote continued)
                                          —'47—




others. This has two consequences. If all firms were identical, then

they would not raise their wages relative to each other, but as they

raisGd    wages, their demand for labor would decrease, and unemployment
would    increase. So long as the level of unemployment compensation is
less than the market wage, the period of unemployment serves as a
discipline device. The equilibrium level of unemployment may be
depicted as in figure 9. Assume there are only two levels of effort
(O,e) and that the unemployment compensation level is fixed.            It seems
plausible that the lower the level of unemployment, the higher the wage
the (inn must pay to make it         wOrthwhile   for an individual not to shirk.
This no shirking wage is depicted as an upward sloping curve, increasing
with the level of employment. The demand for labor (assuming that
workers do not shirk) is the usual downward sloping function of           the

wage. The equilibrium is the intersection of the two.3
        The major objection to this theory is that there are        other methods
of    providing   discipline to the labor force, e.g. forcing them to post
bond. The limitations on these mechanisms are well known (see footnote
21$   above),   but it   is   worth noting that firms do employ indirect forms of
bonding to some extent. Hall has noted that unemployment rates are
highest among groups who, because of limited resources, are least able
to    post bonds.

        The difference between the last two models and        the standard


'42(continued)
believe that by lowering wages they will lower the quality of their
labor force, with a loss in productivity exceeding the savings in wages?

       version of the theory is developed by Shapiro and           Stiglitz
(i98'i). In their more general model, monitoring costs (and hence
monitoring intensity) is endogenous. See also Calvo (1979).
                                           —148—




competitive paradigm should be noted: the latter assumes that all

individuals are paid strictly on a piece rate, that their actions can be

perfectly monitored. If they perform the contracted for action, they

get paid; if the don't, they don't. In fact, most individuals have at

most a    small fraction of        their compensation depend directly on

performance;     in many cases, individual performance cannot be directly
observed;   at best, group performance can         be observed, and then     only with
a lag. Firms do        care about the quality      of   their labor force;   they are
worried   about providing incentives to their workers (in the competitive
paradigm, the firm could care less whether a worker decides to work or
not;   there is a competitive supply of workers readily available to

perform any service; a worker who does not do what he has contracted to

do is replaed by one who will).

       The fifth set of theories are the sociological theories recently

propounded by korge Akerlof (198U). Though many of the patterns of

behavior which he describes might equally well be described by one of

the theories which we have provided here, there are some which are not.

In particular, he noted that individuals' performance depends critically

on whether they believe they are being "fairly" treated. We shall

return to this observation later.

       Though the five theories differ in a number of important respects,

they have a common mathematical structure: the net productivity of a

worker at the ith firm is a function of the wage paid by the firm, w,

wage paid by other firms, wi and the unemployment rate (or, more

generally, the expected duration in the unemployment pool)

             =
                 Ai   (Wj,   wi,   u)

The equilibrium        level of unemployment, and wage structure may be
                                      —u 9—




derived, and the consequences of various policy changes investigated,

for alternative specifications of A



8. Patterns of Uneoloyment: A Further Inlication of the Efficiency

Wage Model.

       The Efficiency wage models are not only consistent with there being

unemployment in a competitive market equilbrium; they provide some

insights into the patterns of observed unemployment. If     groups differ
in   their   relationships between wage and productivity, as illustrated in

figure 10, equilibrium will be characterized by some groups being fully

employed, other groups being partial employed, and still other groups

being rationed out of' the market. Changes in the aggregate demand for

labor will have very large differential effects on the employment of

different groups. (This is in contrast, for instance, to the standard

theories, were the wages of different groups might be affected

differentially, but there is not reason to expect, once wages have

adjusted, differential unemployment rates among different groups.)



9.    The Consequences of Policy changes.

      The policy consequences may differ markedly depending on the

explanation of the dependence of productivity on wages. Consider, for

instance, an increase in the unemployment compensation. In the

"shirking" version of the efficiency wage model, this results in firms

having to raise their wages, to induce workers not to shirk (the penalty

for being caught is smaller at any fixed wage and unemployed level);

this in turn results in a higher equilibrium unemployment rate and a

higher real wage. On the other hand, in the quality—efficiency wage
                                 —50—



model, an increase in unemployment compensation may have a differential

effect on the search intensities of individuals of different abilities,

and thus shift the wage—productivity curve facing different firms. If

low productivity workers' search is reduced relative to the high

productivity workers, then the applicant productivitwage curve may

shift up, as in figure ii, with a consequent change in the wage (it may

either increase or decrease), and increase in the demand for labor. In

figure 12 we have depicted a case where there are low and high

productivity individuals but the number of individuals of each

productivity type who search for a job is affected by the level of

unemployment compensation. In figure 12a the mean ability of those

applying at high wages is increased; the wage is unchanged, but the

demand for labor increased; while in figure llb the mean ability of

those applying at high wages is decreased sufficiently that the optimal

wage is lowered (and unemployment is consequently eliminated.)

     All of these models should be contrasted with the policy

implication of the naive fixed price model, in which an increase in

unemployment compensation would be unambiguously desirable, since wages

and prices are (by assumption) unchanged, while the unemployment

compensation increases aggregate demand.

     Thus, though the structure of the equilibrium with the efficiency

wage model and the fixed price model may look very similar (real wages

do not respond to the presence of unemployment), and a careful general

equilibrium analysis of an economy with efficiency wages would entail

the same kind of detailed analysis of spill—overs and constraints that

have characterized the fixed price literature, the comparative statics

analysis and the analysis of the consequences of policy changes is
                                           -51-


               different.   For in   our   models, real   wages,   though not   falling
completely
to the market clearing levels, do respond to changes in policies.



10. The Efficiency Wage Hypothesis and Cyclical Fluctuations

       We have seen in the previous section how the efficiency wage model
                                                                     Changes in the
can    give   rise to an equilibrium level of unemployment.

economy, in say the      level   of productivity of worKers, in the capital

                                              compensation, give rise to different
stock, in the level of unemployment

levels of equilibrium unemployment. Thus, one approach •to seeing

whether (or the extent to which) the efficiency wage model provides

 insights into cycical fluctuations is to acertain the extent to which we

 can   identify parameter changes which would result in a change in the
 equilibrium level of unemployment.
      For instance, it is easy to show that a lowering of the demand
 curve for labor in figure B (for instance, as a result
                                                        of the
 destruction of some of the country's capital stock) will result both in
 lower wages and a higher unemployment rate.
         But the   insights obtained from the efficiency wage hypothesis

 extend beyond those directly obtained from this kind of equilibrium

  analysis. Even if equilibrium were characterized by full employment,

  the economy's adjustments to disturbances may be such as to result

  (frequently) in unemployment)'

         The argument may be seen      most simply by considering the labor
  turnover model present above. We noted there that there exists a full



        remarks in this and the next section are based on research in
                therefore are of a more speculative nature than results
  progress, and
  reported      earlier in this paper.
                                            —52—




 employment equilibrium, in which all firms pay a wage, w
                                                          at which the
 demand for labor equals the Supply. Assume that some of the capital

 stock has been destroyed, so that there is a new full employment

 equilibrium with a lower real wage.

        Consider now what happens if there is any friction in the wage

setting process. Assume, in particular, that all contracts last for two

periods (seconds. days, years?) and that some contracts come up for

renewal    in    even periods, others in odd; assume further that finns can
hire    within   a period. Then given even this slight amount of friction,
the   only equilibrium entails the real wage          remaining unchanged, with the

resulting increase in unemployment. (It the firms which have the option

of lowering their wage did so, they would            find that they experienced a
higher    quit rate,   and lower profits.)'45
      The argument is, of course, more general than this simple example:

since the optimal wage at      one firm depends on the wage       at the other
firms    (and the   unemployment   rate),   given   that (some firms) do not
adjust,   it does not pay others to adjust: to the full equilibrium levels.

Adjustments may occur, but they occur slowly.46

      Furthermore, the private losses from not reducing wages in the

efficiency wage model are of second order, while in the standard

competitive model, they are first order; that is, if we write the



4See, for instance, J. Taylor, for a discussion of
                                                   staggered contracts.
The theory, as presented, does not explain why contracts should be
staggered. Hosios has developed a theory, based on information costs,
for why in equilibrium, contracts would not be signed simultaneously by
all firms.

'6For a more formal development of these ideas,
                                                see Stiglitz
(forthcoming).
                                           -.53—




profits   of the firm as a function of its wage, the wage paid by other

firms, the    amount of labor hired and a vector of other parameters,


    p         p (Wi    •    L   ,ri)




in the efficiency wage model, the wage is set so that




        p-o
while    in the standard competitive model1 the wage is always the lowest

wage at which the firm can obtain workers. Assume now that some

paramenter flj has changed and that the wage at which a firm can obtain

workers is lowered. In the efficiency wage model, the wage will be

lowered

                 dw1
                        =       —      i   I
                                               ww


                 dn


 but the change in profits from this change in wages is zero (since

    =   0).   But in thestandard competitive paradigm, if firms can obtain

workers at lower wages, their profits are strictly increased.

        As a result, one might expect some "almost rational" firms not to

 fully adjust their wages in response to disturbances which they face.

 (See Akerlof and Yellen (1983)). Such distortion in the behavior of one

 agent in the economy has, of' course, its general equilibrium

 consequences, e.g. on prices elsewhere in the economy. But these are in

 the nature of pecuniary externalities, and were the economy initialily
                                      —51J—




 at a pareto efficient allocation (where rationing did not occur, e.g.

 because of efficiency wage considerations), the economy would still be

 pareto efficient; but under the circumstances described here, there are

 real welfare consequences of these failures on the part of some firms to

 adjust their wages 17



 11. Nominal Versus Real Rigidities

      There is a widespread belief among macro—economists that it is

nominal rigidities, not real rigidities, which are to be explained. The

evidence on this matter is not completely convincing. The few

experiments on fully neutral monetary changes ——      the            from old
                                                            change
francs to new francs —— suggest that such changes may have
                                                                  relatively
few   real effects. Other forms of   monetary   injection are never
uniformily   distributed among the population, and it is easy to construct

(not necessarily plausible) models in which non—uniform monetary

injections will have real effects. Moreover, economies which have

practiced extensive indexing (so money wages are not rigid) have

experienced episodes of unemployment just as economies in which indexing

is not so widely practiced.

      Still, it is worth noting that two versions of the efficiency wage

model may give rise to rigidities in money wages. In the labor turnover

model, we noted an indeterminancy of equilibrium. If all firms were

paying a wage w, it would pay them to continue to pay that wage, in

spite of a change in the demand or supply of labor.         The critical wage



7This result is an application of a more general result
                                                        on market
mediated extenalities in economies with incomplete markets and imperfect
information (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1983).
                                     —55—




could be set in money or real   terms. If each firm believes that all
others   are going to leave money wages     unchanged, it would not pay any

firm   to change his (money) wage. In an economy which has not

experienced rapid rates of inflation in the past, it may be natural to

"fix" on the money rate; while in other economies, where indexing is

more prevalent, it may be the real wage which is rigid.

       The second explanation is based on Akerlof's sociological theories

of the efficiency wage. If individuals come to believe that money wage

reductions are unfair, then it does not pay firms to reduce their money

wages. At one level, such an explanation seems unsatisfactory: why

should individual come to view nominal wage changes of any moment? But

 if workers exhibit such irrationalities, it pays for firms to reflect

 those irrationalities in their wage setting policies.        Such a theory may

 have some degree of plausibiltiy for the short run, in an economy which
 has had little experience with inflation; but it is unconvincing in the
 long run: but then do we have much evidence of nominal wage rigidities

 in    such economies?



 Conclusions

        Those of us brought up in traditional Keynesian macro—economies were

 taught the importance of the assumption of wage rigidity.        This was

 described as a Fact of Life, explained by vague reference to certain

  institutional   factors. If wage   rigidity is aà central   to the
  explanantion of unemployment as many modern renditions of Keynes seem to
                                                                       of
  suggest, surely we need to explain this wage rigidity. The objective
  this paper has been to investigate two important classes of

  explanations.
                                     —56—




       The first approach, the implicit contract
                                                 theory, has had a long,
 but sad, history.118

       The simpler models put forward a decade and a half ago provided an

 explanation of the lack of variability of
                                               real wages, but not an

 explanation of unemployment. The more complicated asymmetric

 information models were found
                                 unconvincing: they more easily gave rise
 to   over—employment than underemployment, and the   forms of contracts to
 be expected, were asymmetric information considerations
                                                             paramount, are
 not observed. Other versions of the asymmetric information implicit

 contract model, explicitly long   term   in nature, may give rise to full
 employment. Two versions of the implicit contract model did give rise

to unemployment: those with limitations on the complexity of the
contracts which could be designed and those in which search was costly
and could not be monitored. Though these
                                               may provide part of the
explanantion of the observed patterns of
                                              wages and unemployed, of who
becomes unemployed, and why unemployment takes the form of layoffs

rather than work—sharing, additional
                                          insights may be obtained from the



 ll8There is the suggestion in the implicit contract approach
                                                               that, since
the terms of the contract, which lead upon occasion to unemployment,     are
signed voluntarily, the unemployment generated is not really involuntary
unemployment; and that since the contract maximized
                                                       expected profits,
given the level of expected utility of the worker, since the contract
is, in this sense efficient, the market
                                          equilibrium is efficient. While
the first question, whether the unemployment is voluntary or
involuntary, is mainly a matter of semantics, the second conclusion,
that the market equilibrium is
                                 pareto efficient, is as we have noted
incorrect. There exist, in general, governmental interventions in the
market which can both increase profits and
                                             increase the expected utility
of workers. (See Newbery and
                                Stiglitz, 1983, Arnott, }Iosios, and
Stiglitz, 19811.)   (The result that —— even when contractual arrangments
between parties are "locally efficient" —— the
                                                 general equilibrium is
not Pareto efficient is more general, and holds whenever there are
problems of moral hazard or adverse selection. See Greenwald and
Stiglitz (1983).)
                                   —57—




secondapproach, the efficiency wage models. These not only provide an
sicplanation of the existence of unemployment equilibrium in competitive

economies, they also provide part of the explanation of the observed

patterns   of unemployment, of who becomes unemployed, and why
unemployment takes the form of layoffs rather than Work—sharing. They
provide an explanation for why different   firms may pay similar labor

different wages. They explain wage stickiness1 both why firms may not

loose much if they fail to adjust their wages, and why, when they adjust

their wages optimally, they adjust them slowly.

    The two theories are, of course, not mutally exclusive:

employer—employee relationships are frequently long term relationships;

what affects the quality of the labor force attracted to a finn, or the

effort which a worker exerts, is not just the wage at the moment, but

his life—time prospects.

    The issues we have raised, concerning the nature of insurance, the

presence of asymmetric information, the limitations of enforcement

mechanisms, and restrictions on the degree of complexity of feasible

contracts, are all relevant in the design of the contract. They must

all be taken into account in explaining cyclical movements in wages,

hours, and employments. Our argument is that while simple efficiency

wage models can provide a plausible explanation of unemployment, simple

 versions of the implicit contract model (with or without asymmetric

 information) can do so only under highly restrictive and implausible

 conditions, and have some important counterfactual implications.

     We have just begun the exploration of the full implications of these

 efficiency wage models. In the end, they may prove as unsatisfactory as

 the earlier versions of the implicit contract theory; empirical
                                    —58—




predictions   of the theory may be shown to be inconsistent with the

observed facts. But for now, they seem     to   provide the most fruitful
direction   of research, in extending ow understanding of    wage
rigidities, this central element in the Keynesian legacy.
                                            —59—



                                      Appendix A

    Proof that layed—off workers are better off than retained workers,
under hypothesis of normality of leisure.

    We   assume that firms provide supplementary unemployment benefits.
    The optimal contract maximizes profits, subject to individual's
obtaining an expected utility of U, i.e. it maximizes

                       lEG h—y]f(s) +           sf f(s)ds
                       A                           A'


subject to

                      f[U(y1h)f(s)ds +             fU(S + b10)f(S)    dS >(<) U
                      A                            A'

as a function of his income, y, and hours worked, h; and B(s) is the
productivity of an individual in state S. It is straightforward to show
that the solution to this entails

                             IJy a         constant;
individuals obtain perfect insurance, in the sense that their marginal
utility of income in all states is the same. Differentiating (A.1), we
obtain


                     dy
                          = —U        /u
                                 by        yy

 thus

                     dU                                                           -



                     — - Uh       —    U
                                           y Ub1
                                                        <or   >0 as leisure is'normal
                                                                              (inferior
                                       U
                                           yy
                                                        —60—



                                             Appendix B

The optimal contract (without selF-selection
                                                                         constraints) must sat isfy
(Li)
           °2Uy(h2,y2)+Uh(h2,y2) - 0

(8.2)          OlUy(hIYl)+rJh(hl,yl) = 0

(8.3)      p1 '
                         U(h1 ,y1
                        Uy(h2,y2)
Without        loss of generality, we let
                                                         y2 a y2.
Then from (8.1), h2 . h21, where

                  OIJy(h2*. y2*)+%(h2.y2I) a o
Let
      ty(h 2*,y2*) a J*• Totally differentialy (8,2) and (B3) we obtain
(letting p'/p — A)

               0hh             Uhy                                         del
                                                                1
                                                   dh1


      —
          61
                (A —           A—Uyy
                       uyh)                        dy1          Mi1 01

                                U
                                    I


Letc=—U .b=Uh,a 0th
                 o                             U
                                                   I,




1D        dPi1 a (A+c)        bAh1 1         A(1bh101) +
          ii

61D       dy1 —0 aAh1, +        oi      (Ab)            01A    [ah1+1] 'be1
          do1

 where         D - (A+c) a + bO
                                    1(A—b)

                     A(a+b01) + ac — b2 0
                 —
                                                              —61 —




Define

    Sj —      01(h1h2)
                                   —                  i   —    1,2
                                                                             I
   US1 —h1 I12+ 1 [c+b—A(bh1 0 +ah1)
                                   D
   do1

D dS2 a                  — 1) (A+c—Abh a,)


   dO1
                         + (c+b —
                                  A(bh191+ah1)]

Direct calculations verify that

  dh -        (b+c)                       >(C) 0          as b÷c >(() 0

  dl              0(c+2b) + a

  dC      a       ab6                     >(C) 0              as abe XC) 0

  dl              o(c+2b) •a

where C - consumption.

Hence, at 0 =                 02

    dS1 XC) 0                                      aA
                                        as      __________            <(>)
                                                  1       a Au
    dO1

 where        a     -    share         of labor =         y
                                                          Oh

 and A            A(Oh—y) —            firm's   measure of relative risk aversion

                  - —y   dlnh — income elasticity of labor supply

                         di

 It immediately follows that                      if
                                A-O, the individual works more hours in
 the good state than in the bad (h1>h,). It also immediately follows
 that for states near each other, whether there is over or
 underemployment simply depends on whether leisure is normal or inferior.
 Moreover, if leisure is normal, and firms are risk neutral, one always
 obtains either full employment or over employment, since h1 > Pt2
                                                 —62—




 Special cases: (a) Separability
 Separability ensures              normality, and dli1   > 0.

                                                   do1
 The condition for dS1 > 0                 can now be written (at 01
                                                                         02

                             do1

             (1— a) v —A a v C 0

where

      C —
            UyyY    worker's relative risk aversion

      v     tJhhh/[Jh —   worker's       elasticity of marginal   disability   of effort
(b) U — U(y—v(h))

This utility function has the property that b÷c                   0.

      a + b 0 = a — ce              v" ) 0

                                    VI

but   since

   b -      u"/u'
             C 0, dh1/do > 0, and if the two states are far
apart, there will be full employment (the constraint        enough
                                                       S 0 Is never
violated, since dS2 C 0).

                          do1
                                 —63—




                               REFERENCES

Akelof, G.A. and J.E. Stiglitz. June 1969. Capital, Wages and Structural
Unemployment. Economic Journal. Vol LXXIX. pp. 269—81.


Akerlof, G. and H. Miyazaki. 1980. The Implicit Contract Theory of
Unemployment Meets the Wage Bill Argument. Review of Economic Studies.
XLVII. pp. 321—38.


Akerlof, George A. 1970. The Market for "Lemons": Qualitative
Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
8'l. pp. 1488—500.


Akerlcf, George and Yellen, Janet. 1983. The Macroeconomic Consequences
of Near Rational Rule of Thumb Behavior, mimeo. U.C. Berkeley.


Akerlof, George. 1984. Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wage Theory: Four
Views. American Economic Review Proceedings.


Arnott, R. and A. Hosios, and J. Stiglitz. 1983. Implicit Contracts,
Labor Mobility and Unemployment. mimeo. Princeton University. (revised
version ofa paper presented at NBER—NSF conference. Dec. 1980).


Arnott, R. and 4. Stiglitz. 1981. Labor Turnover, Wage Structures and
Moral Hazard. mimeo. Princeton University.


Arrow, K.J. 19611. The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of
Riskbearing. Review of Economic Studies. 31. pp. 91.


Azariadis, C. 1975. Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria.
Journal of Political Economy. LXXXIII. pp. 1183—202.


 Azariadis, C. 1979. Implicit Contracts and Related Topics: A Survey. Z.
 Hornstein et al, eds.. The Economics of the Labour Market. London: 1*130.


 Azariadis, C. 1983. Employment with Asymmetric Information. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics. XCVIII. pp. 157—72.


 Azardias, C. and J.E. Stiglitz (1983), "Implicit Contracts and Fixed
 Price Equilibria," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98, pp. 1—22.


 Baily, M.N. 1974. Wages and Employment Under Certain Demands. Review of
                                     —611—




 Economic Studies. XLI. pp. 37—50.


 Bhattaoharya, S. 1983. Tournaments and Incentives: Heterogeneity and
 Essentiality. mimeo. University of California, Berkeley.


 Bloom, Gordon F. and Northrup, Herbert H., Economics of Labor Relations.
 Richard D. Irwin, 1977


 Borch, K. 1968. The Economics of Uncertainty. Princeton: Princeton
 University Press.


Burdett, Kenneth, and Dale T. Mortensen. 1980. "Search, Layoffs, and
Labor Market Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 88, No. 4,
pp. 652—672.


Calve, Guillermo and Wellisz, Stanislaw. 1979. Hierarchy, Ability and
Income Distribution. Journal of Political Economy. 87. pp. 991—1010.


Calvo, Guillermo, and E.S. Phelps. 1977. Appendix: employment contingent
wage contracts. Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy.
Vol. 5 ed. Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, Carnegie—Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics
Supplement. pp. 160—68.


Calvo, Guillermo. May 1979. Quasi—walrasian theories of unemployment.
American Economic Review. Vol. 69. No. 2. pp. 102—107.


Carmichael, Lorne. Spring, 1983. Firm—Specific Human Capital and
Promotion Ladders. Bell Journal.


Chari, V.V. 1983. Involuntary Unemployment and Implicit Contracts.
Quarterly Journal of Economics. XCVIII. pp. 107—22.


Cooper, H. 1981. Risk—Sharing and Productive Efficiency in Labor
Contracts Under Bilateral Asymmetric Information. rnimeo. University of
Pennsylvania.


Cooper, H. 1983. A Note on Overemployment/Underemployment in Labor
Contracts Under Asymmetric Information. Economic Letters, pp. 81—87.


Cooper, H. Worker Asymmetric Information and Involuntary Unemployment,
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper, 672H, April, 1984.
                                  —65—




Debreu, G. 1959. Theory of Value. New York: Wiley.


Eaton, B. Curtis and White, William. 1982. Agent Compensation and the
Limits of Bonding. Economic Inquiry. 20. pp. 330—113.


Gordon, D. F. 19711. A Neoclassical Theory of Keynesian Unemployment.
Economic Inquiry. XII. pp. 1T31—59.


Grandmont, J.M. 1982. Money and Value. Cambridge University Press.


Green, J. and C. Kahn. 1983. Wage—Employment Contracts. Quarterly
Journal of Economics. XCVIII. pp. 173—87.


Greenwald, B. and Stiglitz, J.E. 1983. Market Mediated Externalities:
The Inefficiency of Competitive Economies with Imperfect Information and
Incomplete Markets. mimeo. Princeton.


Grossman, S. and 0. Hart. 1981. Implicit Contracts, Moral Hazard, and
Unemployment. American Economic Review. (papers and proceedings). LXXI.
pp. 301—07.


Grossman, S. and 0. Hart. 1983. Implicit Contracts Under Asymmetric
Information. Quarterly Journal of Economics. XCVIII pp. 1223—56.



Hall, R. 1980. Erriployment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity. Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity. pp. 91—12'T.


Hall, R. and D. Lilien. 1979. Efficient Wage Bargains Under Uncertain
Supply and Demand. American Economic Review. LXIX. pp. 868—79.


Hall, R. and Lazear, E. .1982. The Excess Sensibility of Layoffs and
Quits to Demand. NaSH Working Paper. no. 86U.


Hall, Robert. 1975. The Rigidity of Wages and the Persistence of
Unemployment. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 2. pp. 301—35.


Harris, ..J.E. and M. Todaro. 1970. Migration, Unemployment and
Development: a Two—Sector Analysis. American Economic Review. Vol. 6o.
No. 1. pp. l26—42.
                                   —66—




Harris, H. andB. Holmatrom. 1982. A Theory of Wage Dynamics. Review of
Economic Studies. XLIX. pp. 315—33.


Hart, 0. 1975. On the Optimality of Equilibrium when the Market
Structure 15 Incomplete. Journal of Economic Theory. XI. pp. 1416—J43.


Hart, 0. 1983. Optimal Labor Contracts Under Asymmetric Information: An
Introduction. Review of Economic Studies. 50. pp. 3—36.


Hashimoto, H. June 1981. Firm—Specific human Capital as a Shared
Investment. American Economic Review. pp. T7582.


Holmstrom, 8. 1983. EquIlibrium Long—Term Labor Contracts. Quarterly
Journal of' Economics. XCVIII. pp. 23—511.


Hoslos, A. 1981. Externalities, Efficiency and the Implicit Contract
Theoryof Employment. mimeo. Princeton University.


Imal, H., J. Geanakoplos, and T. Ito. 1981. Incomplete Insurance and
Absolute Risk Aversion. Economic Letters, Vol. 8, 107—112.


Ito, T. 1982. "Implicit Contract Theory: A Critical Sur Ey," Center for
Economic Research, University of Minnesota.


Lelbensteir., J. 1957. Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth. New
York: Wiley.


Malcoimson, James. 1981. Unemployment and the Effclency Wage Hypothesis.
Economic Journal. 91. pp. 8148—66.


Malinvaud, E. 1977. The Theory of' Unemployment Reconsidered. Oxford:
Blackwell.


Malinvaud, E. 1980. Profitability and Unemployment. Cambridge University
Press.


Mirrlees, J. 1975. A Pure Theory of Underdeveloped Economies.
Agriculture in Development Theory. ed. L.A. Reynolds, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
                                 —67—




Moore, J. 1982. optimal Labour Contracts When Workers have a Variety of
Privately Observed Reservation Wages. mimeo. Birkbeek College.


Mortenson. D. 1978. On the Theory of Layoffs. mimeo. Northwestern
University.


Nalebuff, B. and R. Zeckhauser. 1981. Involuntary Unemployment
Reconsidered: Second—Best Contracting with Heterogeneous Firms and
Workers. University of Wisconsin—Madison, Institute for Research on
Poverty, Discussion Paper, #675—61.


Nalebuff, B. and Stiglitz, J.E. 1983. Prizes and Incentives: Towards a
General Theory of Compensation and Competition. Bell Journal.


Nalebuff, B.J. and Stiglitz, J.E. 1983. Information, Competition and
Markets. American Economic Review. pp. 278—283.


Nalebuff, B.J. and Stiglitz, J.E. (forthcoming). Quality and Prices.
Quarterly Journal of Economics.


Neary, J.P. and J. Stiglitz. 1983. Toward a Reconstruction of Keynesian
Economics: Expectations and Constrained Equilibria. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. XCVII. pp. 199—28.


Negishi, 1. 1979. Microeconomic Foundations of Keynesian Macroeconomics,
Amsterdam, North—Holland.


Newbery, D. and J. Stiglitz. 1962. Wage Rigidity, Implicit Contracts and
Economic Efficiency: Are Market Wages Too Flexible?, mimeo. Princeton
University.


 Newbery, D.M.G. and Stiglitz. J.E. 1981. The Theory of Commodity Price
 Stabilization. Oxford University Press.


 Phelps, E.S. 1970. Micro—economic Foundations of Employment and
 Inflation Theory. New York.


 Polemarchakis, H.M. January 1979. Implicit Contracts and Employment
 Theory. Review of Economic Studies. Vol. XLVI. pp. 97—108.


 Polemarchakis, H. and L. Weiss. 1978. Fixed Wages, Layoffs, Unemployment
                                     —68—




 Compensation,   and Welfare. American Economic Review. Vol. 68. pp.
 909—917.



 Rothschild, Michael A. and Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1976. Equilibrium in
 Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay in the Economies of Imperfect
 Information, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90 no. 14 pp. 629—119.


 Salop, S.C. August 1973. Wage Differentials in a Dynamic Theory of the
 Firm. Journal of Economic Theory. Vol. 6. No. 3. pp. 321—11i4.


Salop, Steven. 1979. A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment.
American Economic Review. 69. pp. 117—25.


Sargent, R.J. 1979. Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Academic Press.


Schlicht, •Ekkehart. 1978. Labour Turnover, Wage Structure and Natural
Unemployment, Zeitschrift fur die Gesamte Staatswissenschaft, 1311. pp.
331—46.


Shapiro, Carl and Stiglitz, Joseph. Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker
Discipline Device. American Economic Review, forthcoming.


Solow, R. and J. Stiglitz, 1968. Output, Employment and Wages in the
Short run. Quarterly Journal of Economics. LXXXII. pp. 537—60.


Solow, Robert. 1979. Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness. Journal
of Macroeconomics. pp. 79—82.


Solow, Robert. 1981. On Theories of Unemployment. American Economic
Review. 91. pp. 8118—66.


Stiglitz, J. and Weiss, A. June i98i. Credit Rationing in Markets With
Imperfect Information. American Economic Review. 71. pp. 393—1110.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1973. Approaches to the Economics of Discrimination.
American Economic Review. vol. 62 no. 2. pp. 287—295.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1971ia, Theories of Discrimination and Economic Policy.
Patterns of Racial Discrimination. ed. von Furstenberg. Lexington,
Massachusetts: Lexington Publishing Company. pp. 5—26.
                                   —69—




Stiglitz, J.E. 19711b. Equilibrium Wage Distributions. IMMSS Technical
Report. No. •1514. Stanford University. Forthcoming in Economic Journal.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1976b. The Efficiency Wage }lypothesis, Surplus Labor and
The Distribution of Income in L.D.C.'s. Oxford Economic Papers. vol. 28.
no. 2. pp. 185—207.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1978. Lectures in Macro—economics. mimeo. Oxford
University.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1982a. The Wage—Productivity Hypothesis: Its Economic
Consequences and Policy Implications. Paper presented at the New York
Meetings of the American Economic Association.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1982b. The Inefficiency of the Stock Market Equilibrium.
Review of Economic Studies. 149. pp. 2141—261.


Stiglitz, J.E. 1983. Alternative Theories of Wage Determination and
Unemployment in L.D.C.'s: The Efficiency Wage Model. M. Oersovitz, et
al editor.


Stiglitz, J;E. 19814. Price Rigidities and Market Structure. American
Economic Review.


Stiglitz. J.E. and Weiss, A. 1983. Incentive Effects of Terminations:
Applications to the Credit and Labor Markets. American Economic Review.
73. pp. 912—927.


Stiglitz, J.E., August 1976a. Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in
Competitive Markets. IMMSS Technical Report no. 212. Stanford
University.


Stoft, Steven. 1982. Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary
Unemployment. mimeo. Boston University.


Strand, J. 1983. The Structure of Implicit Contracts with Word of Mouth
Reputational Enforcement. mimeo. University of Oslo.


Strand, J. 1983. The Structure and Efficiency of Reputational Labor
Contracts. mimeo. Stanford University.


Weiss, Andrew. 1980. Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with
                                  —70—



Flexible Wages. Journal of Political Economy. 88. pp. 526—538.


Wilson, Charles. 1977. A Model of Insurance Markets with Incomplete
Information. Journal of Economic Theory, 16 no. 2. pp. 167—207.


Yellen, J. 1984. Efficiency Wage Models of Unemployment. American
Economic Review.
                       FIGURE la




y                                          Indifference curve, good state

                                           I



                                                       Indifference
                                                       curve (bad state)




                                                   2
                                               p




        Iso—prof it
        bad state
        (slopeQ2)           Iso—profit curve, good state
                              slope =
                                      0]




    Self—selection constraints satisfied in first best equilibrium.
                FIGURE lb




y



                                             1
                                         U
                                                                 2
                                                             U

                                                     1
                                                 p




                                                                     2
                                                                 p




                                                         h




    Self—selection constraint not satisfied in first best
    equilibrium. In the good state, the firm would prefer
       to E1.
                              Figure ic




y


                                                    I
                                                p




                                  1
                          2   u
                      U




                                                                   2
                                                               p




                                                        h




    Self—selection constraint not satisfied in first best
    equilibrium: in the bad state, the firm would prefer
                                                            E1 to E2.
    Note that    individuals are better off in a bad state.
                     FIGURE 2a


                                                              1
                                                         U
y


                                                             p




                                                                       /
                                                                           2
                                                                       U




                                                                      V
                                                                           2
                                                                       p

                                            2




                                                                  h




    Contracts     and E1 satisfy the self—selection constraints,
    but there is underemployment in the bad state (to force
    truth telling, employment is resti-icted in bad state).
                    FIGURE 2b




                                                      1
                                                  p




               U2      U1


                                                              2
                                                          p




                                                  h




Contracts
             and E1 satisfy the self—selection constraint,
but there is overernployment in
                               the good state (to force
truth telling, employment is expanded in good state.)
                 FIGURE 3




y




                                        U2

                                                               1
                                                           p
                                               UI1!

                                                                       2
                                                                   p




                                                       h




    If Uh — 0, there will always be over—employment.
                 Figure 4




                              U1




                                                        p2




With infinitely risk averse firms (and finitely risk averse
individuals) in the good state, the firm always prefers
   to E1.
A
A




                                       A = (l—c)R

                                             a',




                                                             'I

                                                    A
                                                    c   individual's
                                                        risk aversion



                            Figure 5

    Critical value of firm relative risk aversion (A), below
    which the only equilibria entail over or full employment.
    Increasing workers elasticity of marginal disutility of
    labor and reducing the workers degree of risk aversion
    make under—employment equilibria more likely.
     7


/
7/




                 Uy_ah




                                                                    h
                                                           I


                                      are Perfect SUbStitutes fld
                 are risk neutral
         alto.a75         i fj    t best equilib
                                                  Constraints are
                      FIGURE Gb




y




                    E2
        uy—ah




    0                                                     1   h




        The self—selection constraints are not binding,
        even with a non—linear technology.
                 FIGURE 6c




y




                                                         U(y1 — ah1)




                                                        U(y2 — ah2)




                               2 h—y =




                                                         h




    Self—selection constraints are still satisfied if firms
    are risk averse.
                        FIGURE 6d




y




                                           U'




                                                   U2

                                                     J




                                                              h



    If firms   are   risk averse and there is diminishing returns
    (to the number of hours worked by each worker), then there
        exist an underemployment equilibrium.
7                                U


                                          01




                                                        h



                           Figure 6e


    If individuals have utility functions of the form U = U(y—v(h))
    and firms are risk neutral, then the first best equilibrium
    always satisfies the self—selection constraints.
                  FIGURE 7




A




                                             Wage—productivity
                                                 curve




                                                       w



    w is the efficiency wage. At w', wage costs per—efficiency
      unit are minimized.
                            FIGURE 8




Quit rate




 J   +5




                                                 quit rate function




                                                        w



            w* is the efficiency wage. At w*, total labor costs
            (including turnover costs) are minimized.
                       FIGURE 9




w

                                      no shirking
                                        wage
       \




                                  N
                                      N
                                          S.-


                                                      Demand for labor




                                                    Full employment




    If monitoring is costly, the only equilibria entail
    unemployment. A decrease in the demand for labor will
    result in lower real wages and more unemployment.
                        FIGURE 1Q




A




                         *      *                          w
                        w2     w    1



    Consequences of differing wage productivity functions: some
    groups will be fully employed (group 1), some partially employed
    (group 2) and some completely unemployed (group 3).
                                             FIGURE 11
                                                                                    relationship after increase
                                                                             loyment benefits

                                                                   Efficiency wage relationship before
                                                                    increase in unemployment benefits




                                                                                w

    An increase in unemployment compensation may change
    wages and the demand for labor.




                                                   FIGURE 12   -


A                                                                                   Efficiency wage relationship
                                                                                    after increase in
                                                                     I
                                                                                    unemployment benefits

                                                                                    Efficiency wage relationship
                                                                                    before increase in
                                                                                    unemployment benefits




                                                           I
      __________________________________________



                                                       w             w              w
                                                           1             2



     Two group case: an increase in unemployment compensation
     leaves wages unchanged but reduces unemployment.
                      FIGURE 12b




A




    /
                                   /
                                            Efficiency wage relationship
                                            before increase in unemployment
                                            benefits




                     /                      Efficiency wage relationship
                                            after increase in unemployment
                                            benefits




                    Wi              W2




    Two group case: an increase in unemployment compensation
    lowers the wage and reduces unemployment.
