                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               HEALTH CAPITAL AND THE PRENATAL ENVIRONMENT:
              THE EFFECT OF MATERNAL FASTING DURING PREGNANCY

                                         Douglas Almond
                                        Bhashkar Mazumder

                                        Working Paper 14428
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14428


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We gratefully acknowledge comments from seminar participants at the NBER Cohorts meeting Spring
2007, UC Davis, Chicago Harris, the National Poverty Center Life Events Conference, Brown University,
Stockholm University (IIES), the NBER Childrens Program, the University of Illinois (Chicago), the
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Notre Dame, the Tinbergen Institute, Bristol University, UVA,
Cornell, and the University of Chicago (Booth School of Business). We also thank Lena Almond,
Hoyt Bleakley, Janet Currie, Carlos Dobkin, Phoebe Ellsworth, Andrew Gelman, Jon Guryan, Jim
Heckman, Hilary Hoynes, Darren Lubotsky, Doug Miller, Kevin Milligan, Diane Whitmore-Schanzenbach,
and Kosali Simon for helpful comments. We thank Ana Rocca, Kenley Barrett, Sarena Goodman,
and Shyue-Ming Loh for excellent research assistance and Christine Pal for careful copy editing. The
views expressed here do not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve system, nor those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Douglas Almond and Bhashkar Mazumder. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of Maternal Fasting During Pregnancy
Douglas Almond and Bhashkar Mazumder
NBER Working Paper No. 14428
October 2008, Revised May 2010
JEL No. I1,I12,J1,J14

                                              ABSTRACT

We use the Islamic holy month of Ramadan as a natural experiment in fasting and fetal health. In Michigan
births 1989-2006, we find prenatal exposure to Ramadan among Arab mothers results in lower birthweight
and reduced gestation length. Exposure to Ramadan in the first month of gestation is also associated
with a sizable reduction in the number of male births. In Census data for Uganda, Iraq, and the US
we find strong associations between in utero exposure to Ramadan and the likelihood of being disabled
as an adult. Effects are particularly large for mental (or learning) disabilities. We also find significant
effects on proxies for wealth, earnings, the sex composition of the adult population, and more suggestive
evidence of effects on schooling. We find no evidence that negative selection in conceptions during
Ramadan accounts for our findings, suggesting that avoiding Ramadan exposure during pregnancy
is costly or the long-term effects of fasting unknown.


Douglas Almond
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
da2152@columbia.edu

Bhashkar Mazumder
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
bmazumder@frbchi.org
1         Introduction
Restricted maternal nutrition during critical windows of fetal development can lead to
adaptive physiologic responses that are irreversible and later lead to poor adult outcomes
[Gluckman and Hanson, 2005].               Recent studies by economists have utilized exogenous
shocks “caused by conditions outside the control of the mother” [Currie, 2009] to provide
compelling observational evidence on the importance of prenatal development, which can
impact both subsequent health capital and skill formation [Cunha and Heckman, 2007].
These studies have typically leveraged uncommon and severe historical events, such as
exposure to famine or infectious disease, for identiﬁcation. It has yet to be established,
however, whether more commonly encountered circumstances also exert signiﬁcant long-
term eﬀects. Such exposures are not only more directly relevant to the physiologic path-
ways described in the biomedical literature, but also may be more amenable to policy
intervention.
        In this study, we consider a common early-childhood exposure that is ongoing today:
disruptions to the timing of prenatal nutrition from meal skipping or dieting during preg-
nancy.1 Speciﬁcally we consider the eﬀects of maternal fasting. Muslims generally fast
each day during the lunar month of Ramadan. Fasting includes abstaining from eating
and drinking during daylight hours. Certain persons are automatically exempted from
fasting: “children, those who are ill or too elderly, those who are traveling, and women
who are menstruating, have just given birth, or are breast feeding” [Esposito, 2003]. Preg-
nant women are not explicitly exempted. Three in four Muslim pregnancies overlap with
Ramadan and surveys indicate the majority of pregnant Muslims observe the fast.
        Previous studies have shown that fasts associated with Ramadan during pregnancy
can lead to sharp declines in maternal glucose levels along with other biochemical changes
[Prentice et al., 1983, Malhotra et al., 1989].             The supply of glucose and oxygen are
considered to be the key signals of the maternal environment during early embryonic
development and disruptions in their availability can lead to permanent physiological
adaptations that may later lead to disease [Gluckman and Hanson, 2005]. Therefore,
repeated maternal fasting during pregnancy may present a more direct way to assess
    1
        Nearly 1 in 4 women report skipping meals during pregnancy in the US [Siega-Riz et al., 2001].



                                                      1
the long term eﬀects of alterations in the fetal environment than other more indirect
treatments such as exposure to disease. We provide new evidence on fasting’s eﬀects on
birth outcomes and the ﬁrst evidence of eﬀects later in life using large-sample microdata
on Muslims in the United States, Iraq, and Uganda.
       Our methodological approach addresses a key ﬂaw in previous studies of Ramadan fast-
ing and birth outcomes. These epidemiological studies have compared pregnant women
who fasted to those who did not at a point in time, under the basic assumption that the de-
cision to fast is exogenous.2 Instead, we compare births over many years where Ramadan
overlaps with pregnancy to those where Ramadan does not and estimate the reduced
form eﬀect of Ramadan’s timing.3 That is, we estimate an “intent to treat” (ITT) eﬀect
without relying on the decision whether to fast for identiﬁcation.4 This approach yields
distinct ITT estimates for speciﬁc months of gestation; Muslim births where Ramadans
falls in the early postnatal period serve as the control group. Because Ramadan follows
a lunar calendar, its occurrence moves forward by roughly 11 days each year. Thus, we
can disentangle the eﬀect of prenatal overlap with Ramadan from season of birth, which
is also related to health in adulthood [Doblhammer and Vaupel, 2001, Costa and Lahey,
2005, Costa et al., 2007, Buckles and Hungerman, 2008].
       Using natality data from Michigan, we ﬁnd that prenatal exposure to Ramadan low-
ers birth weight and reduces gestation length. Further, the likelihood of a male birth
is about 10% lower when Ramadan falls very early in pregnancy and occurs during the
peak period of daylight fasting hours. Using Census data for the United States, Iraq, and
Uganda we ﬁnd long-term eﬀects on adult health and economic outcomes. We generally
ﬁnd the largest eﬀects on adults when Ramadan falls early in pregnancy. Rates of adult
disability are roughly 20% higher, with speciﬁc mental disabilities showing substantially
larger eﬀects. Our estimates are conservative to the extent that Ramadan is not univer-
sally observed. Importantly, we detect no corresponding outcome diﬀerences when the
   2
     Pre-pregnancy BMI, along with other characteristics, has been found to predict fasting observance
[Kavehmanesh and Abolghasemi, 2004].
   3
     We do not observe whether mothers fasted in our data. See Section 6.
   4
     We draw an analogy with research designs where there is random assignment to treatment and control
groups but where compliance may be endogenous. In our case we assume that the timing of Ramadan
relative to pregnancy is exogenous, but that the decision to fast is endogenous and is not universally
observed.



                                                  2
same design is applied to non-Muslims as a falsiﬁcation test.
   As we discuss in Section 2, our ﬁndings are plausible in the context of the biomedical
literature where studies have documented that even relatively short fasts result in dra-
matic changes in the metabolic biochemical proﬁles of pregnant mothers, a phenomenon
known as “accelerated starvation”. For this reason, medical authorities generally discour-
age meal skipping during pregnancy. Accelerated starvation has speciﬁcally been found
in the context of Ramadan fasting in multiple countries suggesting that Ramadan is of
direct relevance to more general concerns about meal skipping or dieting during preg-
nancy. The altered metabolic proﬁles that occur with fasting have been associated with
diminished cognitive function during childhood and experimental animal studies suggest
that these alterations may hamper neurological development. One recent study has doc-
umented heightened levels of the hormone cortisol among pregnant women fasting during
Ramadan [Dikensoy et al., 2009], which has been associated with adverse long-term health
eﬀects through fetal programming of the neuro-endocrine system. Our results are also
consistent with studies of the Dutch famine and 1918 Inﬂuenza Pandemic which found par-
ticularly large long-term health eﬀects associated with early-pregnancy exposure. Several
studies have also documented that maternal nutrition during pregnancy varies positively
with male births (in the cross-section). One speciﬁc hypothesis suggests that a drop in
maternal glucose levels provides a signal of a poor future environment leading to fewer
completed pregnancies of male oﬀspring.
   Our identifying assumption is that pregnancies are not timed relative to Ramadan
along unobserved determinants of health. We present evidence that pre-determined ma-
ternal and paternal characteristics are not systematically related to the timing of concep-
tion relative to Ramadan. In our Michigan data, we observe maternal education, whether
previous birth was low birth weight, maternal diabetes, whether mother smoked, and
whether Medicaid paid for the delivery: each is unrelated to the timing of pregnancy
relative to Ramadan. Not surprisingly, controlling for these factors has a negligible eﬀect
on our ITT estimates.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes previous
epidemiological work on Ramadan and health, referencing additional supporting material
in the Appendix. Section 3 describes our natality and Census data, ITT measures, and

                                            3
econometric model. Section 4 presents our results for birth outcomes in Michigan and
Section 5 describes our ﬁndings for adult outcomes in Uganda, Iraq, and the US. Section
6 synthesizes and interprets our results and discusses future research.



2         Previous Literature
We brieﬂy discuss previous studies relating maternal fasting to health or human capital
outcomes. In the interest of space, we refer the reader to additional background material
in Appendix, Section A.5 In discussing previous work on fasting and health it is instruc-
tive to separate studies that have evaluated: 1) measures of maternal and fetal health
during pregnancy, and; 2) health at birth. In contrast to prenatal health, measurement
of newborn health is relatively standardized (e.g., by birth weight or infant mortality).
However, studies of maternal and fetal health allow for comparisons over time for the
same pregnancy – in and out of the fasting state – addressing the potential endogeneity
of the fasting decision.
        Our review of the previous literature is distilled into several hypotheses that are laid
out in Appendix Table A1 which we use to inform our analysis. The table highlights which
outcomes may be aﬀected and which speciﬁc months of pregnancy are most vulnerable to
exposure to fasting for each outcome. Fasting early in pregnancy is most likely to matter
for adult outcomes whereas birth outcomes (e.g. birthweight) could potentially be aﬀected
throughout gestation.


2.1        Ramadan and Health During Pregnancy

Writing in The Lancet, Metzger et al. [1982] documented a set of divergent biochemical
measures among pregnant women who skipped breakfast in the second half of pregnancy.
Relative to twenty-seven non-pregnant women with similar characteristics, “circulating
fuels and glucoregulatory hormones” changed profoundly in twenty-one pregnant women
when the “overnight fast” was extended to noon on the following day (relative to post-
    5
     Appendix Section A summarizes the eﬀects of fasting on caloric intake and weight gain; the rates
of observance of Ramadan fasting by pregnant women; the potential health eﬀects of maternal biochem-
ical changes on oﬀspring; fasting and fetal programming; studies of Ramadan fasting’s eﬀect on birth
outcomes; and our hypotheses relating speciﬁc periods of exposure to particular outcomes.


                                                 4
prandial baseline). Further, plasma glucose and alanine was lower in the pregnant women
than in the non-pregnant women after 12 hours of fasting while levels of free fatty acids
and beta-hydroxybutyrate, a ketone, were signiﬁcantly higher. This set of biochemi-
cal changes, also known as “accelerated starvation”, occurred after only “minor dietary
deprivation” for both lean and obese women. Metzger et al. [1982] concluded that meal-
skipping “should be avoided during normal pregnancy.” Meis and Swain [1984] found
that daytime fasts during pregnancy caused signiﬁcantly lower glucose concentrations
than nighttime fasts. Accelerated starvation has been associated with diminished cog-
nitive function [Rizzo et al., 1991] and animal studies have linked ketone exposure very
early in pregnancy to neurological impairments[Hunter and Sadler, 1987, Moore et al.,
1989, Sheehan et al., 1985]. Gluckman and Hanson [2005] emphasize the importance of
glucose supply during early embryonic development noting that “the developing embryo
will change the relative assignment of cells to the inner cell and outer cell mass according
to whether it perceives a problem in glucose supply” and show that among rats “poor
maternal nutrition at this stage produces oﬀspring with higher blood pressure”.
   According to survey data, most pregnant Muslims observe the Ramadan fast (See
Appendix Section A.1.2 for details). Following the study of breakfast skipping by Metzger
et al. [1982], Ramadan fasting was likewise found to cause accelerated starvation among
pregnant women in Gambia [Prentice et al., 1983] and in England [Malhotra et al., 1989].
Mirghani et al. [2004] found that maternal glucose levels were lower in the fasting state
compared to the postprandial baseline, a diﬀerence accentuated by the number days
fasted: “the eﬀect on maternal glucose levels during Ramadan fasting is cumulative.”
Several studies of maternal fasting during Ramadan have found adverse eﬀects carried over
to measures of fetal health: fetal breathing movements and fetal heart rate accelerations
[Mirghani et al., 2004, 2005].
   Recently, Dikensoy et al. [2009] reported that Ramadan fasting is associated with
increases in cortisol levels during pregnancy, but not for non-fasting pregnant women
(both relative to pre-pregnancy levels). This ﬁnding is of interest because cortisol is
a stress hormone frequently invoked as a potential mechanism through which prenatal
experiences may “program” adult health [Kapoor et al., 2006] (See Appendix Section A.3
for more details).

                                             5
      To summarize, there is fairly consistent evidence that fasting during pregnancy has a
“ﬁrst-stage” eﬀect on maternal and fetal health measures. We summarize the literature
on potential fasting sequelae in Appendix Section A. Despite uncertainty whether these
ﬁrst stage eﬀects carry over to birth outcomes and longer-term eﬀects (See Section 2.2
below), the Institute of Medicine nevertheless recommends pregnant women should “eat
small to moderate sized meals at regular intervals, and eat nutritious snacks” [Institute of
Medicine, 1992:45]. Similarly, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
recommends that pregnant women avoid skipping meals.6


2.2       Ramadan and Perinatal Health

Whether there is an eﬀect of fasting on birth outcomes has not been established. However,
it is important to note that measures of birth size are highly imperfect proxies for capturing
nutritional disruptions during embryonic or fetal development [Gluckman and Hanson,
2005]. Therefore, the absence of a ﬁnding of eﬀects of fasting on birth weight, for example,
does not preclude the possibility of adverse eﬀects on long-term outcomes. Nevertheless
it is useful to review the previous literature on fasting and birth outcomes. Most previous
studies have drawn comparisons over only a single Ramadan season. Since the panel-data
dimension is generally absent for analyses of birth outcomes, studies have resorted to
strong assumptions on the comparability of fasters and non-fasters. These two groups
are likely diﬀerent in ways that would generate diﬀerences in birth outcomes absent any
causal eﬀect of fasting. Pre-pregnancy BMI, along with other characteristics, has been
found to predict fasting observance [Kavehmanesh and Abolghasemi, 2004]. This basic
weakness in design has been exacerbated by: 1) small sample sizes that in general would
only be able to distinguish quite large eﬀects from zero; 2) consideration of Ramadan fasts
observed exclusively in mid or late gestation. We refer the reader to the more detailed
discussion of these studies in Appendix A.4.1.
      No previous study has exploited idiosyncratic variation across birth cohorts in the tim-
ing of Ramadan relative to birth. As Ramadan’s forward movement through the western
calendar is slow, the separation of Ramadan from seasonal eﬀects on birth outcomes (e.g.,
  6
      http://www.acog.org/publications/patient education/bp087.cfm?printerFriendly=yes



                                                  6
Doblhammer and Vaupel [2001], Costa and Lahey [2005]) requires data across many birth
years. Data availability, therefore, may have precluded implementation of an ITT analysis
like ours. Similarly, no previous study has exploited the number of daylight hours during
the Ramadan fast for identiﬁcation (which is clearly not feasible for populations living
near the equator, e.g., in Uganda or Indonesia).
        Finally, ours is the ﬁrst study to analyze the relationship between outcomes in adult-
hood and in utero Ramadan exposure. The study closest to ours in this respect is by
Azizi et al. [2004] who found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the IQ’s of school-age children by
maternal fasting behavior during the third trimester (please see Appendix Section A.4.2
for details). Subsequent to our study, Ewijk [2009] analyzed IFLS data from Indonesia,
ﬁnding evidence of long-term eﬀects of fasting.7



3         Data and Methodology
Our identiﬁcation strategy requires microdata with information on:

    1. a substantial number of Muslims;

    2. precise information on birth date (i.e., more detailed than age in years);

    3. coverage of many birth cohorts (i.e., birth years);

    4. health outcomes.

        In datasets with a large number of both Muslims and non-Muslims, we would also
like to distinguish between these groups. We summarize the handful of suitable datasets
below (see Appendix B for details), followed by our econometric approach.


3.1        Michigan Natality Files

From Michigan’s Division for Vital Records and Health Statistics, we obtained birth cer-
tiﬁcate microdata for 1989 to 2006 in Michigan – approximately 2.5 million birth records.8
    7
     Ewijk [2009] graciously notes that we are “the ﬁrst to systematically examine [Ramadan’s] long-term
eﬀects.”
   8
     We thank Michael Beebe and Glenn Copeland in Michigan’s Vital Statistics Oﬃce for their assistance
with these data.



                                                   7
Although, there is no information on religion, ancestry of the mother is reported (ances-
try information is not recorded in the national vital statistics data produced by NCHS).
This feature of Michigan’s natality data allows us to construct a proxy for whether the
mother is Muslim based on reported “Arab” ancestry (or reported ancestries from pre-
dominantly Muslim countries).9 Compared to other US states, Michigan has a relatively
large Arab population.10 There are a total of about 50,000 births to mothers of Arab an-
cestry (about 2.2 percent of MI births) over this period. While there is a large population
of Arabs around Detroit, the Arabs are reasonably dispersed throughout the State (see
Appendix Figure A2, Panel A).
       Since a large fraction of Arabs in Michigan are actually Chaldeans – a sect of Chris-
tianity – our proxy may misclassify many mothers and thereby attenuate our estimated
eﬀects.11 We use the 2000 US Census SF3 (1 in 6 sample) data to identify Michigan
zipcodes with heavy concentrations of Chaldeans – who presumably do not observe the
fast – relative to Arabs (see Appendix Figure A2, Panel B). In some speciﬁcations, we
will drop observations from these zipcodes to compare ITT estimates. Appendix Table
A2 provides summary statistics for Michigan’s natality data.


3.2       Data from National Censuses

To consider whether health in adulthood is aﬀected by prenatal Ramadan exposure, we
analyze Census microdata for the three countries where our identiﬁcation strategy can
be implemented in publicly-available data. Data from the Uganda 2002 Census are best
suited for our analysis because religion is reported, there are large numbers of both Mus-
lims and non-Muslims in Uganda, month of birth is reported, and a host of disability
measures are queried. While less well-suited to our analysis, 1997 Iraq Census data and
US Census data allow us to assess whether the basic Uganda results are replicated in
other settings.
   9
     See Section B.1 of the Appendix for more detail.
  10
     We thank Carlos Dobkin (UCSC) for suggesting we focus on Michigan’s Muslim population.
  11
     According to the 2000 Census, about a quarter of those of an Arabic speaking ancestry in Michigan
are Chaldean Christians. Our estimates based on the Detroit Arab American Study (DAAS) suggest
that about 47% of those who self-identify as “Arab American” in the Detroit area are Chaldean.




                                                  8
3.2.1      Uganda Census 2002

Our sample of Muslim adults includes approximately 80,000 men and women between
the ages of 20 and 80 in 2002. Muslims constitute about 11% of Uganda’s population
and have more schooling and lower rates of disability than non-Muslims (Appendix Table
A3). Both Muslims and non-Muslims share a strong seasonality in the number of births.
Muslims tend to live in the southeastern portion of the country.
       Unlike other national censuses, the Uganda Census asks a battery of questions about
speciﬁc disabilities, including: blindness or vision impairments, deafness or hearing im-
pairments, being mute, disabilities aﬀecting lower extremities, disabilities aﬀecting upper
extremities, mental/learning disabilities, and psychological disabilities (lasting six months
or longer). As only about 5% of adults report a disability compared to over 10% in the US
Census, disabilities recorded in the Uganda Census may be more severe. Further, Uganda
reports information on the origin of disabilities: congenital, disease, accident, aging, war
injury, other or multiple causes. In the absence of direct measures of economic status
we use home ownership. We also consider several other socioeconomic outcomes such as
literacy, schooling, and employment.


3.2.2      Iraq Census 1997

Although religion is not reported in the Iraq Census, roughly 97% of the population
is Muslim, minimizing concerns about misclassiﬁcation of religion. Our main sample
includes over 250,000 individuals born from 1958 to 1977 who were between the ages of
20 and 39 in 1997 and for whom we have reliable information on birth month.12 Because
we only cover 20 birth cohorts compared to 60 in Uganda, we may be more concerned
about confounding from seasonality. In addition, although our sample size is large this is
oﬀset to some degree by surprisingly low rates of reported disabilities. At 1.5%, Iraqis are
substantially less likely than Americans (around 12%) or Ugandans (around 5%) to report
a disability. Part of this is of course, due to the fact that we have a younger sample. Along
with a general disability question, there are speciﬁc questions about disabilities involving
sight, hearing, lower extremities, upper extremities, and psychological disabilities. In
  12
    Only 20 percent of those born prior to 1958 provide reliable data on birth month. We discuss these
data limitations in greater detail in Appendix section B.3

                                                  9
contrast to Uganda, there is no variable to assess mental/learning disabilities.
       In addition to home ownership, we consider a second proxy for wealth/status, polyg-
yny. Under Iraqi law, courts may only allow polygyny if husbands are able to ﬁnancially
support multiple wives and if they are able to maintain separate households for each
wife.13 (Iraq Legal Development Project, 2005). More generally, polygyny reﬂects high
male status [Edlund, 1999]. Since polygyny is relatively infrequent for a young sample,
we expand our sample to include up to 45 year olds. Sample means for our outcomes are
shown with the regression results in Table 7.


3.2.3      US Census 1980, ACS 2005-2007

Our third Census sample is composed of immigrants to the US who were born in pre-
dominantly Muslim countries.14 We use a 6% sample from the 1980 Census along with
a pooled sample of the American Community Surveys (ACS) for the years 2005 through
2007 (3% sample). The ACS is modelled on the long form of the decennial Census. We
use these years because they provide the quarter of birth.15 Not observing birth month
dulls the empirical comparisons that we can make. On the positive side, we obtain a large,
national sample of US immigrants from Muslim countries in which to implement our ITT
analysis. Data quality is high, and includes additional outcomes beyond disability, such
as earnings.16 Selected sample means are shown at the bottom of Table 8.
  13
     Under Iraqi Personal Status Code Number 188, Article 3(4) it is written that: Marriage of more
than one wife is prohibited in the absence of judicial permission on two conditions: (a) The husband has
ﬁnancial suﬃciency to marry more than one wife. (b) He should have a legal interest.
   Iraqi Personal Status Code Number 188, Article 26 states that: The husband should not house his
second wife in the same house with the ﬁrst one without her approval, and should not house any other
relative with her without her approval, except his minor child.
   Roughly 2% of Iraqi men report polygynous unions.
  14
     Speciﬁcally, we use countries with at least an 80 percent Muslim population. To asses the magnitude
of misclassiﬁcation attributable to this birth-county proxy, the same proxy variable was created in the
2001 Canada Census, which includes self-reported religion. 67% of Canadian immigrants from these 80%
Muslim countries reported being Muslim. We thank Kevin Milligan (UBC) for this information. See
Appendix Section B.5 for additional details.
  15
     In addition to not knowing birth month, we do not know the exact birth year in the ACS since it is
not asked and age is not reported as of a speciﬁc enumeration date as it is in the decennial Census. Given
that Ramadan exposure shifts by only 11 days from year to year, using survey year - age provides a
good approximation of birth year for the purposes of constructing Ramadan exposure measures at the
quarterly level. The correlation between Ramadan exposure using survey year minus age, and survey
year minus age minus 1, is about 0.93.
  16
     Speciﬁcally we take the log of annual earnings and use the CPI for inﬂation adjustment. For consis-
tency, we restrict the sample to ages between 20 and 80. Earnings are restricted to a sample between the


                                                   10
3.3     Ramadan Measures

We record start and end dates for the 104 Ramadans in the 20th century and construct
the following measures of prenatal Ramadan exposure:17

exppct calculates the fraction of days over the subsequent 30 days that overlap with
      Ramadan.

exphrspct utilizes the number of daylight hours in each day to proxy for the length of
      the Ramadan fast.18 The numerator is the number of daylight hours over the next
      30 days that overlap with Ramadan; the denominator is the maximum number of
      daylight hours over any 30 day period over the entire sample period (which depends
      only on latitude). Daylight hours in Michigan vary from a low of around 9 to a high of
      over 15 at the summer solstice when the eﬀects of accelerated starvation may be most
      evident. Please see Appendix Figure A3 for a an illustrative example of exphrspct
      versus exppct coding from 1989 (and the associated description in Appendix Section
      B.1).

rampct is the fraction of days in each month that overlap with Ramadan.19 rampct is
      used when we observe just the birth month, as in our Uganda and Iraq samples and
      is calculated for each month (not each day as for measures above). As Uganda is at
      the equator, the number of daylight hours is fairly constant over the year at 12.

    Each of the above measures is calculated at up to nine diﬀerent points in time corre-
sponding to the gestation months (ten in some speciﬁcations where we include the month
prior to conception). exppct and exphrspct are calculated for the day beginning each preg-
nancy month. This feature of our research design is useful as speciﬁc health outcomes
ages of 20 and 60.
  17
     Many websites translate dates from the Islamic (Hijri) calendar. We used the following website
http://www.oriold.unizh.ch/static/hegira.html, but veriﬁed the dates from a second source.
  18
     The beginning of the Ramadan fast actually precedes sunrise and begins at the time of the morning
prayer (fajr ). The precise timing of the morning prayer may vary across mosques and typically depends
on a rule regarding the angle of the sun relative to the horizon. For this reason we actually understate
the number of fasting hours in our data. Daylight hours are measured for the city of Dearborn which
contains a large share of the state’s Arab population.
  19
     We opted to use this measure, rather than a simple dummy variable since it provides a continuous
measure of treatment (more power).



                                                  11
may be more or less susceptible to nutrition depending on the stage of pregnancy (see
Appendix Table A1 and accompanying text in Appendix Section A). Finally, we construct
a fourth exposure measure by taking the average of rampct for each quarter of the year.
This quarterly measure is used for our US sample, where we observe just the quarter of
birth.
       In general, we assign the Ramadan ITT by counting backwards from the birth date.
We consider alternatives to this approach where we have estimates of gestation length
(Michigan). In the rest of our data, we do not observe gestation length. Furthermore,
measurement error in gestation length, commonly based on date of last menstrual period,
may be substantial [Pearl et al., 2007]. For Michigan, we consider the following three
assignment rules:

   1. The ﬁrst approach uses the exact date of birth and simply assumes that all births
         have a normal gestation length of 40 weeks since last menstrual period. The Ra-
         madan exposure measures are assigned by going backwards from the birth date in
         30 day increments and using daily exposure measures (exphrspct and exppct) from
         30 days prior to birth to 270 days prior to birth. Using this approach the measure
         of Ramadan exposure 9 months prior to birth is a proxy for the actual exposure
         during the “ﬁrst month” of gestation.

   2. Our second approach incorporates the measures of gestation from the natality data
         to match each individual to an estimated date of conception.20 We then assign
         Ramadan exposure for the ﬁrst month based on the daily exposure measures for the
         date that is 4 days prior to the estimated date of conception.21 We then proceed
         to assign Ramadan exposure measures forward in 30-day increments. Using this
         approach a child born premature after say, 34-35 weeks of gestation would only have
         been in utero for about 8 months and therefore only the ﬁrst 8 exposure variables
         are actually relevant for birth outcomes.
  20
      Gestation based on last menstrual period (LMP) is used except if it is missing or if it diﬀers with
the physician estimated gestation by more than 14 days, in which case the physician estimated measure
is substituted. The conception date is estimated as occurring 14 days after LMP.
   21
      This ensures that we have lined up the gestation month exposure in a parallel way to that used in
the ﬁrst approach. In other words, if a birth has exactly 40 weeks or 280 days of gestation, using either
approach we will start measuring gestation exactly 270 days prior to birth.


                                                   12
   3. Our third approach ignores information on exact birth date and actual gestation
         and mimics what we can do with our Census samples where we only know month of
         birth. Here we match individuals to the rampct measure for each of the 9 months
         prior to birth.


3.4       Econometric Model

We regress each outcome, yi , on a set of nine Ramadan exposure measures (either ex-
phrspct, exppct or rampct). Separate exposure measures for each gestation month k are
included simultaneously in each regression, even though an individual will only be exposed
to Ramadan in at most two (adjacent) months of gestation. The eﬀects of Ramadan ex-
posure in a given month of gestation, therefore, are measured relative to no prenatal
exposure to Ramadan – i.e., when Ramadan falls in the two to three months after birth.

                             
                             9
                  yi = α +         θk · exphrspctk + yeary + monthm + geogg + εi                     (1)
                             k=1


Additional controls include birth year dummies, a set of calendar birth month dummies
(or conception month dummies if gestation information is used), and a set of dummies
that measure geographic location at the time of birth.22 In the Michigan analysis we
also include a number of largely predetermined variables as additional controls: mother’s
age, mother’s age squared, mother’s years of education, father’s age, father’s age squared,
father’s education, a dummy for missing father’s education, parity, tobacco use during
pregnancy, alcohol use during pregnancy, the number of previous pregnancies where the
child was born dead, and whether the birth was paid for by Medicaid (an income proxy).23
In our pooled samples of adult men and women in Uganda, Iraq, and the US we also
include a female dummy.
       In a typical speciﬁcation where we include the nine exposure measures simultaneously,
we also run an F -test on the joint signiﬁcance of all nine coeﬃcients. This tests the
overall eﬀect of Ramadan exposure during any point in gestation. In addition, since
  22
     In Michigan we use 84 county dummies. In Uganda we use 56 district of birth dummies. In Iraq we
use 18 governates of birth and in the US we use 38 countries of birth.
  23
     Parity is deﬁned as the number of previous live births. Alcohol and tobacco use are arguably endoge-
nous since their use may be reduced during the month of gestation that overlaps with Ramadan.


                                                   13
our hypotheses for some outcomes (Table A1) suggest an eﬀect only in speciﬁc gestation
months, we also run tests of equality of all coeﬃcients.
    When we use a non-Muslim sample as a falsiﬁcation check (in a separate regression),
the birth timing and birth location eﬀects are allowed to vary across groups (along with
the other parameters). For estimates on population counts by month we use aggregate
measures at the cell level where cells are deﬁned by each of the distinct conception or
birth months over the sample period. For Michigan, this yields 216 cells (18 years × 12
calendar months).
    For the adult US sample where we only observe quarter of birth, there is an added
diﬃculty in identifying a control period with no in utero Ramadan exposure. If we assume
that all births were of normal gestation length, then individuals were in utero for each of
the two quarters prior to the birth quarter, along with some portion of their birth quarter.
This would suggest that we use the quarter three quarters prior to the birth quarter as the
omitted category. A more conservative approach would treat only those with Ramadan
exposure in the two quarters prior to birth as treated and omit both of the other two
birth quarters. We will show results using each of the two approaches.



4     Michigan Results

4.1    Birthweight Weight and Gestation

Table 1 presents the results for birthweight. In the ﬁrst four columns we assign births
their Ramadan exposures by counting backwards from the date of birth (i.e., ignoring
the reported information on gestation and assuming pregnancies all had normal gestation
length). We designate the coeﬃcients on Ramadan exposure according to the number of
months prior to birth.
    Columns (1) and (2) use measures of Ramadan exposure that incorporate hours of
daylight (exphrspct). The ﬁrst entry of column (1) indicates that birthweight was about
40 grams lower if an Arab mother was in the ﬁrst month of pregnancy (i.e. nine months
before birth) during the peak period of daylight hours and Ramadan coincided with the
ﬁrst month of gestation. This result is signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. In addition,


                                            14
gestation months 2, 4, and 6 also show signiﬁcant negative eﬀects of around 40 grams.
We also ﬁnd that the F -test on the joint importance of all the prenatal Ramadan exposure
measures is signiﬁcant at the 8 percent level. The test of the equality of coeﬃcients is
not rejected at conventional signiﬁcance levels.
       In column (2), we also include Ramadan exposure 10 months prior to birth as a
falsiﬁcation and robustness check. As expected there is no detectable eﬀect on birth weight
and its inclusion does not substantially aﬀect the point estimates for other months. In
column (3) we measure Ramadan exposure by the fraction of days in the gestation month
that overlap with Ramadan. This treats a Ramadan falling in winter the same as one
during summer. It also changes the interpretation of the coeﬃcient to reﬂect the average
eﬀect of Ramadan exposure across all seasons. As expected, this reduces the magnitude
of the estimated eﬀects to around 25-30 grams, which remain statistically diﬀerent from
zero. In column (4) we again include exposure in the month prior to the beginning of
pregnancy and ﬁnd no eﬀect. Column (5) ignores information about the exact date of
birth and only utilizes the birth month to assign exposure measures of the fraction of
days in each month that overlap with Ramadan. With this approach we now ﬁnd only
the second month of gestation to be signiﬁcant and that the coeﬃcients are far from
jointly signiﬁcant or signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from one another. Nevertheless, the eﬀect size
remains in the 30 gram range. Using only birth month re-allocates some Ramadan ITT
assignments to adjacent months.24
       In columns (6)-(9) of Table 1, we assign Ramadan exposure using the time elapsed
since conception, and exclude the 7% of births that are pre-term (< 37 weeks gestation).
This ensures that at least the ﬁrst 8 exposure measures are reasonably interpretable since
all of these births would have been in utero for 8 months.25 Columns (6) and (7) utilize
the daylight hours index of exposure. We ﬁnd eﬀects that are statistically signiﬁcant at
the 5 percent level for exposure in month 1. As in columns (1) and (2), the size of these
eﬀects are between 35 and 40 grams. In column (7) we again show no eﬀect in the month
prior to conception. Thus, the pattern of birth weight eﬀects we ﬁnd are not an artifact
  24
     For example, the eﬀect of Ramadan falling nine months prior to birth in column (4) appears smoothed
into the adjacent month (8 months before birth) in column (5).
  25
     In our tables we use italics to signify estimates that may include post natal exposure for some sample
members.


                                                    15
of assigning the Ramadan ITT using date of birth. Columns (8) and (9) show smaller
eﬀects from ﬁrst month exposure when seasonal diﬀerences in the length of the diurnal
fast is ignored. The smaller sample used in columns (6) through (9) that ignores gestation
length have considerably higher signiﬁcance levels on our joint test of an eﬀect across all
gestation months (i.e., when we drop premature births and estimate the speciﬁcations
in columns (1)-(5)). This suggests that part of the diﬀerence between the two panels of
Table 1 may be due to selection on nearly full-term births. For example, the magnitude
of the eﬀects for Ramadans that fall 4 months prior to birth are attenuated in the full
term sample.
       We explore the role of conditioning on diﬀerent gestation lengths and using a more
restricted sample of zipcodes that excludes zipcodes with a large fraction of Christian
Arabs (Chaldeans) in Appendix Table A4. We note that when we condition on full-
term births (39-42 weeks) and restrict the sample to those with a likely higher degree of
adherence to the fast we ﬁnd larger ITT eﬀects that are also signiﬁcant in mid-gestation
months 5 and 7. The associated text in the Appendix discusses impacts on gestation
length itself, which are modest compared to those for intrauterine growth retardation
(IUGR).


4.2       Refutability Check Using Non-Arab Births

Identiﬁcation of our ITT estimates comes from an idiosyncratic, non-linear function of
date of birth. If this function somehow introduced a mechanical relationship between
birth date and health outcomes (e.g. picking up a time trend), it should also be observed
among non-Muslims. As a check on the validity of the results above, we apply the same
ITT to our non-Arab sample in Table 2. The ﬁrst six columns assign exposure assuming
normal gestation for the whole sample, while the seventh through ninth columns utilize
the gestation data and present the results for the sample of full-term births. Within each
of these sets of results, we use either all non-Arab mothers or a “super control” group
of non-Arab mothers living in zipcodes without any Arabs (according to the 2000 census
data).26 We ﬁnd no birthweight eﬀects among non-Arabs comparable to the results in
  26
    The results are unaﬀected if we use the natality data to identify non-Arab zipcodes. However, given
that we have more conﬁdence in the reporting of ancestry detail in the Census we opted to use those


                                                  16
Table 1.27


4.3       Summary and Discussion of Birth Weight Results

Overall, in utero exposure to Ramadan is associated with lower birth weight among
Michigan’s Arab mothers. A full month of exposure to Ramadan during the peak period
of daylight hours could lead to a reduction in birth weight of about 40 grams especially
when Ramadan falls in the ﬁrst month of gestation. Nevertheless, the size of this eﬀect is
relatively small: 40 grams is only about 1.2 percent of the mean birth weight for Arabs.
These eﬀects are population averages and do not account for the fact that some fraction
of these women are not actually fasting and more importantly, perhaps, that we may be
including a sizable fraction of Non-Muslim women among the Arabs. Table A4 provides
suggestive evidence that the eﬀects may be larger and also occur during mid-gestation
when we account for these factors. In terms of the birth weight distribution, it appears
that most of the estimated eﬀect for early pregnancy exposure is in the middle of the
distribution (see Appendix Figure A4), rather than a disproportionate increase in the
likelihood of low birth weights. Gluckman and Hanson [2005] emphasize that adaptive
responses to nutritional restrictions may occur throughout the birth weight distribution
(p.99).      On the other hand, increases in low birth weight may be more closely tied
to other measures of newborn health than reductions at higher birth weights [Almond
et al., 2005]. In any event, since birth weight may be a poor proxy for the underlying
eﬀects of nutritional shocks on fetal development (e.g. Franko et al. [2009]), we interpret
our ﬁndings on birth outcomes conservatively, using them primarily as conﬁrmation that
prenatal fasting is indeed having a “ﬁrst stage” eﬀect on health measured at birth.
   Finally, if Ramadan observance during pregnancy varied by socioeconomic or health
status, treatments eﬀects would presumably also show a corresponding gradient, other
things equal. Interestingly, we observe no systematic gradient in the size of the birth
weight eﬀects by maternal education, Medicaid use, or month prenatal care was initiated
(results available from authors). If treatment eﬀects are relatively homogeneous, this
ﬁgures.
  27
     In column (3) of Table 2 we obtain two estimates of about -4 grams that are only signiﬁcant at the
10 percent level, which may be chance occurrences among the 81 reported point estimates.



                                                  17
suggests that fasting observance is high or fairly uniform across socioeconomic groups by
month of gestation.


4.4       Fetal Death and the Sex Ratio at Birth

Mathews et al. [2008] found that poor maternal nutrition (possibly due to breakfast
skipping), around the time of conception skews the sex ratio in favor of girls, most likely
through the selective attrition of male conceptuses. Similarly, Almond et al. [2009] found
that severe morning sickness in early pregnancy is associated with female births, but also
a 50% fetal death rate due to severe nausea and vomiting.28 More generally, maternal
nutrition among mammals close to conception is positively associated with the likelihood
of male oﬀspring Cameron [2004].
       We consider Ramadan’s eﬀect on sex at birth and the number of lives births in Table
3. Using our full sample of Arab mothers (column 1) we ﬁnd a large eﬀect of -3.7 percent-
age points (p-value = 0.06) on the likelihood of a male birth from exposure to Ramadan
during the longest diurnal fast in month 1 of pregnancy. In column (2) when we restrict
the zipcodes to those with fewer Chaldeans relative to Arabs, this point estimate rises
substantially to -6.6 percentage points and is signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level. Inter-
estingly, we ﬁnd some suggestive evidence of an eﬀect in the month prior to conception
possibly reﬂecting the persistent eﬀect of fasting just prior to conception. Columns (3)
and (4) show no analogous eﬀects for our non-Arab samples.
       To shed light on the cause of the sex ratio change, we aggregate counts of total births,
male births, and female births based on the month of conception. This results in 216
observations for conceptions between April 1988 and March 2006. The mean fraction of
births (weighted) that are male is 51.8 percent for Arabs over this period and the mean
sex ratio (male to female births) is 1.086. For non-Arabs, the respective means are 51.3
and 1.054. We regressed the log of the number of births on the exphrspct measures of
Ramadan exposure including dummies for month and year of conception and our full set
of controls.
       Results for the more restricted sample of Arabs are shown in columns (5) through (7).
  28
    By fetal death, we mean any attrition between conception and live birth. This could include attrition
during embryonic development before a fetus is fully formed.


                                                   18
Peak exposure to the Ramadan fast in the month after conception is associated with a 16
percent decline in total births. If male vulnerability [Kraemer, 2000] is the culprit, this
drop should be concentrated among male births. When we examine this by sex, we indeed
ﬁnd this is driven by a 26 percent drop in male births (p-value = 0.005), while female
births fall by a statistically insigniﬁcant 4 percent.29 This decline in births associated with
fasting around the time of conception is probably not due to other behavioral changes
associated with Ramadan since it is diﬃcult to imagine an alternative mechanism which
impacts sex-speciﬁc fertility.
       Among those conceived shortly after Ramadan, (i.e., exposure in month zero, the
month prior to pregnancy) there is a statistically insigniﬁcant increase of 6.3 percent in
total live births associated with full exposure with some suggestive evidence of a female
skew.30 The fact that total births rise somewhat after Ramadan is not so surprising since
the end of Ramadan (Eid ul-Fitr ) is a major event for Muslims and is celebrated with
a three day period of festivities.31 Further, the end of Ramadan marks the end of a
restriction on sex during daytime hours and the end of a period of piety. Nevertheless, the
increase in fertility is small, statistically insigniﬁcant and perhaps skewed toward female
births. We address potential selection issues that might arise from fertility changes in
section 4.6.


4.5       Other Birth Outcomes

We brieﬂy summarize results for nine other birth outcomes: low birth weight, infant death,
APGAR scores, maternal weight gain, NICU unit, C-section, abnormal conditions, and
congenital anomalies. We used three diﬀerent speciﬁcations and two diﬀerent samples
but found that many of the results were sensitive to these choices.32 Appendix Table
A5 shows results with our more restricted sample of zipcodes and the broadest sample
  29
     Several other gestation months show larger drops for female births associated with Ramadan exposure.
  30
     The increase in male births (one third of one percent) lags female births (9 percent). When we use
our full sample of Arab births (not shown) the increase in total births is 4 percent with male births rising
by 0.5 percent and female births rising by 6.5 percent.
  31
     In Hong Kong natality microdata, the lunar new year celebration is associated with a comparable
increase in births approximately nine months later (results available from authors).
  32
     We varied gestation length (25-42 weeks, 37-42 weeks, and 39-42 weeks) and whether we used the
full sample of Arabs or the more restricted sample of zipcodes.



                                                    19
in terms of gestation (25-42 weeks) where only the ﬁrst 5 gestation month coeﬃcients
are readily interpretable (due to to compositional eﬀects). The most consistent ﬁnding
concerned lower maternal weight gain due to exposure in the 7th month of gestation that is
apparent in all of our samples, though not always statistically signiﬁcant. While maternal
weight gain might appear to be a desirable “ﬁrst stage” measure, it has at least one
(unobserved) self-reported component (pre-pregnancy weight) and thereby suﬀers from
substantially more measurement error than newborn’s birth weight [Schieve et al., 1999].


4.6       Selective Timing of Conceptions Around Ramadan

Our identifying assumption is that the composition of Muslim parents does not change
systematically by their children’s in utero exposure to Ramadan. A general concern could
be that mothers of higher socioeconomic status (SES) seek to avoid having pregnancies
overlap with Ramadan by concentrating conceptions during the two to three months just
after Ramadan.33 Another concern could be if less healthy or less educated women are
more likely to conceive in the month prior to Ramadan which might account for our con-
sistent ﬁndings on ﬁrst month exposure. Finally, although we did not detect a statistically
signiﬁcant increase in conceptions following Ramadan, one might be concerned that there
is selection associated with which parents conceive just after Ramadan due to general
behavioral changes in society during this festive period.
       We assess whether Ramadan exposure during pregnancy and the month prior to con-
ception is associated with a set of pre-determined characteristics of the pregnancy that
may be correlated with birth outcomes.34 Table 4 estimates equation (1) with twelve
“outcome” variables: mothers’ education, whether the pregnancy was paid for by Med-
icaid (income proxy), mother’s age, father’s age, father’s education, tobacco use during
pregnancy, alcohol use during pregnancy, parity, whether a previous child was born dead,
an indicator for missing father’s education, whether the mother had previously delivered
a small baby and whether diabetes was considered a risk factor for the mother. Out of the
  33
     This might not alter our conclusions concerning diﬀerences due to exposure within the gestation
period.
  34
     Because we only observe those conceptions which result in a live birth, eﬀects of post-conception Ra-
madan exposure may be manifested in pre-determined characteristics if Ramadan-induced fetal mortality
has a gradient in these same characteristics.


                                                   20
120 estimates, only 1 coeﬃcient was signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level. We found exposure
during the last month of pregnancy was associated with lower alcohol use. We found only
4 coeﬃcients that were signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level and three of them suggested Ra-
madan exposure was positively selected. For example mothers who had high exposure in
the fourth month of gestation had higher education than mothers whose pregnancies did
not overlap with Ramadan. Most importantly we found no evidence indicating positive
selection in mothers who conceive in the month after Ramadan and no evidence suggesting
that mothers who conceive in the month before Ramadan are negatively selected. In an
additional check, we have run all of our birthweight and gestation length results dropping
mothers who conceived in the month after Ramadan so that our eﬀects are estimated
only relative to mother’s who conceived two to three months after Ramadan but whose
pregnancies did not overlap with Ramadan, and found very similar results.35



5       Census Results

5.1     Results from Uganda Census

Our presentation of potential long-term eﬀects begins with Uganda, where self-reported
religion, birth month, and various health outcomes are available for a sizable number of
adult Muslims and non-Muslims. As in data from other countries (e.g., the US Census),
disability is the primary measure of health in the Uganda Census.


5.1.1    Disability Outcomes

Table 5 shows disability outcomes for Muslims and non-Muslims. Because these outcomes
have a low incidence rate we have multiplied the coeﬃcients and standard errors by 100
to make them easier to read. The eﬀects are therefore measured in percentage points. In
the ﬁrst column we show the eﬀects of Ramadan exposure over each of the nine months
preceding birth. In column (1) we ﬁnd a statistically signiﬁcant increase in the likelihood
  35
    If anything, point estimates tend to increase in absolute value. For example the Table 1 column
(6) estimate for the ﬁrst month of gestation rises to -53.3 from -37.9 with a p-value of 0.02. The Table
A4 column (6) estimate of the 2nd month eﬀect on weeks of gestation is -0.16 rather than -0.11 with a
p-value of 0.02.



                                                  21
of a disability (of any kind) for Muslims born nine months after Ramadan (point estimate
of 0.819 and p-value of 0.02). Relative to the mean disability rate of 3.8 percent, the eﬀect
is substantial at 22 percent. We ﬁnd that no other month prior to birth is statistically
signiﬁcant and the p-value on the joint test of all nine coeﬃcients does not approach
statistical signiﬁcance. We cannot reject that all of the coeﬃcients are equal.
   Turning to speciﬁc disabilities (columns (2) to (5)), the most striking ﬁnding is the
increased incidence of a mental or learning disability (column (4)) when Ramadan occurs
during the ﬁrst month pregnancy. The point estimate is 0.250 with a p-value of 0.001.
Given the mean rate of 0.14 percent this implies that the occurrence of Ramadan early
in pregnancy nearly doubles the likelihood of a disability related to diminished cognitive
function. Thus, the increase in mental/learning disabilities from month-one Ramadan
exposure would account for about 15% of all mental/learning disabilities among Muslims.
Furthermore, those with exposure in month 8 have a 100% increase (signiﬁcant at the
5% level) and those with Ramadan exposure in months 5 or 6 show smaller increases
(signiﬁcant at the 10% level). The joint test on all gestation months of no eﬀect is
rejected at the 4 percent signiﬁcance level.
   We also ﬁnd that the incidence of sight/blindness and hearing/deafness are higher for
those born 9 months after Ramadan. Speciﬁcally, the magnitude of the eﬀects relative to
those not in utero are 33 percent for blindness (p-value = 0.07) and 64 percent for deafness
(p-value = 0.04). For hearing/deafness we also ﬁnd a marginally signiﬁcant eﬀect for those
exposed to Ramadan in the ﬁfth month of gestation.
   We run the same speciﬁcations on our sample of non-Muslims in columns (6) - (10).
We ﬁnd no cases of a corresponding signiﬁcant result for Muslims also occurring for
Non-Muslims for these outcomes. We tested the sensitivity of the results for Muslims to
also including exposure during the 10th month prior to birth and found that the results
were unaﬀected and that in no case was the coeﬃcient on the 10th month statistically
signiﬁcant (see Appendix Table A6). We also ran our speciﬁcations separately for men
and women (not shown) and found that the results were qualitatively similar though the
estimates were much less precise.




                                               22
5.1.2      Causes of Disability

Previous falsiﬁcation tests have considered Ramadan exposure outside of pregnancy and
Ramadan exposure during pregnancy for non-Muslims. Information on the causes of dis-
abilities provides a third falsiﬁcation test. We group these reported causes – accident,
occupational injury, war injury, aging, disease, or congenital – by whether they can rea-
sonably be linked to fasting via the mechanisms discussed earlier. Clearly, disabilities that
arise from accidents, occupational injuries, or war injuries are postnatal and should not
be related to maternal fasting during Ramadan. On the other hand, the fetal origins hy-
pothesis suggests that extended periods of nutritional restriction may be associated with
a reprogramming of the body’s systems that result in poor health outcomes later in life
(see Appendix for additional discussion). This would be consistent with those who report
“aging” as the source of a disability. Since it is conceivable that fasting might contribute
to a weakened immune system, respondents who report disabilities due to “disease” could
plausibly be related to the timing of Ramadan. Finally, whether maternal nutrition aﬀects
congenital disabilities (those present at birth) is not clear-cut.36
       We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant eﬀects from accidents, occupational injury or war injuries for
Muslims or non-Muslims in any gestation month (Appendix Table A7). In contrast,
Muslims born nine months after Ramadan have an increased incidence of disabilities
due to aging of 0.37 percentage points (p-value = 0.006). We ﬁnd no evidence linking
Ramadan exposure to disease-related or congenital disabilities (consistent with Michigan
results for congenital anomalies). We found no comparable eﬀect of ﬁrst month exposure
to Ramadan on disabilities caused by aging for non-Muslims.37
       In order to address possible concerns about selective timing of pregnancy in Uganda,
we used a sample of children aged 17 or under and living with their parents and regressed
parent characteristics (education, illiteracy, and disability) on the child’s Ramadan expo-
sure using equation (1). As with Michigan, we found no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of
negative selection on parent characteristics. Finally, we also found that the results were
insensitive to excluding outlier cohorts that had extremely large or small disability rates.
  36
    If the disability is epigenetic then it may be associated with maternal fasting.
  37
    Among non-Muslims the only signiﬁcant eﬀect is that those exposed to Ramadan one month before
birth are 0.12 percentage points (p-value = 0.017) more likely to have a congenital disability. This is a
20 percent eﬀect relative to the mean.


                                                   23
If anything, excluding outliers slightly increased the point estimates and their precision.


5.1.3     Sex Composition of Adult Population

With the Uganda data we explore the possibility that maternal fasting may inﬂuence the
sex composition of the adult population. This could arise either from alterations to the
sex composition at birth or because of selective mortality by sex after birth as implied by
some of the fetal origins literature (see Appendix Section 1). To assess this, we conduct
an analysis parallel to our Michigan analysis. First we simply regress male as an outcome
in equation (1). Second, we aggregate the population by cells constructed by birth month
both for the pooled sample as well as separately by sex and take the log of the population
counts as an outcome.
      Results are shown in the left most panel of Table 6. In column (1) we ﬁnd that every
implied gestational month has a negative coeﬃcient and that the 1st, 4th and 7th months
of gestation are statistically signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level The joint test of all the
exposure months is signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level. In column (2) we ﬁnd only slight
evidence cohort size is related to Ramadan exposure when we pool men and women.
When we look at the log of population counts of males in column (3), seven of the nine
months have negative coeﬃcients and the 7th month of gestation has a particularly large
and statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect (15%). The eﬀects on the sex in column (1) appear to
be driven by reductions in the number of males. In column (4) we show the analogous
results for women where the eﬀects are all positive but only signiﬁcant in one month.
In other results (not shown) we ﬁnd no comparable eﬀects on the sex composition for
non-Muslims.


5.1.4     Other Outcomes in Uganda

The remaining columns of Table 6 show results for non-health outcomes. Unfortunately
preferred economic outcomes, such as wages, income, and wealth, are not available. In
column (5) we examine whether home ownership, a proxy for wealth, is aﬀected. We
restrict the sample to men since they are the vast majority of property owners in Uganda.38
 38
    Uganda is a patriarchal society where land is passed down through sons. Although women are
not prevented from owning land, by one estimate, 93 percent of Ugandan land is owned by men.


                                             24
We ﬁnd that men exposed to Ramadan in the ﬁrst month of gestation are 2.6 percentage
points less likely to own their home (p-value=0.027) and that men exposed in the 2nd
month of gestation are 2.1 percentage points less likely to own their home (p-value=0.051).
Given the high rate of male home ownership (73.4 percent), these eﬀects are not especially
large. We can reject that there is no eﬀect of Ramadan exposure over all gestation months
on home ownership at the 5 percent level. In contrast, we ﬁnd no statistically signiﬁcant
eﬀects of Ramadan exposure on home ownership for non-Muslims.
   In columns (6) through (9) we examine illiteracy, completed years of schooling, a
dummy for no schooling, and employment status at the time of the Census. We ﬁnd
no statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects that associate greater Ramadan exposure with higher
illiteracy or lower schooling. In fact those born 8 months after Ramadan appear to have
higher human capital levels by both of these measures. The magnitude of these eﬀects,
however, is very small. For example, the increase in years of schooling for these individuals
is only about a tenth of a year, or 1.6 percent of the sample mean.
   In developing countries a reduction in health capital could be manifested in less pro-
ductive childhood labor and possibly lead to increased schooling. We also speculate that
these small but positive results might reﬂect a selective eﬀect on surviving males, who
seem to bear the brunt of Ramadan-related attrition (either prenatally or postnatally). In
developing countries where average mortality rates are high, the selective eﬀect of health
disruptions operating through early-life mortality may overwhelm “fetal origins” eﬀects
on adult survivors [Deaton et al., 2009]. Scotland [1956] provides supportive evidence
that death rates among the frail were very high in Uganda during roughly the middle
of our sample period in the 1950s. When we split the sample by gender, we only found
these positive education eﬀects for men and found negative (though insigniﬁcant) eﬀects
on women. When we split the sample by those above age 50 versus those aged 50 or
younger, the eﬀects are much larger for the older groups. These facts are consistent with
the possibility of sex-speciﬁc selective mortality.
(http://www.womensenews.org/article.cfm/dyn/aid/1456/context/archive).




                                             25
5.2       Results from Iraq Census

We replicate the basic Uganda results using 1997 Iraq Census data. Columns (1) to (4)
of Table 7 show the eﬀects on disability. Full exposure to Ramadan nine months before
birth is associated with a 0.33 percentage point increase in the probability of having a
disability (p-value = 0.016). While in Uganda the overall disability rate was 3.8 percent,
in Iraq it is just 1.5 percent. However, the eﬀect size relative to the mean in Iraq is 23
percent, nearly identical to the 22 percent eﬀect size that we estimated in Uganda. In Iraq
the rates of disabilities involving sight and hearing, however, are a much smaller fraction
of the reported rates for Uganda and this may explain why we detect no eﬀect on these
measures for ﬁrst month exposure in columns (2) and (3).39 We do ﬁnd that exposure in
month 5 of pregnancy has an eﬀect on vision related disabilities.
       “Insane” is the sole mental disability queried, which IPUMS relabeled as “psycholog-
ical” disability. Interestingly, at 0.36 percent, Iraq’s psychological disability rate is actu-
ally higher than the combined rate of 0.28 percent for mental/learning plus psychological
disabilities in Uganda (despite Iraq’s lower overall disability rate). This suggests that
mental/learning disabilities that are related to cognitive impairments may be subsumed
in the psychological disability measure for Iraq. In column (4) we ﬁnd strong eﬀects on
psychological disabilities just as we did for mental/learning disabilities in Uganda. First
month exposure to Ramadan is associated with 0.23 percentage point increase in the like-
lihood of a psychological disability or a 63 percent eﬀect relative to the mean (p-value
= 0.001). We also estimate positive but insigniﬁcant eﬀects in 6 of the other 8 gestation
months. As was the case in Uganda with mental/learning disabilities, the joint test of
zero eﬀect across all gestation months is easily rejected at the 5 percent level, as is the
test of equality of coeﬃcients. The fact that both overall disability as well as disabilities
that likely capture cognitive impairments appear to be impacted in precisely the same
period of fetal development in two diﬀerent societies is remarkable and reinforces that our
ﬁndings are not due to chance.
       In columns (5) through (8) of Table 7 we turn to socioeconomic outcomes.40 The
  39
     For vision/blindness only 0.14 percent report this disability which is only about one-tenth of the share
reporting a comparable disability in Uganda. For deaf/hearing only 0.02 percent report this disability
which is only one-sixteenth of the rate found in Uganda.
  40
     We experimented with measures of human capital such as years of schooling and illiteracy but found

                                                     26
1997 Iraqi Census asks about instances of men having multiple wives which we use to
proxy for wealth (as described earlier). For this measure, shown in column (5) we ﬁnd
that men with ﬁrst month exposure are more than half a percentage point less likely to
have multiple wives and negative point estimates are found throughout pregnancy. A
large and signiﬁcant eﬀect is also found during month 6 of gestation. Similarly, for home
ownership (column 6), we see highly signiﬁcant eﬀects of exposure throughout the in utero
period and the joint test of all gestation month coeﬃcients is signiﬁcant at the 8 percent
level. In column (7) we see no eﬀects on the sex composition of the adult population
which may not be so surprising given that Iraq’s sex ratio is already skewed toward
women. Finally, in column (8) we ﬁnd both small positive and small negative eﬀects of
Ramadan exposure on employment that are statistically signiﬁcant. We note that among
males, home owners are less likely to be employed (73%) than non-home owners (82%)
suggesting that employment may be a poor proxy for economic status in Iraq and may
actually signal lower status.41 As with our Uganda results, we have also run all of these
estimates including exposure 10 months prior to birth and in no case did it meaningfully
alter the results.


5.3     Results from US Census

The US data provide potentially higher quality measures of disability as well as direct
measures of labor market outcomes (unavailable for Iraq and Uganda). As mentioned in
Section 3.2.3, the data’s chief drawback is absence of month of birth information, which
dulls assignment of the Ramadan ITT. On the other hand, ﬁndings of long-term eﬀects
in the US may address concerns that the Uganda and Iraq results do not generalize to
Muslims living in a high-income Western society.
    Panel A of Table 8 presents results for four outcomes across three samples. In each
regression we estimated eﬀects of Ramadan exposure in one’s birth quarter and in the
that there were extremely strong month of birth trends in these variables that could not be adequately
controlled for without having a full set of birth cohorts for whom Ramadan occurred throughout the
entire calendar year. The seasonality in birth month are likely related to institutional issues concerning
education (e.g. cutoﬀ ages for starting or ending school tied to speciﬁc dates).
  41
     If we control for home ownership and multiple wives the instances of positive eﬀects of Ramadan
exposure on male employment are eliminated.



                                                   27
prior two birth quarters, omitting Ramadan exposure three quarters prior to the birth
quarter and thereby treating that cohort as the control group. Since we have averaged our
monthly exposure measures within each birth quarter, our quarterly exposure measure
never exceeds one third (0.33) in any quarter. Therefore, our coeﬃcients which represent
the eﬀect of a unit change in exposure should be scaled down by one-third to be inter-
pretable as the eﬀect of fasting for 30 days within the birth quarter. For this table we
have also multiplied all the dichotomous outcomes by 100.
       The ﬁrst four columns pool samples drawn from the 1980 Census and the 2005-2007
ACS. We ﬁnd a signiﬁcant eﬀect of exposure in the quarter prior to birth on the incidence
of disability (column (1)). The coeﬃcient of 3.50 suggests that Ramadan’s occurrence in
a particular month within that quarter would raise the likelihood of a disability by about
1.17 percentage points. Since the mean rate of disability in the sample is 6.07 percent, this
implies about a 19 percent eﬀect at the mean, again quite similar to the corresponding
magnitudes in Uganda and Iran. The p-value on the joint test of the three quarters is
0.01. However, the timing of exposure appears to be concentrated more in the second
trimester rather than early in gestation.42 Of course it may be that eﬀects are large in
the ﬁrst month of gestation (as in Uganda and Iraq) in addition to the second trimester
but we are obviously unable to check this.
       In column (4), we ﬁnd that exposure both in the birth quarter and two quarters prior
to birth is associated with a reduction in log annual earnings of about 5.5 to 6 percent
(re-scaled). Both estimates are signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level and the eﬀects are jointly
signiﬁcant at the 0.11 level. To measure human capital we began by examining completed
years of schooling as an outcome (not shown) and found a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect of
about 0.15 years from one month’s exposure that occurs two quarters prior to birth. Since
this was a relatively small sized eﬀect, we then looked for whether this was concentrated
at the low end of the education distribution by looking at failure to complete 12 years
of schooling as an outcome (“less than HS”). Column (2) shows a coeﬃcient of 2.513 for
Ramadans falling two quarters prior to the birth quarter, signiﬁcant at the 11 percent
  42
    Depending on when in the quarter an individual is born, the prior quarter could reﬂect eﬀects
anywhere from the 4th gestation month to the 9th. If births were uniformly distributed within a quarter
then the mean exposure month would be the ﬁfth month of gestation.




                                                  28
level. The point estimate implies that one month of exposure to Ramadan fasting is
associated with about a 0.84 percentage point increase in the high school dropout rate
which implies a 6.4 percent eﬀect size evaluated at the mean.
      We ﬁnd negative point estimates for the likelihood of being male (column (3)) that
are not statistically signiﬁcant, but nevertheless potentially meaningful quantitatively.
Complete exposure in the quarter two quarters prior to the birth quarter is associated with
a roughly 1 percentage point decline in the male share of the adult Muslim population.
      The General Accounting Oﬃce noted the “impact of measurement error appears to be
greater for the ACS” than for the long-form of the decennial US Census [GAO, 2002]. In
columns (5) through (8) we restrict the sample to those observed in the 1980 Census,43
about a third of the full sample, and observe broadly similar eﬀects. With this sample
we also observe that the other two quarters of Ramadan appear to have strong eﬀects
on adult disability. So it could be that in 1980, at least, there were in fact long-term
repercussions among those whose mothers fasted early in pregnancy.          In columns (9)
through (12) we restrict the sample to the pooled ACS sample from more recent years.
We again see disability eﬀects of a similar magnitude and timing. For both subsamples
the eﬀects on earnings are insigniﬁcant but if anything appear to be stronger earlier in
pregnancy (two quarters prior to the birth quarter).
      Panel B takes a more conservative approach in designating the control group. Although
we know that the vast majority of pregnancies that overlap with Ramadan’s occurrence
in the two quarters prior to birth will actually be exposed to Ramadan for the entirety
of the three months of the quarter, this is much less likely for the quarter of birth itself
and the quarter three quarters prior to the birth quarter. Therefore, here both of these
quarters are omitted and serve as the reference group. As can be seen in columns (1)
through (4) of Panel B, this does not alter our basic results. The eﬀect size on disability
is a bit smaller but still highly signiﬁcant. The eﬀect on having fewer than 12 years of
schooling actually rises, becomes signiﬁcant at the 5 percent level, and the joint test of
both exposure coeﬃcients is now signiﬁcant at the 8 percent level. On the other hand the
eﬀect on earnings drops considerably and is no longer statistically signiﬁcant.
      We have also run all of these speciﬁcations on a sample of US born whites that are
 43
      The last decennial Census to report quarter of birth.


                                                    29
presumably non-Muslims based on reported ancestry and found no eﬀects of similar mag-
nitudes.
       To summarize, in the US Census we ﬁnd: 1) strong evidence of elevated rates of disabil-
ity from in utero exposure to Ramadan generally toward the middle of pregnancy; 2) evi-
dence of lower earnings with Ramadan exposure early in pregnancy (e.g., ﬁrst trimester);
and 3) suggestive evidence linking Ramadan exposure early in pregnancy to a lower like-
lihood of completing high school.



6        Discussion and Future Research

6.1       How does fasting observance aﬀect our estimates?

As rates of fasting by pregnant women during Ramadan approach unity, our ITT estimate
approaches the treatment eﬀect of fasting (which cannot be said of previous comparisons
between fasters and non-fasters). Fasting observance may be highest in early pregnancy,
both because mothers may be unaware they are pregnant and the burden of pregnancy
is lower.44 Thus, the estimated health damage attributable to Ramadan falling in the
ﬁrst month of pregnancy may approximate the treatment eﬀect of fasting during this
period. Correspondence between our ITT estimate and fasting’s eﬀect is likely higher
in Iraq and Uganda where we have little classiﬁcation error in Muslim status. In our
Michigan data, our proxy for Muslims will include a higher fraction of non-Muslims due
to the likely presence of Chaldeans who report Arab ancestry. This is also likely to be
the case, albeit to a lesser extent, with our US Census data where we may include some
non-Muslim immigrants from predominantly Muslim countries. As compliance (fasting
during Ramadan) is presumably zero for non-Muslims, our US ITT estimates are likely
attenuated.
       Ideally, we would observe fasting behavior by month of pregnancy and subsequent
health or human capital outcomes for a large sample of Muslims. With this information
  44
    The only study that we are aware of that documented diﬀerences in fasting behavior across pregnancy
was by Arab and Nasrollahi [2001] who found that of the 4,343 women delivering in hospitals in Hamadan,
Iran in 1999, fasting was only slightly more common when Ramadan fell in the ﬁrst trimester (77% )
than in the second trimester (72%) or third trimester (65%).



                                                  30
and a suﬃciently long span of birth years, we could construct Wald estimates of the
eﬀect of fasting on health during each pregnancy month. Ramadan’s coincidence with
pregnancy month would be the binary instrumental variable for fasting observance. As
long as Muslims are not fasting for other reasons during the month of Ramadan (as seems
reasonable), this Wald estimate could be interpreted as the eﬀect of fasting on fasters
(i.e., the treatment on the treated rather than simply a LATE estimate, see Angrist and
Pischke [2009]). Failing this, data on fasting behavior and pregnancy month could be used
to estimate the ﬁrst stage eﬀects of Ramadan timing (preferably for the US, Uganda, or
Iraq), and combined with our ITT estimates in a two-sample IV procedure. This approach
would also integrate potential heterogeneity in fasting rates by pregnancy month.
       The most compelling previous studies of the developmental origins of health and dis-
ease have relied on exogenous shocks “caused by conditions outside the control of the
mother” [Currie, 2009]. These shocks have also typically involved relatively uncommon
and severe historical events and so the relevance to policy may be somewhat tenuous. Our
study departs from these in considering a treatment that to a greater degree is within the
control of the mother (but still identiﬁed by exogenous timing) and may potentially be
amenable to interventions. We also study a phenomenon that conforms more closely to
the established theories relating a decline in circulating levels of maternal glucose during
critical windows of embryonic and fetal development. That obtaining a dispensation to
postpone fasting until after pregnancy is apparently the exception rather than the norm
(see Appendix A.1.2) suggests two possibilities. First, the cost of requesting the dispen-
sation may be high – in part because mothers usually become aware of their pregnancies
after the ﬁrst month [Floyd et al., 1999]. Alternatively, it may be that the full health
consequences of Ramadan fasting during pregnancy are unknown. This explanation also
seems plausible as ours is the ﬁrst study to ﬁnd long-term eﬀects.
       An alternative approach families could adopt is to time pregnancies to commence
shortly after Ramadan, and thereby avoid the overlap. That we do not observe this
behavior could suggest that timing pregnancies is costly or unreliable,45 or again that
fasting during pregnancy is not considered teratogenic.
  45
    Dickert-Conlin and Chandra [1999] found a responsiveness to tax incentives in the timing of deliveries,
not conceptions.



                                                    31
6.2       Synthesizing the Results

In table A1 we present hypotheses concerning which outcomes are likely to be aﬀected by
fasting, and in which months of pregnancy. In accordance with our hypotheses, we ﬁnd
evidence that fasting aﬀects birth weight, gestation length and the sex composition at
birth using natality data from Michigan. For birth weight it appears that fasting during
the ﬁrst month or two is consistently associated with lower birthweight. However, when
we limit our sample full-term births in non-Chaldean zipcodes, we ﬁnd negative eﬀects in
other stages of pregnancy. Our results on the sex composition of births are also consistent
with the hypothesis that nutrition shortly after conception matters.
       We take these ﬁndings primarily as conﬁrmation that there is a detectable eﬀect of
fasting that is evident at birth. The absence of such evidence would make the case for
long-term eﬀects superﬁcially more suspect but still plausible from the point of view of
biological theory. Although some may interpret evidence of negative eﬀects on birth
weight as an important ﬁnding in and of itself, we take the more conservative view that
it merely demonstrates the potential importance of nutritional disruptions during fetal
development on long-term outcomes.
       Our literature review further suggests that irrespective of when in pregnancy fasting
may aﬀect birth outcomes, adult outcomes are generally likely to be aﬀected by prenatal
nutritional disruptions early in pregnancy.46 Accordingly, we ﬁnd large eﬀects on disability
from early exposure in Uganda and Iraq. In the US, where we have much more blunt data
on birth timing, we ﬁnd that rates of disability are elevated by a very similar magnitude as
in Iraq and Uganda but that the timing of eﬀects is now concentrated during the second
trimester, though we cannot rule out the possibility of large eﬀects early in pregnancy
and ﬁnd evidence of this when we use only the 1980 US Census (the last decennial Census
to report birth quarter).
       With respect to education, although we ﬁnd no evidence of a negative eﬀect in Uganda
we do estimate a signiﬁcantly lower likelihood of completing high school that is associated
with early exposure in the US. We note that theory is not clear on whether reductions
in health capital in the context of a developing country should reduce schooling since it
  46
    Evidence from the 1918 and 1957 inﬂuenza pandemics suggests that the ﬁrst half of pregnancy is
particularly important to subsequent health and human capital [Almond, 2006, Kelly, 2009].


                                               32
may also reduce productivity among child laborers. For Uganda, we also ﬁnd evidence
that is consistent with the possibility that sex-speciﬁc selective mortality may have led
to a positive association. It would be useful for future research to use administrative
educational data (e.g. test scores) to more directly ascertain whether there are eﬀects on
human capital during adolescence.
   Finally, with respect to economic outcomes, we ﬁnd that fasting early in pregnancy
is associated with lower wealth using home ownership in Uganda and home ownership
and polygyny in Iraq. In the US we similarly ﬁnd that early exposure is associated with
reduced earnings, although eﬀects are also apparent in other periods of pregnancy.


6.3    Generalizability and Future Research

An important caveat of our analysis is that we only measure the reduced form eﬀect of
exposure to all aspects of Ramadan’s occurrence, not just fasting. The fact that Ramadan
may alter other behaviors (e.g. sleeping patterns) may lead one to question whether the
eﬀects of fasting during Ramadan generalizes to other contexts such as dieting during
pregnancy. We would ﬁrst emphasize that there is a strong physiologic and empirical basis
in the medical literature for expecting that maternal fasting can lead to metabolic changes
in the intra-uterine environment (i.e. reductions in glucose and increases in ketones) that
could potentially result in adverse birth outcomes. Further, no other behavioral aspect of
Ramadan observance that we are aware of has been linked to adverse pregnancy or birth
outcomes. Therefore, the fact that accelerated starvation has in fact been documented
in both developed and developing countries during Ramadan provides a priori evidence
that Ramadan is of direct relevance for understanding the implications of nutritional
deprivation during pregnancy more generally. The presence of elevated levels of cortisol
provides further evidence of a likely eﬀect. At a minimum, the results of this paper are
a clarion call for further research. It would be fruitful for future studies to analyze the
extent to which other behavioral aspects of Ramadan may interact with fasting behavior
and whether these other factors may serve to amplify or dampen the eﬀects of restricted
prenatal nutrition. Finally, setting aside the issue of generalizability, the fact that millions
of pregnant Muslim women will fast each year implies that understanding the long-term


                                              33
impacts of Ramadan is an important question per se.
       Future research should also conﬁrm whether other commonly-experienced disruptions
to prenatal nutrition exert similar eﬀects as Ramadan fasting. Most US pregnancies are
not recognized until after the ﬁrst month of gestation [Floyd et al., 1999]. Given the results
of this study, maternal behavior particularly during the ﬁrst month of pregnancy, can have
permanent impacts on oﬀspring health. Roughly 40% of US women of childbearing age
are attempting to lose weight [Cohen and Kim, 2009] and 24% of women reported meal-
skipping during pregnancy [Siega-Riz et al., 2001].47 Even in relatively well-nourished
populations, prenatal nutrition (and at a minimum its timing) may be sub-optimal for
fetal development. Future research should employ new identiﬁcation strategies to evaluate
both short and long-term health eﬀects of nutrition in early pregnancy on health and other
end points, e.g., test scores.




  47
       Furthermore, approximately 5% of pregnant women manifest eating disorders [Turton et al., 1999].


                                                    34
References
Douglas Almond. Is the 1918 inﬂuenza pandemic over? long-term eﬀects of in utero
 inﬂuenza exposure in the post-1940 U.S. population. Journal of Political Economy, 114
 (4):672–712, August 2006.
Douglas Almond, Kenneth Y. Chay, and David S. Lee. The costs of low birth weight.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3):1031–1084, August 2005.
Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, Michael Joﬀe, and Mårten Palme. Is hyperemesis gravi-
 darum an adaptive condition? manuscript, Stockholm University, February 2009.
Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-
  cist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2009.
Malihe Arab and Shahla Nasrollahi. Interrelation of ramadan fasting and birth weight.
 Medical Journal of the Islamic Academy of Sciences, 14(3):91–95, 2001.
Fereidoun Azizi, Hossein Sadeghipour, Behnam Siahkolah, and Nasrollah Rezaei-Ghaleh.
  Intellectual development of children born to mothers who fasted during pregnancy.
  International Journal of Vitamin and Nutrition Research, 74(5):374–380, September
  2004.
Kasey Buckles and Daniel M. Hungerman. Season of birth and later outcomes: Old
 questions, new answers. manuscript, University of Notre Dame, July 2008.
Elissa Z. Cameron. Facultative adjustment of mammalian sex ratios in support fo the
  trivers-willard hypothesis: evidence for a mechanism. Proceedings of the Royal Society
  B: Biological Sciences, 271(1549):1723–1728, 2004.
Jennifer H. Cohen and Hyoshin Kim. Sociodemographic and health characteristics as-
  sociated with attempting weight loss during pregnancy. Preventing Chronic Disease:
  Public Health Research, Practice, and Policy, 6(1):1–9, January 2009. Centers for Dis-
  ease Control and Prevention.
Dora L. Costa, Lorens A. Helmchen, and Sven Wilson. Race, infection, and arteriosclerosis
 in the past. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(33):13219–13224,
 2007.
Dora L. Costa and Joanna N. Lahey. Predicting older age mortality trends. Journal of
 the European Economic Association, 3(2-3):487–493, April-May 2005.
Flavio Cunha and James J. Heckman. The technolgy of skill formation. American Eco-
  nomic Review, 97(2):31–47, May 2007.
Janet Currie. Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Is there a causal relationship between child
  health and human capital development? Journal of Economic Literature, XLVII(1):
  87–122, March 2009.
Angus Deaton, Carlos Bozzoli, and Climent Quintana-Domeque. Child mortality and
 adult height. Demography, forthcoming 2009.

                                           35
Stacy Dickert-Conlin and Amitabh Chandra. Taxes and the timing of births. Journal of
  Political Economy, 1999, vol. 107, no. 1, 107(1):161–177, 1999.

E. Dikensoy, O. Balat, B. Cebesoy, A. Ozkur, H. Cicek, and G. Can. The eﬀect of Ramadan
  fasting on maternal serum lipids, cortisol levels and fetal development. Archives of
  gynecology and obstetrics, 279(2):119, 2009.

Gabriele Doblhammer and James W. Vaupel. Lifespan depends on month of birth. Pro-
 ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(5):2934–2939, February 2001.

Lena Edlund. Son preference, sex ratios, and marriage patterns. Journal of Political
  Economy, 107(6):1275–1304, December 1999.

John L. Esposito. The Oxford Dictionary of Islam. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
  2003.

Reyn Van Ewijk. Long-term health eﬀects on the next generation of ramadan fasting
  during pregnancy. April 2009. CEP Discussion Paper No 926.

RL Floyd, P Decouﬂe, and DW Hungerford. Alcohol use prior to pregnancy recognition.
 American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 17:101–107(7), August 1999.

Kathryn L. Franko, Peter D. Gluckman, Catherine M. Law, Alan S. Beedle, and Su-
 san M.B. Morton. Small for Gestational Age. Causes and Consequences, volume 13 of
 Pediatr Adolesc Med., chapter Low Birth Weight and Optimal Fetal Development: A
 Global Perspective, pages 73–85. Karger, Basel, 2009. W Kiess W and SD Chernausek
 SD and ACS Hokken-Koelega: (editors).

GAO. The american community survey: Accuracy and timeliness issues. Technical report,
 The General Accounting Oﬃce, Washington, DC, September 2002. GAO-02-956R.

Peter Gluckman and Mark Hanson. The Fetal Matrix: Evolution, Development and Dis-
  ease. Cambridge University Press, Cambride, England, 2005.

ES Hunter and TW Sadler. D-(-)-beta hydroxybutyrate-induced eﬀects on mouse embryos
  in vitro. Teratology, 36:259–64, 1987.

Amita Kapoor, Elizabeth Dunn, Alice Kostaki, Marcus H. Andrews, and Stephen G.
 Matthews. Fetal programming of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal function: Prenatal
 stress and glucocorticoids. Journal of Physiology, 572(1):31–44, 2006.

Zohreh Kavehmanesh and Hassan Abolghasemi. Maternal ramadan fasting and neonatal
  health. Journal of Perinatology, 24:748–750, 2004.

Elaine Kelly. The scourge of asian ﬂu: in utero exposure to pandemic inﬂuenza and the
  development of a cohort of british children. IFS Working Paper, September 2009.

Sebastian Kraemer. The fragile male. BMJ, 321(7276):1609–1612, 2000.




                                          36
Ashok Malhotra, P.H. Scott, J.S. Scott, H. Gee, and B.A. Wharton. Metabolic changes in
  asian muslim pregnant mothers observing the ramadan fast in britian. British Journal
  of Nutrition, 61(3):663–672, May 1989.

Fiona Mathews, Paul J. Johnson, and Andrew Neil. You are what your mother eats:
  evidence for maternal preconception diet inﬂuencing foetal sex in humans. Proceedings
  of the Royal Society B, pages 1–8, April 2008.

P. J. Meis and J.C. Roseand M. Swain. Pregnancy alters diurnal variation of plasma
  glucose concentration. Chronobiol. Int., 1:145–149, 1984.

Boyd E. Metzger, Veronica Ravnikar, Rita A. Vileisis, and Norbert Freinkel. ‘accelerated
  starvation’ and the skipped breakfast in late normal pregnancy. The Lancet, 1(8272):
  588–592, March 1982.

Hisham M. Mirghani, Sarath Weerasinghe, Shamsaa Al-Awar, Lolowa Abdulla, and Mu-
  tairu Ezimokhai. The eﬀect of intermittent maternal fasting on computerized fetal heart
  tracing. Journal of Perinatology, 25:90–92, 2005.

H.M. Mirghani, S.D. Weerasinghe, J.R. Smith, and M. Ezimokhai. The eﬀect of intermit-
  tent maternal fasting on human fetal breathing movements. Journal of Obstetrics and
  Gynaecology, 24(6):635–637, September 2004.

DCP Moore, M Stanisstreet, and CA Clarke. Morphological and physiological eﬀects of
 beta-hydroxybutyrate on rat embryos grown in vitro at diﬀerent stages. Teratology, 40:
 237–51, 1989.

Institute of Medicine, editor. Nutrition During Pregnancy and Lactation: An Implemen-
  tation Guide. National Academy Press, Washington D.C., 1992.

M Pearl, ML Wier, and M Kharrazi. Assessing the quality of last menstrual period date
 on california birth records. Paediatric and perinatal epidemiology, 21 Suppl 2:50, 2007.

AM Prentice, A Prentice, WH Lamb, PG Lunn, and S. Austin. Metabolic consequences
 of fasting during ramadan in pregnant and lactating women. Human nutrition. Clinical
 nutrition, 37(4):283–94, July 1983.

T Rizzo, BE Metzger, WJ Burns, and K Burns. Correlations between antepartum mater-
  nal metabolism and child intelligence. New England Journal of Medicine, 325:911–916,
  1991.

Laura A. Schieve, Geraldine S. Perry, Mary E. Cogswell, Kelley S. Scanlon, Deborah
  Rosenberg, Suzan Carmichael, and Cynthia Ferre. Validity of self-reported pregnancy
  delivery weight. American Journal of Epidemiology, 150(9), 1999.

WHD Scotland. Length of gestation of east african women. Journal of Obstetrics and
 Gynaecology, 63(1):120–123, 1956.

EA Sheehan, F Beck, CA Clarke, and M Stanisstreet. Eﬀects of beta-hydroxybutyrate on
 rat embryos grown in culture. Experentia, 41:273–75, 1985.

                                           37
Anna Maria Siega-Riz, Tracy Hermann, David A Savitz, and John M Thorp. Frequency
 of eating during pregnancy and its eﬀect on preterm delivery. American Journal of
 Epidemiology, 153(7):647–652, 2001.

P. Turton, P. Hughes, H. Bolton, and P. Sedgwick. Incidence and demographic correlates
  of eating disorder symptoms in a pregnant population. The International Journal of
  Eating Disorders, 26(4):448–452, 1999.




                                         38
Table 1: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Birth Weight by Gestation Month,
                                                                  Month Michigan Arabs
D
Dependent
     d    V
          Variable
             i bl iis Bi
                      Birthweight,
                          h i h C  Coefficients
                                      ffi i     are on R
                                                       Ramadan
                                                           d E Exposure measures (% off daylight
                                                                                        d li h hours,
                                                                                                 h    % off days)
                                                                                                            d )
                       Ramadan Exposure
                                 p      Assumingg Normal Gestation                              Ramadan Exposure
                                                                                                          p      Usingg Gestation Data (37
                                                                                                                                       (37-42
                                                                                                                                       ( 42 wks))
Months         ( )
               (1)            ( )
                              (2)           ( )
                                            (3)            ( )
                                                           (4)         ( )
                                                                       (5)             Gestation     ((6))            ((7))         ((8))          ((9))
prior to   Birth Day      Birth Day     Birth Day      Birth Day    Birth Mo
                                                                           Mo.          Month    Birth Day        Birth Day     Birth Day      Birth Day
 Birth       Hours          Hours         Days           Days         Days             exposure    Hours            Hours         Days           Days
   10           --            6.4            --            4.3          --                 0           --             6.0             --           5.5
                            (19 7)
                            (19.7)                       (13 8)
                                                         (13.8)                                                     (18 1)
                                                                                                                    (18.1)                       (12 4)
                                                                                                                                                 (12.4)
   9          -39.8
               39 8 **       -38.9
                              38 9 **      -26.7
                                            26 7 **      -25.9
                                                          25 9 **      -10.8
                                                                        10 8                1          -37.9
                                                                                                        37 9 **      -36.9
                                                                                                                      36 9 **      -22.3
                                                                                                                                    22 3 *        -21.3
                                                                                                                                                   21 3 *
             (18.5)
             (18 5)         (18.7)
                            (18 7)        (12.7)
                                          (12 7)        (13.0)
                                                        (13 0)        (12.7)
                                                                      (12 7)                          (16.9)
                                                                                                      (16 9)        (17.1)
                                                                                                                    (17 1)        (11.5)
                                                                                                                                  (11 5)         (11.7)
                                                                                                                                                 (11 7)
   8          -38.0
               38 0 **
               38.0          -35.7
                              35 7 *
                              35.7         -24.5
                                            24 5 **
                                            24.5         -22.8
                                                          22 8 *
                                                          22.8         -33.2
                                                                        33 2 ***
                                                                        33.2                2          -27.2
                                                                                                        27 2 *
                                                                                                        27.2         -25.0
                                                                                                                      25 0
                                                                                                                      25.0         -16.9
                                                                                                                                    16 9
                                                                                                                                    16.9          -14.7
                                                                                                                                                   14 7
                                                                                                                                                   14.7
             ( 7))
             (17
             (17.7)         ( 1))
                            (19
                            (19.1)        ( 4))
                                          (12
                                          (12.4)        ( 6))
                                                        (13
                                                        (13.6)        ( 4))
                                                                      (12
                                                                      (12.4)                          ( 1))
                                                                                                      (16
                                                                                                      (16.1)        ( 5))
                                                                                                                    (17
                                                                                                                    (17.5)        ( 1))
                                                                                                                                  (11
                                                                                                                                  (11.1)         ( 2))
                                                                                                                                                 (12
                                                                                                                                                 (12.2)
   7          7
              7.6            9.6           7
                                           7.5           9.0           -8.8                 3          -4.7
                                                                                                        47           -2.8          -1.7
                                                                                                                                      7           0.1
             (18 3)
             (18.3)         (19 2)
                            (19.2)        (12 8)
                                          (12.8)        (13 6)
                                                        (13.6)        (12 8)
                                                                      (12.8)                          (16 6)
                                                                                                      (16.6)        (17 6)
                                                                                                                    (17.6)        (11 5)
                                                                                                                                  (11.5)         (12 3)
                                                                                                                                                 (12.3)
   6          -37 6 **
              -37.6          -35 6 *
                             -35.6         -25 4 **
                                           -25.4         -23 9 *
                                                         -23.9         -10 8
                                                                       -10.8                4          -13 4
                                                                                                       -13.4         -11 5
                                                                                                                     -11.5         -8 9
                                                                                                                                   -8.9           -6 9
                                                                                                                                                  -6.9
             (18.5)
             (18 5)         (19.5)
                            (19 5)        (13.0)
                                          (13 0)        (13.9)
                                                        (13 9)        (12.8)
                                                                      (12 8)                          (16.6)
                                                                                                      (16 6)        (17.7)
                                                                                                                    (17 7)        (11.6)
                                                                                                                                  (11 6)         (12.5)
                                                                                                                                                 (12 5)
   5           11
               1.1            30
                              3.0           25
                                            2.5           40
                                                          4.0          -18.5
                                                                        18 5                5          -16.0
                                                                                                        16 0         -14.1
                                                                                                                      14 1          -9.8
                                                                                                                                     98            -7.9
                                                                                                                                                    79
             (18 8))
             ((18.8)        (19 7))
                            ((19.7)       (13 2))
                                          ((13.2)       (14 0))
                                                        ((14.0)       ( 2))
                                                                      (13
                                                                      (13.2)                          ( 9))
                                                                                                      (16
                                                                                                      (16.9)        ( 8))
                                                                                                                    (17
                                                                                                                    (17.8)        (11 9))
                                                                                                                                  ((11.9)        (12 6))
                                                                                                                                                 ((12.6)
   4          -33.8
               33 8 *
               33.8          -32.0
                              32 0 *
                              32.0         -23.6
                                            23 6 *
                                            23.6         -22.2
                                                          22 2
                                                          22.2         -8.2
                                                                        82
                                                                        8.2                 6          -21.9
                                                                                                        21 9
                                                                                                        21.9         -20.2
                                                                                                                      20 2
                                                                                                                      20.2         -14.8
                                                                                                                                    14 8
                                                                                                                                    14.8          -13.0
                                                                                                                                                   13 0
                                                                                                                                                   13.0
             (18 7)
             (18.7)         (19 5)
                            (19.5)        (13 2)
                                          (13.2)        (13 9)
                                                        (13.9)        (13 2)
                                                                      (13.2)                          (17 0)
                                                                                                      (17.0)        (17 8)
                                                                                                                    (17.8)        (11 9)
                                                                                                                                  (11.9)         (12 6)
                                                                                                                                                 (12.6)
   3          -19 7
              -19.7          -17 9
                             -17.9         -13 0
                                           -13.0         -11 6
                                                         -11.6         -16 2
                                                                       -16.2                7          -17 3
                                                                                                       -17.3         -15 6
                                                                                                                     -15.6         -14 1
                                                                                                                                   -14.1          -12 4
                                                                                                                                                  -12.4
             (
             (19.1))        (
                            (19.9))       (
                                          (13.0))       (
                                                        (13.7))       (
                                                                      (13.3))                         (
                                                                                                      (16.7))       (
                                                                                                                    (17.5))       (
                                                                                                                                  (11.7))        (
                                                                                                                                                 (12.4))
   2          -13.5
               13 5          -11.9
                              11 9          -7.6
                                             76           -6.3
                                                           63          -12.2
                                                                        12 2                8          12 4
                                                                                                       12.4          14 0
                                                                                                                     14.0           81
                                                                                                                                    8.1            97
                                                                                                                                                   9.7
             ( 6))
             (18
             (18.6)         ( 3))
                            (19
                            (19.3)        (12 5))
                                          ((12.5)       (13 1))
                                                        ((13.1)       ( 6))
                                                                      (12
                                                                      (12.6)                          ( 0))
                                                                                                      (16
                                                                                                      (16.0)        ( 7))
                                                                                                                    (16
                                                                                                                    (16.7)        (11 2))
                                                                                                                                  ((11.2)        (11 8))
                                                                                                                                                 ((11.8)
   1          10.1
              10 1           12 3
                             12.3          7.8
                                           78            95
                                                         9.5           -5.9
                                                                        59
                                                                        5.9                 9          -15.5
                                                                                                        15 5
                                                                                                        15.5         -13.4
                                                                                                                      13 4
                                                                                                                      13.4         -10.7
                                                                                                                                    10 7
                                                                                                                                    10.7          -8.6
                                                                                                                                                   86
                                                                                                                                                   8.6
             (19 0)
             (19.0)         (20 1)
                            (20.1)        (12 8)
                                          (12.8)        (13 9)
                                                        (13.9)        (13 0)
                                                                      (13.0)                          (16 4)
                                                                                                      (16.4)        (17 6)
                                                                                                                    (17.6)        (11 4)
                                                                                                                                  (11.4)         (12 5)
                                                                                                                                                 (12.5)
joint test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
     l
p -value      0.078          0.100         0.251         0.076        0.478
                                                                        4                             0.289         0.350          0.437
                                                                                                                                     4           0.513
jjoint test,
       test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
                                                q
 p -value      0 166
               0.166          0.251
                              0 251         0.280
                                            0 280        0 121
                                                         0.121        0 844
                                                                      0.844                           0 405
                                                                                                      0.405         0 396
                                                                                                                    0.396          0 557
                                                                                                                                   0.557         0 518
                                                                                                                                                 0.518
N          44112        44112         32101         44112           44112                        41106      41106        41106           41106
Notes: Columns 1-4 use exact birth date but do not utilize gestation data. Column 5 only uses birth month. Columns 6-10 use either self reported or
physician estimated gestation (see text). Entries show the coefficent on the relevant Ramadan exposure measure. Controls include mother’s age, mother’
age squared,d mother’s
                  h ’ education,
                        d         tobacco
                                    b      use, alcohol
                                                 l h l use, parity, ffather’s
                                                                        h ’ education,
                                                                               d         d
                                                                                         dummy ffor missing ffather’s
                                                                                                                h ’ education,
                                                                                                                      d        ffather’s
                                                                                                                                   h ’ age, ffather’s
                                                                                                                                                h ’ age
squared number of pre
squared,             previous
                         ious pregnancies that resulted in death at birth
                                                                      birth, conception (or birth) month dummies
                                                                                                         dummies, count
                                                                                                                    county dummies and birth yearear dummies.
                                                                                                                                                     dummies
                                                                          members
Italicized estimates may represent postnatal exposure for some sample members.
Standard errors in parentheses, *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 2: Effects of Ramadan Exposure
                              p      on Birth Weight
                                                 g byy Gestation Month,
                                                                 Month, Michigan
                                                                             g Non-Arabs
                                                                                 Non Arabs
                                  Exposure Assuming
                                           A        Normal Gestation                                           Exposure Using Gestation Data
                          All Non Arabs                         Exc. Arab Zip                                        All Non Arabs        Ex Arab Zip
 Months          ( )
                 (1)            ( )
                                (2)            ( )
                                               (3)               ( )
                                                                 (4)        ( )
                                                                            (5)          ( )
                                                                                         (6)          Gestation      ( )
                                                                                                                     (7)             ( )
                                                                                                                                     (8)          ( )
                                                                                                                                                  (9)
 prior
   i to     Bi h Day
            Birth  D       Bi h Day
                           Birth  D      Bi h Month
                                         Birth  M h          Bi h Day
                                                             Birth D    Bi h Day
                                                                        Birth  D    Bi h Month
                                                                                    Birth M h          M h
                                                                                                       Month    Bi h Day
                                                                                                                Birth  D        Bi h Day
                                                                                                                                Birth  D      Bi h Day
                                                                                                                                              Birth D
  Bi th
  Birth       H
              Hours          Days
                             D               Days
                                             D                 H
                                                               Hours      Days
                                                                          D             Days
                                                                                        D             exposure    Hours
                                                                                                                  H               Days
                                                                                                                                  D             Hours
                                                                                                                                                H
    9           -3.3
                 33
                 3.3           -2.2
                                22
                                2.2           -1.4
                                               14
                                               1.4              14.1
                                                                14 1       11.3
                                                                           11 3          4.8
                                                                                         48               1         -3.2
                                                                                                                     32
                                                                                                                     3.2            -0.4
                                                                                                                                     04
                                                                                                                                     0.4         21.8
                                                                                                                                                 21 8 *
               (3 3)
               (3.3)          (2 3)
                              (2.3)          (2 4)
                                             (2.4)             (11 9)
                                                               (11.9)      (8 3)
                                                                           (8.3)        (8 3)
                                                                                        (8.3)                      (3 3)
                                                                                                                   (3.3)           (2 3)
                                                                                                                                   (2.3)        (11 9)
                                                                                                                                                (11.9)
    8           -0.5
                 05            -0.8
                                08            -2.3
                                               23                84
                                                                 8.4        46
                                                                            4.6           97
                                                                                          9.7             2           25
                                                                                                                      2.5            30
                                                                                                                                     3.0          10 9
                                                                                                                                                  10.9
               ( 2))
               (3
               (3.2)          ( 3))
                              (2
                              (2.3)          ( 3))
                                             (2
                                             (2.3)            (11 4))
                                                              ((11.4)     (8 1))
                                                                          ((8.1)        (8 0))
                                                                                        ((8.0)                      (3 2))
                                                                                                                    ((3.2)         (2 2))
                                                                                                                                   ((2.2)       (11 2))
                                                                                                                                                ((11.2)
    7           -2 9
                -2.9           -2 5
                               -2.5           -4 0
                                              -4.0       *      93
                                                                9.3        72
                                                                           7.2           32
                                                                                         3.2              3          -1 6
                                                                                                                     -1.6           -1 1
                                                                                                                                    -1.1         16 1
                                                                                                                                                 16.1
               (3.3)
               (3 3)          (2.3)
                              (2 3)          (2.3)
                                             (2 3)            (11.7)
                                                              (11 7)      (8.3)
                                                                          (8 3)         (8.3)
                                                                                        (8 3)                       (3.2)
                                                                                                                    (3 2)          (2.3)
                                                                                                                                   (2 3)        (11.5)
                                                                                                                                                (11 5)
    6           0.5            -0.1           0.5               5.3        4.7          13.5              4          -0.8           0.1           10.1
               ( )
               (3.3)          ( )
                              (2.3)          ( )
                                             (2.3)            (
                                                              (11.6))     ( )
                                                                          (8.3)         ( )
                                                                                        (8.3)                       ( )
                                                                                                                    (3.2)          ( )
                                                                                                                                   (2.3)        (
                                                                                                                                                (11.4))
    5           -3.7
                 37
                 3.7           -3.2
                                32
                                3.2           -4.2
                                               42
                                               4.2       *      88
                                                                8.8        77.1
                                                                              1          -4.4
                                                                                          44
                                                                                          4.4             5          0.6
                                                                                                                     06             0.7
                                                                                                                                    07            5.8
                                                                                                                                                  58
               (3 3)
               (3.3)          (2 4)
                              (2.4)          (2 4)
                                             (2.4)            (11 8)
                                                              (11.8)      (8 4)
                                                                          (8.4)         (8 3)
                                                                                        (8.3)                       (3 2)
                                                                                                                    (3.2)          (2 3)
                                                                                                                                   (2.3)        (11 5)
                                                                                                                                                (11.5)
    4            10
                 1.0            06
                                0.6           -1.9
                                               19                29
                                                                 2.9        25
                                                                            2.5         11 7
                                                                                        11.7              6           01
                                                                                                                      0.1            08
                                                                                                                                     0.8           55
                                                                                                                                                   5.5
               (3 3))
               ((3.3)         (2 4))
                              ((2.4)         ( 3))
                                             (2
                                             (2.3)            (11 8))
                                                              ((11.8)     (8 5))
                                                                          ((8.5)        ( 4))
                                                                                        (8
                                                                                        (8.4)                       (3 2))
                                                                                                                    ((3.2)         (2 3))
                                                                                                                                   ((2.3)       (11 5))
                                                                                                                                                ((11.5)
    3           -3.8
                 38            -2.7
                                27            05
                                              0.5               96
                                                                9.6        71
                                                                           7.1           29
                                                                                         2.9              7          -0.8
                                                                                                                      08            05
                                                                                                                                    0.5          -2.2
                                                                                                                                                  22
               (3.3)
               (3 3)          (2.3)
                              (2 3)          (2.3)
                                             (2 3)            (11.8)
                                                              (11 8)      (8.3)
                                                                          (8 3)         (8.4)
                                                                                        (8 4)                       (3.2)
                                                                                                                    (3 2)          (2.3)
                                                                                                                                   (2 3)        (11.3)
                                                                                                                                                (11 3)
    2           -0.8           -1.5           -3.5              8.8        7.2           9.1              8          -1.4           -1.1          8.5
               ( )
               (3.2)          ( )
                              (2.2)          ( )
                                             (2.2)            (
                                                              (11.5))     ( )
                                                                          (8.0)         ( )
                                                                                        (8.0)                       ( )
                                                                                                                    (3.1)          ( )
                                                                                                                                   (2.2)        (
                                                                                                                                                (11.0))
    1           0.8
                08             -0.2
                                02
                                0.2           -1.4
                                               14
                                               1.4             -4.5
                                                                45
                                                                4.5        -6.2
                                                                            62
                                                                            6.2          -3.3
                                                                                          33
                                                                                          3.3             9          -4.8
                                                                                                                      48
                                                                                                                      4.8           -3.1
                                                                                                                                     31
                                                                                                                                     3.1         -2.5
                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                  2.5
               (3 3)
               (3.3)          (2 3)
                              (2.3)          (2 3)
                                             (2.3)            (11 9)
                                                              (11.9)      (8 3)
                                                                          (8.3)         (8 4)
                                                                                        (8.4)                       (3 2)
                                                                                                                    (3.2)          (2 3)
                                                                                                                                   (2.3)        (11 5)
                                                                                                                                                (11.5)
jjoint test,
       test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal
                                            q     to 0
    value
 p -value       0 933
                0.933          0 921
                               0.921          0 561
                                              0.561           0 943
                                                              0.943      0 834
                                                                         0.834         0 703
                                                                                       0.703                        0 857
                                                                                                                    0.857         0 747
                                                                                                                                  0.747           0 677
                                                                                                                                                  0.677
jjoint test,
       test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
                                                q
 p -value       0 934
                0.934          0 958
                               0.958         0 743
                                             0.743            0 979
                                                              0.979      0 892
                                                                         0.892         0 783
                                                                                       0.783                        0 813
                                                                                                                    0.813         0 655
                                                                                                                                  0.655           0 768
                                                                                                                                                  0.768
N           1565800         1565800       1565800        122844        122844        122844                      1070617       1070617        84675
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure to daylight hours over subsequent 30 days as fraction of peak daylight hours. Columns 1 and
2 assume normal gestation. Columns 3 and 4 use either self reported or physician estimated gestation and use births between 39 and 42 weeks
gestation.
   t ti    Columns
           C l      1 and
                        d 3 use a broad
                                   b d sample  l off imputed
                                                     i   t d non-Arab
                                                                  A b mothers
                                                                           th   based
                                                                                b d on reportedt d ancestry
                                                                                                         t or race. Columns
                                                                                                                      C l       2 andd 4 further
                                                                                                                                         f th restrict
                                                                                                                                                  ti t
this sample to mothers living in zipcodes with no Arabs according to the 2000 Census.
                                                                               Census      Controls include mother’s age,
                                                                                                                      age mother’s age squared,
                                                                                                                                         squared mother’s
education, tobacco use, alcohol use, parity, father’s education, dummy for missing father’s education, father’s age, father’s age squared, number of
previous pregnancies that resulted in death at birth, conception (or birth) month dummies, county dummies and birth year dummies.
Standard errors in parentheses, *significant
                                *             at 10%;
                                                   % ** significant at 5%;
                                                                        % *** significant at 1%
                                                                                              %
Table 3: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Sex at Birth and Live Births, Michigan Arabs and Non Arabs
                           Dependent Variable is Male                         Dependent Variable is Log Live Births (Total, Male Female)
 Gestation         (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)              (5)      (6)       (7)                 (8)      (9)       (10)
  Month            All      Arabs Exc.         All       Non-Arab                 Arab Sample                          Non-Arab Sample
 exposure        Arabs     Chaldean Zip     Non-Arabs    Zipcodes        Total     Male     Female              Total     Male     Female
     0           -0.032       -0.033          0.003        0.007           0.063     0.003     0.090              0.030     0.050     0.044
                (0.021)      (0.025)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.068)   (0.087)   (0.097)            (0.040)   (0.049)   (0.047)
     1          -0.037*      -0.066***         0.002        0.011          -0.164**   -0.258***    -0.043          0.042      0.051      0.031
                (0.020)       (0.023)         (0.003)      (0.012)          (0.063)    (0.082)    (0.087)         (0.035)    (0.044)    (0.042)
     2           -0.008        -0.008          0.001        -0.019          -0.007      0.017      0.021           -0.016     -0.005     0.022
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.066)     (0.086)    (0.093)         (0.041)    (0.049)    (0.048)
     3           -0.002        -0.007          0.002        -0.009          -0.088     -0.143*     -0.060          0.029      -0.010     0.076
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.065)     (0.083)    (0.093)         (0.039)    (0.048)    (0.046)
     4           -0.022        -0.030          0.002        -0.007          0.047       -0.037     0.084           0.045      0.054      0.066
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.070)     (0.090)    (0.096)         (0.042)    (0.049)    (0.047)
     5           0.005         -0.015          0.001        0.014           -0.035      -0.055     0.004           0.023      0.032      0.021
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.069)     (0.084)    (0.097)         (0.038)    (0.048)    (0.046)
     6           -0.013        -0.022          0.001        -0.011          0.037       -0.021     0.078           -0.012     -0.018     0.024
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.066)     (0.085)    (0.090)         (0.038)    (0.048)    (0.045)
     7           -0.012
                  0 012        -0.009
                                0 009          0 002
                                               0.002        0 018
                                                            0.018           -0.113
                                                                             0 113      -0.083
                                                                                         0 083     -0.148
                                                                                                    0 148          0 012
                                                                                                                   0.012      0 039
                                                                                                                              0.039      -0.014
                                                                                                                                          0 014
                (0.020)       (0.023)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.069)     (0.084)    (0.094)         (0.039)    (0.048)    (0.047)
     8           -0.026        -0.031          0.001        -0.005          0.008       -0.063     0.088           0.056      0.038     0.077*
                (0.019)       (0.023)         (0.003)      (0.011)         (0.063)     (0.078)    (0.087)         (0.035)    (0.045)    (0.042)
     9           -0.030        -0.030          0.003        0.001           0.003       -0.063     0.060          0.007       0.020      0.006
                (0.020)       (0.024)         (0.003)      (0.012)         (0.068)     (0.083)    (0.097)        (0.039)     (0.049)    (0.046)
joint test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
p -value            0.52        0.34            1.00        0.21             0.19       0.34       0.63            0.69       0.80       0.58
N                41153          29955       1434014       112516           216        216        216              216       216           216
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure to daylight hours over subsequent 30 days as fraction of peak daylight hours
during sample period. Gestation is either self reported or physician estimated. All samples use births with gestation between 37 and 42
weeks and include controls for mother’s age, mother’s age squared, mother’s education, tobacco use, alcohol use, parity, father’s education,
dummy for missing father’s education, father’s age, father’s age squared, number of previous pregnancies that resulted in death at birth,
conception month dummies, county dummies and birth year dummies. The Arab sample in columns 5 through 7 drops Arab mothers
living in zipcodes with a large share of Chaldeans. The non-Arab sample in columns 8 through 10 drops presumed Non Arab mothers
living in zipcodes with an Arab presence. Standard errors in parentheses. Italicized estimates may represent postnatal exposure for some
sample members. *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 4: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Characteristics of Pregnancies
                                                              g        Resultingg in Live Births,
                                                                                          Births Michigan
                                                                                                      g Arabs
             (1)      (2)                (3)          (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)           (9)      (10)        (11)      (12)
Gestation                                                                                                    Previous Father’s
                                                                                                                        Father s   Previous   Diabetes
 M h
 Month    M
          Mother
          Mother’s
              h ’s                    Mother
                                      M
                                      Mother’s
                                          h ’s    Father
                                                  F
                                                  Father’s
                                                      h ’s      Father
                                                                F
                                                                Father’s
                                                                    h ’s                                       Child     Ed
                                                                                                                         Educ.       S ll
                                                                                                                                     Small      Ri k
                                                                                                                                                Risk
E
Exposure  Education
          Ed ti     Medicaid
                    M di id             A
                                        Age          Age
                                                     A         Ed ti
                                                               Education   Tobacco
                                                                           T b        Alcohol
                                                                                      Al   h l   Parity
                                                                                                 P it       B
                                                                                                            Born   Dead
                                                                                                                   D d    Miss.
                                                                                                                          Mi         Baby
                                                                                                                                     B b       F t
                                                                                                                                               Factor
    0       0.030
            0 030    0.001
                     0 001             -0.111
                                        0 111
                                        0.111       -0.256
                                                     0 256
                                                     0.256       -0.007
                                                                  0 007
                                                                  0.007     0 001
                                                                            0.001      -0.002
                                                                                        0 002
                                                                                        0.002     0 040
                                                                                                  0.040        -0.029
                                                                                                                0 029
                                                                                                                0.029    -0.007
                                                                                                                          0 007
                                                                                                                          0.007      0 001
                                                                                                                                     0.001     -0.008
                                                                                                                                                0 008
                                                                                                                                                0.008
           (0 138)
           (0.138)  (0 019)
                    (0.019)           (0 226)
                                      (0.226)      (0 261)
                                                   (0.261)      (0 134)
                                                                (0.134)    (0 008)
                                                                           (0.008)    (0 002)
                                                                                      (0.002)    (0 060)
                                                                                                 (0.060)      (0 026)
                                                                                                              (0.026)   (0 010)
                                                                                                                        (0.010)     (0 003)
                                                                                                                                    (0.003)   (0 006)
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    1           0 014
                0.014      -0.008
                            0 008        0 269
                                         0.269       -0.011
                                                      0 011       0 050
                                                                  0.050     -0.003
                                                                             0 003      0 002
                                                                                        0.002      0 002
                                                                                                   0.002      -0.035
                                                                                                               0 035     -0.005
                                                                                                                          0 005     -0.003
                                                                                                                                     0 003     -0.006
                                                                                                                                                0 006
              (0 130))
              ((0.130)    ( 018))
                          (0
                          (0.018)      (0 213))
                                       ((0.213)     ( 246))
                                                    (0
                                                    (0.246)     (0 126))
                                                                ((0.126)   ( 007))
                                                                           (0
                                                                           (0.007)    (0 001))
                                                                                      ((0.001)   (0 057))
                                                                                                 ((0.057)    ( 024))
                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                             (0.024)    ( 009))
                                                                                                                        (0
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    ( 003))
                                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    ( 006))
                                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    2          -0 099
               -0.099       0 008
                            0.008        0 194
                                         0.194        0 080
                                                      0.080      -0 085
                                                                 -0.085      0 006
                                                                             0.006     -0 001
                                                                                       -0.001     -0 033
                                                                                                  -0.033      -0 028
                                                                                                              -0.028    0 018*
                                                                                                                        0.018*      -0 003
                                                                                                                                    -0.003     -0 009
                                                                                                                                               -0.009
              (
              (0.133))    (
                          (0.018))     (
                                       (0.217))     (
                                                    (0.251))    (
                                                                (0.129))   (
                                                                           (0.007))   (
                                                                                      (0.001))   (
                                                                                                 (0.058))    (
                                                                                                             (0.025))   (
                                                                                                                        (0.009)
                                                                                                                              )    (
                                                                                                                                   (0.003))   (
                                                                                                                                              (0.006))
    3          0.079
               0 079       -0.017
                            0 017
                            0.017       0 089
                                        0.089        -0.172
                                                      0 172
                                                      0.172      0 135
                                                                 0.135      -0.005
                                                                             0 005
                                                                             0.005     -0.001
                                                                                        0 001
                                                                                        0.001     0 021
                                                                                                  0.021      -0.049*
                                                                                                              0 049*
                                                                                                              0.049      -0.013
                                                                                                                          0 013
                                                                                                                          0.013    -0.006*
                                                                                                                                    0 006*
                                                                                                                                    0.006      0 003
                                                                                                                                               0.003
              (0 133)
              (0.133)     (0 018)
                          (0.018)      (0 219)
                                       (0.219)      (0 253)
                                                    (0.253)     (0 130)
                                                                (0.130)    (0 007)
                                                                           (0.007)    (0 002)
                                                                                      (0.002)    (0 058)
                                                                                                 (0.058)     (0 025)
                                                                                                             (0.025)    (0 009)
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    (0 003)
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    (0 006)
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    4         0 234*
              0.234*       -0.007
                            0 007        0 310
                                         0.310       -0.023
                                                      0 023       0 164
                                                                  0.164     -0.012
                                                                             0 012      0 000
                                                                                        0.000     -0.030
                                                                                                   0 030      -0.012
                                                                                                               0 012     -0.011
                                                                                                                          0 011     -0.001
                                                                                                                                     0 001     -0.004
                                                                                                                                                0 004
              ( 134))
              (0
              (0.134)     ( 018))
                          (0
                          (0.018)      (0 220))
                                       ((0.220)     ( 253))
                                                    (0
                                                    (0.253)     (0 130))
                                                                ((0.130)   ( 007))
                                                                           (0
                                                                           (0.007)    (0 002))
                                                                                      ((0.002)   ( 059))
                                                                                                 (0
                                                                                                 (0.059)     ( 025))
                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                             (0.025)    ( 009))
                                                                                                                        (0
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    ( 003))
                                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    ( 006))
                                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    5          0 142
               0.142       0 022
                           0.022        0 081
                                        0.081        -0 087
                                                     -0.087      0 160
                                                                 0.160      0 008
                                                                            0.008      -0 002
                                                                                       -0.002     0 024
                                                                                                  0.024       0 011
                                                                                                              0.011      -0 004
                                                                                                                         -0.004     -0 002
                                                                                                                                    -0.002     0 003
                                                                                                                                               0.003
              (0.135)
              (0 135)     (0.019)
                          (0 019)      (0.221)
                                       (0 221)      (0.255)
                                                    (0 255)     (0.131)
                                                                (0 131)    (0.007)
                                                                           (0 007)    (0.002)
                                                                                      (0 002)    (0.059)
                                                                                                 (0 059)     (0.025)
                                                                                                             (0 025)    (0.010)
                                                                                                                        (0 010)    (0.003)
                                                                                                                                   (0 003)    (0.006)
                                                                                                                                              (0 006)
    6          -0.064
                0 064      0 004
                           0.004        0 174
                                        0.174        0 214
                                                     0.214       -0.042
                                                                  0 042     -0.010
                                                                             0 010     0 000
                                                                                       0.000      0 011
                                                                                                  0.011       -0.013
                                                                                                               0 013     -0.013
                                                                                                                          0 013     0 001
                                                                                                                                    0.001      0 008
                                                                                                                                               0.008
              (0 134)
              (0.134)     (0 018)
                          (0.018)      (0 220)
                                       (0.220)      (0 254)
                                                    (0.254)     (0 131)
                                                                (0.131)    (0 007)
                                                                           (0.007)    (0 002)
                                                                                      (0.002)    (0 059)
                                                                                                 (0.059)     (0 025)
                                                                                                             (0.025)    (0 009)
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    (0 003)
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    (0 006)
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    7           00.030
                   030     -0.004
                            0 00
                              004        00.158
                                            158
                                             58      -0.139
                                                      0 139
                                                         39      -0.028
                                                                  0 0028
                                                                       8     0.000
                                                                             0 000      0.000
                                                                                        0 000     -0.079
                                                                                                   0 079      -0.027
                                                                                                               0 0027
                                                                                                                    7    -0.012
                                                                                                                          0 0012    -0.001
                                                                                                                                     0 00
                                                                                                                                       001     -0.004
                                                                                                                                                0 00
                                                                                                                                                  004
              (0 132))
              ((0.132)    ( 018))
                          (0
                          (0.018)      (0 217))
                                       ((0.217)     ( 251))
                                                    (0
                                                    (0.251)     ( 129))
                                                                (0
                                                                (0.129)    (0 007))
                                                                           ((0.007)   (0 001))
                                                                                      ((0.001)   ( 058))
                                                                                                 (0
                                                                                                 (0.058)     ( 025))
                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                             (0.025)    ( 009))
                                                                                                                        (0
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    ( 003))
                                                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    ( 006))
                                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)
    8          -0.087
                0 087      -0.012
                            0 012       0 260
                                        0.260        0 048
                                                     0.048       0 009
                                                                 0.009      -0.010
                                                                             0 010     -0.001
                                                                                        0 001     0 060
                                                                                                  0.060       -0.007
                                                                                                               0 007     -0.007
                                                                                                                          0 007     -0.001
                                                                                                                                     0 001     0 005
                                                                                                                                               0.005
              (0.127)
              (0 127)     (0.017)
                          (0 017)      (0.208)
                                       (0 208)      (0.241)
                                                    (0 241)     (0.124)
                                                                (0 124)    (0.007)
                                                                           (0 007)    (0.001)
                                                                                      (0 001)    (0.056)
                                                                                                 (0 056)     (0.024)
                                                                                                             (0 024)    (0.009)
                                                                                                                        (0 009)    (0.003)
                                                                                                                                   (0 003)    (0.006)
                                                                                                                                              (0 006)
    9          0.039       -0.019       -0.012      -0.345       0.155      0.000     -0.003**
                                                                                      -0.003**    -0.042      -0.020     -0.005     0.000      0.006
              (0 134)
              (0.134)     (0 018)
                          (0.018)      (0 219)
                                       (0.219)     (0 254)
                                                   (0.254)      (0 130)
                                                                (0.130)    (0 007)
                                                                           (0.007)     (0 002)
                                                                                       (0.002)   (0 059)
                                                                                                 (0.059)     (0 025)
                                                                                                             (0.025)    (0 009)
                                                                                                                        (0.009)    (0 003)
                                                                                                                                   (0.003)    (0 006)
                                                                                                                                              (0.006)

jjoint test,
       test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal
                                             q   to 0
    value
 p -value         0 48
                  0.48        00.72
                                 72      00.81
                                            81       00.88
                                                        88       0 56
                                                                 0.56       0 52
                                                                            0.52        0 32
                                                                                        0.32      0 84
                                                                                                  0.84         0 56
                                                                                                               0.56       0 21
                                                                                                                          0.21       0 79
                                                                                                                                     0.79       0 24
                                                                                                                                                0.24
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
p -value        0 39
                0.39        00.64
                               64      00.9
                                          9        00.83
                                                      83         0 49
                                                                 0.49       0 47
                                                                            0.47        0 26
                                                                                        0.26      0 78
                                                                                                  0.78         0 68
                                                                                                               0.68       02
                                                                                                                          0.2        08
                                                                                                                                     0.8        0 18
                                                                                                                                                0.18
N             42441       43116        43719    42489       40951      43000      42971      43427       43466       43728       42971         42971
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure to daylight hours over subsequent 30 days as fraction of peak daylight hours
during sample period. Gestation is either self reported or physician estimated. All samples use births with gestation between 37 and 42
weeks. Regressions include dummies for conception month, county and birth year. Italicized estimates may represent post natal
exposure ffor some sample     b
                       l members.   St
                                    Standard                 th
                                        d d errors iin parentheses,  **significant
                                                                        i ifi t att 10%
                                                                                    10%; ** significant
                                                                                             i ifi t att 5%
                                                                                                          5%; *** significant
                                                                                                                    i ifi t att 1%
Table 5: Effects of Ramadan Exposure in Months Prior to Birth on Disability Outcomes in Uganda

                                       M li
                                       Muslims                                                                 N Muslims
                                                                                                               Non-Muslims
                                                                                                               Non M li
M th
Months         (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)       (5)                 (6)             (7)         (8)           (9)     (10)
P i to
Prior  t                   Sight/
                           Si ht/     H i /
                                      Hearing/        M t l/
                                                      Mental/                                        Si ht/
                                                                                                     Sight/     H i /
                                                                                                                Hearing/     M t l/
                                                                                                                             Mental/
Bi tth
Birth      Disability
           Di sab
                bilitty     Bli d
                            Blind        Deaf
                                         Deaf         Lea i g
                                                      Learning     Psych.
                                                                   P sych           Disability
                                                                                    Di  sab
                                                                                          bilitty     Bli d
                                                                                                      Blind        Deaf
                                                                                                                   Deaf      Lea i g
                                                                                                                             Learning     Psych.
                                                                                                                                          P sych
   9        0 819**
            0.819**        0 349*
                           0.349*     0 243**
                                      0.243**         0 250***
                                                      0.250***      -0.098
                                                                     0 098             -0.023
                                                                                        0 023         -0.052
                                                                                                       0 052       0 028
                                                                                                                   0.028        -0.037
                                                                                                                                 0 037     0 045
                                                                                                                                           0.045
            (0 359))
            ((0.359)      (0 193))
                          ((0.193)     (0 117))
                                       ((0.117)        (0 071))
                                                       ((0.071)   (0 072))
                                                                  ((0.072)           (0 146))
                                                                                     ((0.146)       (0 080))
                                                                                                    ((0.080)     (0 052))
                                                                                                                 ((0.052)     (0 028))
                                                                                                                              ((0.028)   (0 030))
                                                                                                                                         ((0.030)
   8         0.087         -0.078       0.162          0.103       -0.068             -0.015         -0.043       0.043       -0.005      -0.028
            (0 337)
            (0.337)       (0 180)
                          (0.180)      (0 110)
                                       (0.110)        (0 066)
                                                      (0.066)     (0 067)
                                                                  (0.067)            (0 137)
                                                                                     (0.137)        (0 075)
                                                                                                    (0.075)      (0 049)
                                                                                                                 (0.049)     (0 026)
                                                                                                                             (0.026)     (0 028)
                                                                                                                                         (0.028)
   7          -0.132
               0 132        -0.022
                             0 022        00.13
                                             13         00.028
                                                           028      00.058
                                                                       058             -0.074
                                                                                        0 074       -0.142*
                                                                                                      0 142*       -0.006
                                                                                                                    0 006      -0.006
                                                                                                                                0 006      00.010
                                                                                                                                              010
            (0 349))
            ((0.349)      (0 187))
                          ((0.187)     (0 114))
                                       ((0.114)       (0 069))
                                                      ((0.069)    (0 069))
                                                                  ((0.069)           (0 142))
                                                                                     ((0.142)       (0 078))
                                                                                                    ((0.078)     (0 051))
                                                                                                                 ((0.051)    (0 027))
                                                                                                                             ((0.027)    (0 029))
                                                                                                                                         ((0.029)
   6          0.197         0.074        0.161          0.100      -0.098             -0.091          0.082       -0.007      -0.017       0.017
            (
            (0.353))      (
                          (0.189))     (
                                       (0.115))       (
                                                      (0.070))    (
                                                                  (0.070))           ( 44)
                                                                                     (0.144)        (
                                                                                                    (0.079))     (
                                                                                                                 (0.051))    (
                                                                                                                             (0.027))    (
                                                                                                                                         (0.029))
   5          0 085
              0.085        -0.004
                            0 004      0 197*
                                       0.197*         0 129*
                                                      0.129*       -0.058
                                                                    0 058              0 209
                                                                                       0.209         -0.111
                                                                                                      0 111        0 051
                                                                                                                   0.051       0 034
                                                                                                                               0.034       0 006
                                                                                                                                           0.006
            (0 348))
            ((0.348)      ( 187))
                          (0
                          (0.187)      ( 114))
                                       (0
                                       (0.114)        ( 069))
                                                      (0
                                                      (0.069)     ( 069))
                                                                  (0
                                                                  (0.069)            (0 143))
                                                                                     ((0.143)       ( 079))
                                                                                                    (0
                                                                                                    (0.079)      (0 051))
                                                                                                                 ((0.051)    (0 027))
                                                                                                                             ((0.027)    (0 029))
                                                                                                                                         ((0.029)
   4          0 273
              0.273         0 039
                            0.039        0 072
                                         0.072        0 117*
                                                      0.117        -0 049
                                                                   -0.049             -0 090
                                                                                      -0.090         -0 030
                                                                                                     -0.030        0 048
                                                                                                                   0.048      -0 004
                                                                                                                              -0.004      -0 017
                                                                                                                                          -0.017
            (
            (0.352))      (
                          (0.189))     (
                                       (0.115))       (
                                                      (0.070)
                                                            )     (
                                                                  (0.070))           (
                                                                                     (0.144))       (
                                                                                                    (0.079))     (
                                                                                                                 (0.051))    (
                                                                                                                             (0.027))    (
                                                                                                                                         (0.029))
   3          00.104
                 104
                  0         00.124
                               124       00.099
                                            099         00.039
                                                           039     -0.009
                                                                    0 009              00.003
                                                                                          003         00.115
                                                                                                         115
                                                                                                           5      -0.018
                                                                                                                   0 0018
                                                                                                                        8     -0.004
                                                                                                                               0 00
                                                                                                                                 004       00.010
                                                                                                                                              0010
                                                                                                                                                 0
            (0 364))
            ((0.364)      (0 195))
                          ((0.195)     (0 119))
                                       ((0.119)       (0 072))
                                                      ((0.072)    ( 073))
                                                                  (0
                                                                  (0.073)            (0 147))
                                                                                     ((0.147)       (0 081))
                                                                                                    ((0.081)     ( 053))
                                                                                                                 (0
                                                                                                                 (0.053)     ( 028))
                                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                                             (0.028)     (0 030))
                                                                                                                                         ((0.030)
   2         -0 266
             -0.266        -0 272
                           -0.272        0 026
                                         0.026        00.144**
                                                         144**     -0 019
                                                                   -0.019              0 039
                                                                                       0.039         -0 015
                                                                                                     -0.015        0 065
                                                                                                                   0.065      -0 043
                                                                                                                              -0.043       0 036
                                                                                                                                           0.036
            (
            (0.350))      (
                          (0.187))     (
                                       (0.114))        (
                                                       (0.069)
                                                             )    (
                                                                  (0.070))           (
                                                                                     (0.142))       (
                                                                                                    (0.078))     (
                                                                                                                 (0.051))    (
                                                                                                                             (0.027))    (
                                                                                                                                         (0.029))
   1         -0.103
              0 103
              0.103         0.018
                            0 018       0.086
                                        0 086          0.089
                                                       0 089       -0.034
                                                                    0 034
                                                                    0.034              0.208
                                                                                       0 208         -0.061
                                                                                                      0 061
                                                                                                      0.061       0.035
                                                                                                                  0 035       0.010
                                                                                                                              0 010       0.023
                                                                                                                                          0 023
            ( 366))
            (0
            (0.366)       (0 196))
                          ((0.196)     ( 120))
                                       (0
                                       (0.120)        ( 072))
                                                      (0
                                                      (0.072)     ( 073))
                                                                  (0
                                                                  (0.073)            (0 148))
                                                                                     ((0.148)       ( 082))
                                                                                                    (0
                                                                                                    (0.082)      ( 053))
                                                                                                                 (0
                                                                                                                 (0.053)     ( 028))
                                                                                                                             (0
                                                                                                                             (0.028)     ( 030))
                                                                                                                                         (0
                                                                                                                                         (0.030)
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
p -value     0.390         0.560        0.480          0.040       0.740               0.670         0.290        0.890       0.560       0.650
joint test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
     l
p -value      0.310         0.460
                              4          0.830         0.290       0.750
                                                                     7                 0.570
                                                                                          7          0.240
                                                                                                        4         0.910       0.490
                                                                                                                                4         0.580
M
Mean         3 80%
             3.80%        1 06%
                          1.06%         0 38%
                                        0.38%          0 14%
                                                       0.14%      0 14%
                                                                  0.14%              5 21%
                                                                                     5.21%          1 49%
                                                                                                    1.49%        0 61%
                                                                                                                 0.61%       0 17%
                                                                                                                             0.17%       0 20%
                                                                                                                                         0.20%
N            80924        80922         80923          80921      80921              640825         640789       640781      640777      640776
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure measured as the percent of days overlapping with Ramadan during the nine
months preceding birth (rampct). Each outcome is multiplied by 100, so that coefficients are in units of percentage points. All
regressions include an indicator for female, birth month dummies, district of birth dummies and birth year dummies.
Standard errors in parentheses, *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 6: Effects of Ramadan Exposure
                              p      in Months Prior to Birth on Other Outcomes,
                                                                       Outcomes, Ugandan
                                                                                  g      Muslims
                   S C
                   Sex Composition
                              i i off Ad
                                      Adult
                                          l PPopulation
                                                 l i                                        S i
                                                                                            Socioeconomic i O
                                                                                                            Outcomes
Monthsh         ( )
                (1)          ( )
                             (2)           ( )
                                           (3)          ( )
                                                        (4)              ( )
                                                                         (5)           ( )
                                                                                       (6)              ( )
                                                                                                        (7)           ( )
                                                                                                                      (8)         ( )
                                                                                                                                  (9)
P i to
Prior                        L
                             Log          L
                                          Log           L
                                                        Log            H
                                                                       Home                         Years
                                                                                                    Y       off       N
                                                                                                                      No
Bi th
Birth          Male
               M l       Population
                         P     l ti      Males
                                         M l         Females
                                                     F      l        Ownership
                                                                     O       hi     Illit t
                                                                                    Illiterate     S h li
                                                                                                   Schooling      S h li
                                                                                                                  Schooling    E l d
                                                                                                                               Employed
   9         -0.020**
              0 020**
              0.020         0 001
                            0.001        -0.030
                                          0 030
                                          0.030        0.053
                                                       0 053          -0.026**
                                                                       0 026**
                                                                       0.026          0 008
                                                                                      0.008           -0.088
                                                                                                       0 088
                                                                                                       0.088        -0.004
                                                                                                                     0 004
                                                                                                                     0.004       0.000
                                                                                                                                 0 000
              (0 009)
              (0.009)      (0 047)
                           (0.047)      (0 059)
                                        (0.059)       (0 065)
                                                      (0.065)          (0 012)
                                                                       (0.012)       (0 008)
                                                                                     (0.008)         (0 068)
                                                                                                     (0.068)       (0 007)
                                                                                                                   (0.007)      (0 009)
                                                                                                                                (0.009)
   8         -0.015*
               0 015*         0 015
                              0.015       -0.034
                                           0 034        0 081
                                                        0.081          -0.021*
                                                                         0 021*     -0.015**
                                                                                      0 015**      0 119*
                                                                                                   0.119*          -0.007
                                                                                                                    0 007        -0.001
                                                                                                                                  0 001
             (0 009))
             ((0.009)       (0 044))
                            ((0.044)     ( 056))
                                         (0
                                         (0.056)      (0 062))
                                                      ((0.062)         (0 011))
                                                                       ((0.011)      (0 007))
                                                                                     ((0.007)      ( 064))
                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                   (0.064)        ( 007))
                                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                                  (0.007)       ( 008))
                                                                                                                                (0
                                                                                                                                (0.008)
   7           -0.003        0.007        -0.055       0.083            -0.017        0.007         -0.009         0.001         -0.009
              (0 009)
              (0.009)       (0 045)
                            (0.045)      (0 057)
                                         (0.057)      (0 063)
                                                      (0.063)          (0 011)
                                                                       (0.011)       (0 008)
                                                                                     (0.008)       (0 066)
                                                                                                   (0.066)        (0 007)
                                                                                                                  (0.007)       (0 009)
                                                                                                                                (0.009)
   6         -0.021**
               0 021**       -0.047
                              0 047       -0.081
                                           0 081        0 01
                                                        0.01             0 008
                                                                         0.008       -0.014*
                                                                                       0 014*        0 01
                                                                                                     0.01         -0.013*
                                                                                                                    0 013*        0 013
                                                                                                                                  0.013
              (0 009))
              ((0.009)      ( 045))
                            (0
                            (0.045)      ( 057))
                                         (0
                                         (0.057)      (0 063))
                                                      ((0.063)         (0 011))
                                                                       ((0.011)      (0 008))
                                                                                     ((0.008)      (0 067))
                                                                                                   ((0.067)       (0 007))
                                                                                                                  ((0.007)      (0 009))
                                                                                                                                ((0.009)
   5           -0 015
               -0.015        0 069
                             0.069        0 014
                                          0.014       00.150**
                                                         150**          -0.018
                                                                        -0 018        0 012
                                                                                      0.012         -0 015
                                                                                                    -0.015         0 005
                                                                                                                   0.005       -0.019**
                                                                                                                               -0 019**
              (0.009)
              (0 009)       (0.045)
                            (0 045)      (0.057)
                                         (0 057)       (0 064)
                                                       (0.064)         (0.011)
                                                                       (0 011)       (0.008)
                                                                                     (0 008)       (0.067)
                                                                                                   (0 067)        (0.007)
                                                                                                                  (0 007)       (0 009)
                                                                                                                                (0.009)
   4         -0.016*
              0 016*
              0.016          0.002
                             0 002        -0.03
                                           0 03
                                           0.03        0.036
                                                       0 036            -0.010
                                                                         0 010
                                                                         0.010        0.008
                                                                                      0 008         -0.045
                                                                                                     0 045
                                                                                                     0.045         0.006
                                                                                                                   0 006         -0.001
                                                                                                                                  0 001
                                                                                                                                  0.001
             (0 009)
             (0.009)        (0 045)
                            (0.045)      (0 057)
                                         (0.057)      (0 064)
                                                      (0.064)          (0 011)
                                                                       (0.011)       (0 008)
                                                                                     (0.008)       (0 067)
                                                                                                   (0.067)        (0 007)
                                                                                                                  (0.007)       (0 009)
                                                                                                                                (0.009)
   3        -0.026***
             0 026***       -0.085*
                              0 085*     -0.148**
                                           0 148**      0 008
                                                        0.008            0 008
                                                                         0.008         0 002
                                                                                       0.002         0 061
                                                                                                     0.061         -0.002
                                                                                                                    0 002         0 005
                                                                                                                                  0.005
             (0 010))
             ((0.010)       (0 046))
                            ((0.046)      (0 057))
                                          ((0.057)    (0 064))
                                                      ((0.064)         (0 012))
                                                                       ((0.012)      (0 008))
                                                                                     ((0.008)      (0 069))
                                                                                                   ((0.069)       ( 008))
                                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                                  (0.008)       (0 009))
                                                                                                                                ((0.009)
   2           -0.009        0.025        0.001        0.066            -0.005        0.009         0.069          0.009         -0.002
              (0 009)
              (0.009)       (0 045)
                            (0.045)      (0 056)
                                         (0.056)      (0 063)
                                                      (0.063)          (0 011)
                                                                       (0.011)       (0 008)
                                                                                     (0.008)       (0 067)
                                                                                                   (0.067)        (0 007)
                                                                                                                  (0.007)       (0 009)
                                                                                                                                (0.009)
   1           -0.009
                0 009
                0.009        -0.025
                              0 025
                              0.025       -0.031
                                           0 031
                                           0.031        0 012
                                                        0.012            0 000
                                                                         0.000         0 005
                                                                                       0.005        -0.011
                                                                                                     0 011
                                                                                                     0.011         -0.005
                                                                                                                    0 005
                                                                                                                    0.005         0 001
                                                                                                                                  0.001
              ( 010))
              (0
              (0.010)       ( 047))
                            (0
                            (0.047)      ( 059))
                                         (0
                                         (0.059)      (0 065))
                                                      ((0.065)         (0 012))
                                                                       ((0.012)      (0 008))
                                                                                     ((0.008)      ( 069))
                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                   (0.069)        ( 008))
                                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                                  (0.008)       (0 009))
                                                                                                                                ((0.009)
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
p -value       0 100
               0.100         0 460
                             0.460         0 420
                                           0.420       0 520
                                                       0.520            0 050
                                                                        0.050         0 100
                                                                                      0.100         0 440
                                                                                                    0.440          0 390
                                                                                                                   0.390         0 460
                                                                                                                                 0.460
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
p -value       0 640
               0.640         0 360
                             0.360         0 570
                                           0.570       0 770
                                                       0.770            0 070
                                                                        0.070         0 070
                                                                                      0.070         0 380
                                                                                                    0.380          0 300
                                                                                                                   0.300         0 380
                                                                                                                                 0.380
Mean          0 506
              0.506           4 205
                              4.205       3 554
                                          3.554       3 399
                                                      3.399            0 734
                                                                       0.734          0 30
                                                                                      0.30          6 94
                                                                                                    6.94        0 25
                                                                                                                0.25           0 66
                                                                                                                               0.66
N             81197            648         653         649            40463          78990         60117       80142          74348
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure measured as the percent of days overlapping with Ramadan during the nine
months preceding birth (rampct). All regressions include birth month and birth year dummies. Columns 2-4 use data on population
counts
    t aggregated
              t d tto th
                      the llevell off birth
                                      bi th year and
                                                   d bi
                                                     birth
                                                        th month.
                                                              th CColumn
                                                                    l    1 and d columns
                                                                                   l     5-9
                                                                                         5 9 also
                                                                                              l include
                                                                                                  i l d district
                                                                                                        di t i t off birth
                                                                                                                     bi th d
                                                                                                                           dummies.
                                                                                                                               i
                           men. Columns 6-9
Column 5 is restricted to men                 6 9 include a dummy for females.
                                                                      females
Standard errors in parentheses
                   parentheses, *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 7: Effects of Ramadan Exposure
                              p      in Months Prior to Birth on Various Outcomes,
                                                                         Outcomes, Iraq
                                                                                      q
                            Di bili O
                            Disability Outcomes                                   S i
                                                                                  Socioeconomic
                                                                                             i OOutcomes
Monthsh         ( )
                (1)           ( )
                              (2)           ( )
                                            (3)         ( )
                                                        (4)            ( )
                                                                       (5)            ( )
                                                                                      (6)          ( )
                                                                                                   (7)            ( )
                                                                                                                  (8)
P i to
Prior                       Blind/
                            Bli d/        D f/
                                          Deaf/                     M li l
                                                                    Multiple         H
                                                                                     Home
Bi th
Birth       Disability
            Di  bilit       Vi i
                            Vision      H i
                                        Hearing        P h
                                                       Psych.        Wi
                                                                     Wives        Ownership
                                                                                  O       hi      M l
                                                                                                  Male         Employed
                                                                                                               E   l d
   9         0.333**
             0 333**
             0.333           0 022
                             0.022        -0.002
                                           0 002
                                           0.002      0.228***
                                                      0 228***
                                                      0.228         -0.542**
                                                                     0 542**
                                                                     0.542         -1.422**
                                                                                    1 422**
                                                                                    1.422         0 355
                                                                                                  0.355         1.097**
                                                                                                                1 097**
                                                                                                                1.097
             (0 141)
             (0.141)        (0 041)
                            (0.041)      (0 016)
                                         (0.016)       (0 070)
                                                       (0.070)       (0 276)
                                                                     (0.276)        (0 724)
                                                                                    (0.724)      (0 586)
                                                                                                 (0.586)        (0 444)
                                                                                                                (0.444)
   8           -0.160
                0 160        -0.017
                              0 017       -0.001
                                           0 001        0 013
                                                        0.013         -0.238
                                                                       0 238        -0.734
                                                                                     0 734          0 591
                                                                                                    0.591         0 079
                                                                                                                  0.079
              ( 129))
              (0
              (0.129)       ( 037))
                            (0
                            (0.037)      ( 015))
                                         (0
                                         (0.015)      (0 064))
                                                      ((0.064)       ( 252))
                                                                     (0
                                                                     (0.252)       ( 662))
                                                                                   (0
                                                                                   (0.662)        (0 536))
                                                                                                  ((0.536)      (0 406))
                                                                                                                ((0.406)
   7           -0.137        0.003        0.016        -0.105         -0.082      -2.063***
                                                                                  -2.063***        0.207        0.829**
                                                                                                                0.829**
              (0 130)
              (0.130)       (0 038)
                            (0.038)      (0 015)
                                         (0.015)      (0 065)
                                                      (0.065)        (0 260)
                                                                     (0.260)       (0 671)
                                                                                   (0.671)        (0 541)
                                                                                                  (0.541)       (0 410)
                                                                                                                (0.410)
   6            0 054
                0.054         0 002
                              0.002        0 003
                                           0.003        0 061
                                                        0.061         -0.404
                                                                       0 404       -1.422**
                                                                                     1 422**        0 049
                                                                                                    0.049       0 740*
                                                                                                                0.740*
              (0 128))
              ((0.128)      (0 037))
                            ((0.037)     (0 015))
                                         ((0.015)     (0 064))
                                                      ((0.064)       ( 256))
                                                                     (0
                                                                     (0.256)        (0 661))
                                                                                    ((0.661)      (0 533))
                                                                                                  ((0.533)      ( 403))
                                                                                                                (0
                                                                                                                (0.403)
   5           0 139
               0.139       0.079**
                           0 079**        0 021
                                          0.021        0 059
                                                       0.059          -0 221
                                                                      -0.221       -1.654**
                                                                                   -1 654**        -0
                                                                                                   -0.382
                                                                                                      382        0 361
                                                                                                                 0.361
              (0.126)
              (0 126)      (0 036)
                           (0.036)       (0.015)
                                         (0 015)      (0.063)
                                                      (0 063)        (0.252)
                                                                     (0 252)        (0 650)
                                                                                    (0.650)       (0.524)
                                                                                                  (0  524)      (0.397)
                                                                                                                (0 397)
   4           0.076
               0 076         0.056
                             0 056        -0.006
                                           0 006
                                           0.006       0.04
                                                       0 04         -0.482**
                                                                     0 482**
                                                                     0.482          -1.091
                                                                                     1 091
                                                                                     1.091         -0.153
                                                                                                    0 153
                                                                                                    0.153        0.164
                                                                                                                 0 164
              (0 132)
              (0.132)       (0 038)
                            (0.038)      (0 015)
                                         (0.015)      (0 066)
                                                      (0.066)        (0 238)
                                                                     (0.238)       (0 679)
                                                                                   (0.679)        (0 547)
                                                                                                  (0.547)       (0 414)
                                                                                                                (0.414)
   3            0 088
                0.088         0 016
                              0.016        0 002
                                           0.002       -0.001
                                                        0 001         -0.128
                                                                       0 128       -1.294*
                                                                                     1 294*        -0.545
                                                                                                    0 545       -0.853**
                                                                                                                  0 853**
              (0 132))
              ((0.132)      (0 038))
                            ((0.038)     (0 015))
                                         ((0.015)     ( 066))
                                                      (0
                                                      (0.066)        ( 249))
                                                                     (0
                                                                     (0.249)       (0 681))
                                                                                   ((0.681)       ( 548))
                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                  (0.548)        (0 415))
                                                                                                                 ((0.415)
   2           0.057         0.041        -0.006       0.03           -0.127       -1.638**
                                                                                   -1.638**        0.328         -0.337
              (0 129)
              (0.129)       (0 037)
                            (0.037)      (0 015)
                                         (0.015)      (0 064)
                                                      (0.064)        (0 240)
                                                                     (0.240)        (0 662)
                                                                                    (0.662)       (0 534)
                                                                                                  (0.534)       (0 404)
                                                                                                                (0.404)
   1            0 046
                0.046         -0.02
                               0 02
                               0.02        0 007
                                           0.007        0 01
                                                        0.01           0 106
                                                                       0.106        -0.951
                                                                                     0 951
                                                                                     0.951         -0.578
                                                                                                    0 578
                                                                                                    0.578       -0.741*
                                                                                                                  0 741*
                                                                                                                  0.741
              (0 136))
              ((0.136)      (0 039))
                            ((0.039)     (0 016))
                                         ((0.016)     (0 067))
                                                      ((0.067)       (0 260))
                                                                     ((0.260)      ( 702))
                                                                                   (0
                                                                                   (0.702)        ( 563))
                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                  (0.563)       (0 426))
                                                                                                                ((0.426)
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
p -value       0 110
               0.110         0 300
                             0.300         0 870
                                           0.870       0 020
                                                       0.020          0 340
                                                                      0.340         0 080
                                                                                    0.080          0 700
                                                                                                   0.700         0 000
                                                                                                                 0.000
joint test,
      test coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
p -value       0 080
               0.080         0 260
                             0.260         0 810
                                           0.810       0 010
                                                       0.010          0 450
                                                                      0.450         0 900
                                                                                    0.900          0 610
                                                                                                   0.610         0 000
                                                                                                                 0.000
Mean             1 48%
                 1.48%         0 12%
                               0.12%        0 02%
                                            0.02%       0 36%
                                                        0.36%         1 60%
                                                                      1.60%         73 68%
                                                                                    73.68%        49 00%
                                                                                                  49.00%      43 29%
                                                                                                              43.29%
N             256156         256156       256156      256156        68951         123743        256174       255109
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure measured as the percent of days overlapping with Ramadan durin
months preceding birth (rampct). All regressions include birth month and birth year dummies. Each outcome is multiplie
th t coefficients
that    ffi i t are iin units
                          it off percentage
                                       t    points.
                                              i t Columns
                                                    C l       5 and
                                                                  d 6 are restricted
                                                                             t i t d to
                                                                                     t men. All regressions
                                                                                                       i    on pooled
                                                                                                                  l d samp
and women include a dummy for females
                                   females.
Standard errors in parentheses
                   parentheses, *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 8: Effects of Ramadan Exposure
                              p      in Quarters
                                        Q        Prior to Birth on Various Outcomes,
                                                                           Outcomes, US

                                                 Panel A: Effects relative to exposure 3 quarters prior to birth quarter
Quarters                       Pooled                                         1980 Census                                     A
                                                                                                                              ACS, 2005-2007
Prior to    (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)          (9)         (10)       (11)            (12)
Birth    Disability     Less HS     Male        Log Earn.    Disability   Less HS Male           Log Earn.     Disability   Less HS Male              Log Earn.
   2       1.395         2.513       -2.610      -0.175**
                                                 -0.175 **     2.673       2.872      -2.246       -0.137        0.885       2.524     -3.426           -0.135
           1 143
           1.143         1 566
                         1.566        2 391
                                      2.391        0 081
                                                   0.081       1 680
                                                               1.680       2 960
                                                                           2.960       3 880
                                                                                       3.880        0 132
                                                                                                    0.132        1 445
                                                                                                                 1.445       1 845
                                                                                                                             1.845      2 948
                                                                                                                                        2.948            0 085
                                                                                                                                                         0.085
   1      3.495
          3
          3.495***
            495***       -0.282
                          0 282
                          0.282       -1.403
                                       1 403
                                       1.403       -0.073
                                                    0 073
                                                    0.073     3.591**
                                                              3 591**
                                                              3.591         -0.355
                                                                             0 355
                                                                             0.355      -2.467
                                                                                         2 467
                                                                                         2.467      -0.027
                                                                                                     0 027
                                                                                                     0.027     3.603***
                                                                                                               3 603***
                                                                                                               3.603         -0.659
                                                                                                                              0 659
                                                                                                                              0.659         -1.769
                                                                                                                                             1 769
                                                                                                                                             1.769      -0.002
                                                                                                                                                         0 002
                                                                                                                                                         0.002
           (1 098)
           (1.098)      (1 504)
                        (1.504)      (2 296)
                                     (2.296)      (0 078)
                                                  (0.078)     (1 647)
                                                              (1.647)      (2 899)
                                                                           (2.899)     (3 802)
                                                                                       (3.802)     (0 128)
                                                                                                   (0.128)      (1 386)
                                                                                                                (1.386)     (1 768)
                                                                                                                            (1.768)        (2 826)
                                                                                                                                           (2.826)     (0 082)
                                                                                                                                                       (0.082)
   0       1 940*
           1.940*        -0.373
                          0 373       -0.028
                                       0 028     -0.165**
                                                   0 165**    3.491**
                                                              3  491**      2 953
                                                                            2.953       -3.688
                                                                                         3 688     -0.246*
                                                                                                     0 246*      1 108
                                                                                                                 1.108       -2.176
                                                                                                                              2 176          1 22
                                                                                                                                             1.22       -0.078
                                                                                                                                                         0 078
           ( 132))
           (1
           (1.132)      ( 552))
                        (1
                        (1.552)      ( 370))
                                     (2
                                     (2.370)      (0 081))
                                                  ((0.081)    (1 697))
                                                              ((1.697)     ( 996))
                                                                           (2
                                                                           (2.996)     ( 930))
                                                                                       (3
                                                                                       (3.930)     (0 133))
                                                                                                   ((0.133)     ( 423))
                                                                                                                (1
                                                                                                                (1.423)     ( 817))
                                                                                                                            (1
                                                                                                                            (1.817)        (2 905))
                                                                                                                                           ((2.905)    ( 084))
                                                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                                                       (0.084)
joint test, coefficients
               ff        on quarters 1 to 3 equall to 0
     l
p -value     0 010
             0.010        0 160
                          0.160       0 610
                                      0.610         0 110
                                                    0.110      0 110
                                                               0.110        0 540
                                                                            0.540       0 820
                                                                                        0.820       0 220
                                                                                                    0.220        0 050
                                                                                                                 0.050       0 050
                                                                                                                             0.050          0 340
                                                                                                                                            0.340       0 320
                                                                                                                                                        0.320
Mean        6.07%
                %       13.01%
                             %       57.25%
                                          %        9.922       4.05%
                                                                   %       15.95%
                                                                                %      62.59%
                                                                                            %       8.996        7.09%
                                                                                                                     %      11.46%
                                                                                                                                 %      54.45%
                                                                                                                                             %         10.293
N           39568        4
                         41056        4
                                      40828        22648
                                                      4        12861        13764
                                                                              7 4       13659       6572
                                                                                                       7         26707
                                                                                                                    7 7      27292
                                                                                                                              7          27169
                                                                                                                                          7            16076
                                                                                                                                                           7

                                      P l B:
                                      Panel B Effects
                                              Eff t relative
                                                      l ti tot exposure in
                                                                        i birth
                                                                           bi th quarter
                                                                                     t and
                                                                                         d 3 quarters
                                                                                                 t prior
                                                                                                      i to
                                                                                                         t birth
                                                                                                           bi th quarter
                                                                                                                     t
Q t
Quarters                       Pooled
                               P l d                                          1980 Census
                                                                                   C                                           ACS,
                                                                                                                               ACS 2005
                                                                                                                                     2005-2007
                                                                                                                                          2007
P i to
Prior       ( )
            (1)            ( )
                           (2)          ( )
                                        (3)         (4)         ( )
                                                                (5)         ( )
                                                                            (6)          (7)        ( )
                                                                                                    (8)           ( )
                                                                                                                  (9)          ( )
                                                                                                                               (10)        ( )
                                                                                                                                           (11)          ( )
                                                                                                                                                         (12)
Bi h
Birth    Disability
         Di bili        L
                        Less  HS    M l
                                    Male        L E
                                                Log  Earn.   Disability
                                                             Di bili      L
                                                                          Less HS Male
                                                                                     M l         L Earn.
                                                                                                 Log E         Disability
                                                                                                               Di bili      L
                                                                                                                            Less  HS Male
                                                                                                                                        M l           L Earn.
                                                                                                                                                      Log  E
   2       0 280
           0.280        22.727**
                        2.727
                           727**      -2.594
                                       2 594
                                       2.594      -0.080
                                                   0 080
                                                   0.080       0 767
                                                               0.767       1 258
                                                                           1.258       -0.231
                                                                                        0 231
                                                                                        0.231      0 000
                                                                                                   0.000         0 243
                                                                                                                 0.243      33.784**
                                                                                                                            3.784
                                                                                                                               784**     -4.133*
                                                                                                                                          4 133*
                                                                                                                                          4.133         -0.090
                                                                                                                                                         0 090
                                                                                                                                                         0.090
          (0 940)
          (0.940)        (1 288)
                         (1.288)     (1 966)
                                     (1.966)     (0 067)
                                                 (0.067)      (1 401)
                                                              (1.401)     (2 465)
                                                                          (2.465)     (3 232)
                                                                                      (3.232)     (0 109)
                                                                                                  (0.109)       (1 186)
                                                                                                                (1.186)      (1 515)
                                                                                                                             (1.515)     (2 420)
                                                                                                                                         (2.420)       (0 070)
                                                                                                                                                       (0.070)
   1      2.516***
          2  516***      -0.095
                          0 095       -1.389
                                       1 389       0 011
                                                   0.011        1 833
                                                                1.833       -1.832
                                                                             1 832      -0.622
                                                                                         0 622      0 098
                                                                                                    0.098       33.036**
                                                                                                                    036**    0 452
                                                                                                                             0.452          -2.392
                                                                                                                                             2 392      0 038
                                                                                                                                                        0.038
           (0 938))
           ((0.938)     ( 285))
                        (1
                        (1.285)      ( 962))
                                     (1
                                     (1.962)      ( 067))
                                                  (0
                                                  (0.067)      ( 408))
                                                               (1
                                                               (1.408)     ( 482))
                                                                           (2
                                                                           (2.482)     ( 255))
                                                                                       (3
                                                                                       (3.255)     ( 108))
                                                                                                   (0
                                                                                                   (0.108)       (1 179))
                                                                                                                 ((1.179)   ( 504))
                                                                                                                            (1
                                                                                                                            (1.504)        ( 405))
                                                                                                                                           (2
                                                                                                                                           (2.405)     ( 070))
                                                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                                                       (0.070)
j i t ttest,
joint     t coefficients
               ffi i t on quarters
                               t   1 tto 3 equall tto 0
   value
      l
p -value     0.020
             0 020       0.080
                         0 080      0.400
                                    0 400           0.420
                                                    0 420      0.430
                                                               0 430        0.560
                                                                            0 560       0.980
                                                                                        0 980       0.630
                                                                                                    0 630        0 030
                                                                                                                 0.030       0 040
                                                                                                                             0.040          0 210
                                                                                                                                            0.210       0 270
                                                                                                                                                        0.270
Mean       6.07%
           6 07%        13 01%
                        13.01%       57 25%
                                     57.25%    9 922
                                               9.922       4 05%
                                                           4.05%      15 95%
                                                                      15.95%      62 59%
                                                                                  62.59%       8 996
                                                                                               8.996       7 09%
                                                                                                           7.09%    11 46%
                                                                                                                    11.46%              54.45%
                                                                                                                                        54 45%         10.293
                                                                                                                                                       10 293
N           39568        41056        40828    22648       12861       13764       13659       6572        26707     27292               27169         16076
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure measured as the percent of days overlapping with Ramadan during the
quarters preceding (or including) birth (rampct). All regressions include birth quarter, birth year and country of birth dummies.
Dichotomous
Di h t        outcomes
                 t      (disbaility,
                        (di b ilit lless HS and
                                              d male)
                                                   l ) are multiplied
                                                              lti li d b
                                                                       by 100
                                                                          100, so th
                                                                                  thatt coefficients
                                                                                           ffi i t are iin units
                                                                                                             it off percentage
                                                                                                                          t    points.
                                                                                                                                 i t All
regressions are on pooled samples of men and women include a dummy for females.
                                                                              females
                   parentheses, *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Standard errors in parentheses
                      Ramadan Appendix Material


Contents
A Biomedical Studies of Fasting                                                            ii
  A.1 First Stage Eﬀects of Ramadan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         ii
       A.1.1 Caloric Intake and Weight Among Fasting Adults . . . . . . . . . .             ii
       A.1.2 Is Ramadan Observed by Pregnant Muslims?           . . . . . . . . . . . .    iii
  A.2 Ramadan and Fetal Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       iv
       A.2.1 Pathways from Maternal to Fetal Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          iv
       A.2.2 Empirical Studies of Fetal Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        v
  A.3 Mechanisms of Fetal Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           v
  A.4 Ramadan and Perinatal Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
       A.4.1 Birth Outcomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
       A.4.2 Longer-term Eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
  A.5 Nutrition and the Sex Ratio at Birth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
  A.6 Hypotheses: Outcomes and Timing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           x

B Data                                                                                     x
  B.1 Michigan Natality Microdata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       x
  B.2 Uganda Census 2002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xii
  B.3 Iraq Census 1997 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
  B.4 US Census 1980, ACS, 2005-2007 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
  B.5 Other Suitable Datasets? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiv

C Birth Outcomes by Gestation Length                                                      xiv

D Distributional Eﬀects on Birth Weight                                                   xvi


E Appendix Tables & Figures
   Tables A1-A7, Figures A1-A4




                                     i
                           Ramadan Appendix Material


A         Biomedical Studies of Fasting
We begin by summarizing evidence on the “ﬁrst stage” eﬀect of fasting during Ramadan.
That is, what is the existing evidence that Ramadan fasting can have a detectable eﬀect
on health? In Section A.1, we consider studies of caloric intake and weight change during
intermittent fasting and summarize survey data on the prevalence of Ramadan fasting
among pregnant women. Second, we discuss the potential impacts of maternal biochemical
changes caused by fasting (accelerated starvation) on the fetus in Section A.2. Third,
we examine potential pathways by which intermittent fasting could have lasting eﬀects
through “fetal programming” in Section A.3. Fourth, we review the empirical studies that
have explicitly examined the eﬀects of Ramadan on birth and early childhood outcomes
in Section A.4. Fifth, we brieﬂy summarize a separate literature on nutrition and the sex
ratio at birth – which to date has not used Ramadan fasting for identiﬁcation – in Section
A.5 . Finally, we distill the preceding into research hypotheses which we will apply to our
data in Section A.6.


A.1        First Stage Eﬀects of Ramadan
A.1.1       Caloric Intake and Weight Among Fasting Adults

Ramadan fasting in the adult population (i.e. not conditioning on pregnancy) has been
associated with modest but statistically signiﬁcant declines in the weight of fasters of
around 1 to 3 kg (Husain et al. [1987]; Ramadan et al. [1999]; Adlouni et al. [1998]; Mansi
[2007]; Takruri [1989]) Reductions in weight are sometimes (but not always) accompanied
by declines in caloric intake and likely depend on dietary customs in speciﬁc countries.1
       Two studies are of particular relevance.       First, in a study of 185 pregnant women,
Arab [2003] found that over a 24 hour period encompassing the Ramadan fast, over 90
percent of the women had a deﬁciency of over 500 calories relative to the required energy
intake and 68 percent had a deﬁciency of over 1000 calories. Second, in the only large
scale population-based study we are aware of, Cole [1993] found striking evidence of sharp
weight changes during Ramadan for women in Gambia. The study was notable because it
used ﬁxed eﬀects with 11 years of panel data and controlled for calendar month, calendar
year, and stage of pregnancy (or lactation). Appendnix Figure A1, taken from the study,
shows that relative to the rest of the year, there is an increase in weight during the four
   1
    For example, Husain et al. [1987] found reductions in caloric intake of between 6 percent and 25
percent relative to nonfasting conditions among Malaysians. In contrast, Adlouni et al. [1998] found a 20
percent increase in calories per day among Moroccans.



                                            ii
                          Ramadan Appendix Material


weeks prior to Ramadan and a sharp increase in weight at the very beginning of Ramadan.
This is followed by an abrupt fall in weight of over 1kg (2.2 pounds) during the subsequent
3 weeks of fasting. The ﬁgure provides striking visual evidence that daytime fasting during
Ramadan is aﬀecting weight gain.
       In any case, as we discuss in section 2.1 of the paper, fasting may induce maternal
biochemical changes and reprogramming of the neuro-endocrine system due to alterations
in the the timing of nutritional intake even if overall caloric intake or weight change is
unaﬀected.

A.1.2       Is Ramadan Observed by Pregnant Muslims?

Although pregnant women may request an exemption from fasting, they are expected to
“make up” the fasting days missed during pregnancy after delivery and this requirement
may discourage pregnant women from seeking the exemption since they may be the only
member of the household fasting [Hoskins, 1992, Mirghani et al., 2004].2 Mirghani et al.
[2004] noted: “Most opt to fast with their families rather than doing this later”:636.
In addition, some Muslims interpret Islamic Law as requiring pregnant women to fast.
For example, the religious leader of Singapore’s Muslims held that: “a pregnant woman
who is in good health, capable of fasting and does not feel any worry about herself or
to her foetus, is required and expected to fast like any ordinary woman” [Joosoph and
Yu, 2004].3 Furthermore, since fasting during Ramadan is one of the ﬁve pillars of Islam
and is a central part of the culture of the Muslim community, many women fear a loss
of connection with the community or would feel guilty about not observing Ramadan
[Robinson and Raisler, 2005].
       As far as we are aware, comprehensive data on Ramadan fasting during pregnancy
do not exist. Various surveys of Muslim women suggest that fasting is the norm. For
example, of the 4,343 women delivering in hospitals in Hamadan, Iran in 1999, 71%
reported fasting at least 1 day, “highlighting the great desire of Muslim women to keep
fasting in Ramadan, the holy month”[Arab and Nasrollahi, 2001]. In a study in Singapore,
87% of the 181 muslim women surveyed fasted at least 1 day during pregnancy, and
74% reported completing at least 20 days of fasting [Joosoph and Yu, 2004]. In a study
   2
     There are some diﬀerences in interpretation of the Koran among Imams regarding whether pregnant
women must make up the fasting days later or simply pay alms for the poor, or both. See, for example,
http://islam1.org/iar/imam/archives/2006/09/09/fasting the month of ramadaan.php
   3
     Similarly, Arab and Nasrollahi [2001] noted that “According the Islamic teaching pregnant women
are allowed to fast if it is not harmful to them”; faculty at the Kurdistan Medical Science University
in Iran noted that pregnant and breastfeeding women “who fear for the their well being or that of the
foetus/child” may be exempted from fasting [Shahgheibi et al., 2005].


                                          iii
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


conducted in Sana’a City, Yemen, more than 90 percent fasted over 20 days [Makki, 2002].
At the Sorrento Maternity Hospital in Birmingham, England, three quarters of mothers
fasted during Ramadan [Eaton and Wharton, 1982]. In a study conducted in Gambia, 90
percent of pregnant women fasted throughout Ramadan [Prentice et al., 1983]. In the
US, a study of 32 Muslim women in Michigan found that 28 had fasted in at least one
pregnancy and reported that 60-90 percent of women from their communities fast during
pregnancy [Robinson and Raisler, 2005].
   In summary, survey data indicate that most but not all women observe the Ramadan
fast during pregnancy. To the extent that pregnant Muslim women do not fast, ITT
estimates are conservative estimates of fasting’s eﬀect. As discussed in Section 6 of the
main paper, fasting observance is likely highest in early pregnancy.


A.2     Ramadan and Fetal Health
A.2.1   Pathways from Maternal to Fetal Health

Does exposure to ketones during “accelerated starvation” (Section 2.1 of the main text)
impair the neural development of the fetus? Controlled studies of mice and rats have
shown that prenatal exposure to ketones result in impaired neurological development.
[Hunter and Sadler, 1987, Moore et al., 1989, Sheehan et al., 1985]. Hunter and Sadler
[1987] reference studies showing ketones “rapidly diﬀuse from the maternal circulation
across extraembryonic membranes”:263. They also point out that in addition to the
period of neurulation (3rd to 4th week of gestation in humans), the earliest stages of
embryogenesis when the “primitive streak” is observed (the 13th day post-conception),
may be especially susceptible to ketones. Moore et al. [1989] noted that “even a relatively
brief episode of ketosis might perturb the development of the early embryo”:248. They also
emphasize that the eﬀects of ketones were to slow neurological development rather than
to produce a malformation. This may explain why similar studies in human populations
have not (for the most part) found evidence of congenital malformations [ter Braak et al.,
2002]
   A related literature has examined the eﬀects of poor metabolic regulation during
pregnancy in mothers with Type 1 diabetes. In this case although the primary concern
is avoiding hyperglycemia (abnormally high blood glucose), this sometimes results in
severe cases of hypocglycemia (abnormally low blood glucose). The latter case may be
instructive for understanding the potential eﬀects of accelerated starvation since blood
glucose drops after a prolonged fast. Some studies of in utero exposure to hypocglycemia


                                      iv
                          Ramadan Appendix Material


among diabetic mothers have shown that fetal growth is reduced and that the key period
is between the fourth to sixth weeks of gestation [ter Braak et al., 2002]). It has also
been shown that hypoglycemia among non-diabetic mothers is also associated with lower
birth weight [Scholl et al., 2001]. Studies of diabetic mothers have shown long-term eﬀects
of accelerated starvation on cognitive functioning during childhood (Rizzo et al. [1991],
Langan et al. [1991]).

A.2.2    Empirical Studies of Fetal Health

Fetal health measures have the advantage of permitting panel data techniques to address
selection in to maternal fasting but the disadvantage of not being standardized health
metrics. Several studies of maternal fasting during Ramadan have found adverse eﬀects
on at least two of these fetal health indicators. Mirghani et al. [2004] found evidence of
reduced fetal breathing movements where measures of fetal breathing were taken both
before and after fasting on the same day. The same study, however, found no change
in overall body movements, fetal tone or maternal appreciation.4 Mirghani et al. [2005]
found a signiﬁcantly fewer heart rate accelerations among pregnant women who were
fasting during Ramadan late in pregnancy compared to controls. This was observed
despite relatively short diurnal fasts (less than 10 hours duration) and the absence of
signiﬁcant changes in glucose levels. DiPietro et al. [2007] found a strong association
between variation in fetal heart rate in utero and mental and psychomotor development
and language ability during early childhood. Finally, Mirghani et al. [2007] found no eﬀect
of Ramadan fasting on uterine arterial blood ﬂow.
   In contrast, studies of hypoglycemia in animals and humans have examined the fetal
heart rate, fetal breathing movements, and limb and body movements in order to identify
impairments to fetal development. A review of these studies in ter Braak et al. [2002] do
not show much aﬀect of moderate hypoglycemia on fetal conditions.


A.3      Mechanisms of Fetal Programming
We now discuss how disruptions to fetal health can have permanent eﬀects. In a review
of epidemiological studies on the fetal origins of adult diseases, Jaddoe and Witteman
[2006] describe two hypotheses related to our study. The ﬁrst is described as “fetal under-
nutrition.” According to this view, inadequate prenatal nutrition leads to developmental
adaptations that are beneﬁcial for short-term survival but lead to lower birth weight.
   4
     A signiﬁcant reduction in upper limb movements was noted but there was a concern that this might
be due to observer bias.


                                          v
                          Ramadan Appendix Material


However, by permanently reprogramming the physiology and metabolism of the fetus,
this ultimately makes the body susceptible to heart disease and diabetes during adult-
hood.5 Although most studies of fetal origins have relied on blunt measures such as birth
weight to proxy for nutritional restriction during pregnancy, a recurring theme in many
studies is that fetal programming may occur even in the absence of birth weight eﬀects.
For example, studies of the Dutch famine have showed that those exposed to the famine
early in gestation had dramatically higher rates of heart disease but did not have lower
birth weight [Painter et al., 2005]. Similarly animal studies have often found evidence
of fetal programming without detecting signiﬁcant changes in fetal weight. e.g. Nishina
et al. [2004]
      A second prominent hypothesis is that nutritional restrictions inhibit the development
of a placental enzyme that is required to convert cortisol into inactive cortisone, thereby
exposing the fetus to excessive amounts of cortisol. It is suggested that exposure to
glucocorticoids such as cortisol in utero leads to a reprogramming of the hypothalamic–
pituitary adrenal axis (HPA) which in turn, could lead to impaired fetal development and
worse health during adulthood.
      In controlled animal studies, researchers have linked nutritional restrictions very early
in gestation to an altered neuro-endocrine system, e.g., Nishina et al. [2004]. With respect
to humans, Herrmann et al. [2001] have shown an association between fasts of 13 hours or
longer and higher levels of plasma corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) which could
reﬂect a reprogramming of the HPA axis. As noted in the main text, Dikensoy et al. [2009]
show that Ramadan fasting is associated with elevated cortisol levels during pregnancy
(relative to pre-pregnancy levels), but not for non-fasting mothers. Kapoor et al. [2006]
describe how the eﬀects of fetal programming of HPA in humans may result in cognitive
impairment; due to the complex feedback mechanisms involved, these eﬀects may not be
evident “until adulthood or early old age”. The authors also emphasize that many of the
long-term eﬀects may be sex-speciﬁc.
      The existing literature on fetal origins however, has made little use of quasi-experimental
research designs to address potential confounding factors or to identify the underlying
mechanisms. Jaddoe and Witteman [2006] recently concluded: “Thus far, it is still not
known which mechanisms underlie the associations between low birth weight and diseases
in adult life. The causal pathways linking low birth weight to diseases in later life seem
to be complex and may include combined environmental and genetic mechanisms in var-
  5
    Jaddoe and Witteman [2006] note that this view has evolved into a more “general developmen-
tal plasticity model in which various fetal and post-natal environmental factors lead to programming
responses”:93.


                                         vi
                        Ramadan Appendix Material


ious periods of life. Well-designed epidemiological studies are necessary to estimate the
population eﬀect size and to identify the underlying mechanisms” Jaddoe and Witteman
[2006, 91].


A.4     Ramadan and Perinatal Health
A.4.1    Birth Outcomes

Existing studies of birth outcomes have relied on comparisons between mothers who re-
ported fasting to those who did not. Kavehmanesh and Abolghasemi [2004] compared 284
births to mothers in Tehran with a “history of fasting during pregnancy” to 255 mothers
who did not fast. Although there were no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences with respect
to maternal education or height, pre-pregnancy BMI’s were substantially higher in the
fasting group. For such comparisons, the conditional independence assumption required
for causal inference [Angrist and Pischke, 2009] is tenuous. Shahgheibi et al. [2005] studied
179 newborns for whom Ramadan fell in the third trimester of pregnancy. Among fasters,
birth weight was lower by 33 grams, birth length was lower by about 0.2 centimeters
while head circumference was larger by 0.08 centimeters. Since these diﬀerences were not
statistically signiﬁcant with the small sample used, the authors concluded that fasting
during the third trimester had “no eﬀect” on growth indices. Arab and Nasrollahi [2001]
studied 4,343 pregnancies in the Hamdan province of Iran and concluded that fasting
did not impact birth weight.     They did note however, that the incidence of low birth
weight (< 2500 grams) was higher among fasters in the second trimester but that this
was signiﬁcant only at the 9 percent level.
   The largest and perhaps most commonly cited study on the eﬀects of Ramadan on
birth weight conducted a retrospective analysis of 13,351 babies born at full term from
1964-84 in Birmingham, England Cross et al. [1990]. Babies were categorized as Muslim
on the basis of the ﬁrst three letters of the mother’s surname and were matched to control
groups by age. However, this study did not compare the birthweights of Muslims in
utero during Ramadan to Muslims who were not in utero during Ramadan but instead
compared across groups of Muslims and Non-Muslims. In addition, by design the study
did not look at the potential eﬀects of Ramadan on gestation length. Although Cross et al.
[1990] found no signiﬁcant eﬀects on mean birth weight, like Arab and Nasrollahi [2001],
they also found a higher incidence of low birth weight among fasters during the second
trimester. Opaneye et al. [1990] found that in Al-Kharj, Saudi Arabia, the incidence of
low birth weight increased during Islamic festivals, Ramadan in particular. 9.9% of the


                                      vii
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


415 births were below 2,500 grams during Ramadan, versus 6.3% for the 4,865 births in
non-Ramadan months. Finally, Malhotra et al. [1989] and Mirghani and Hamud [2006]
found no eﬀects on birthweight and APGAR scores, even though they detected substantial
biochemical changes.
   A separate literature has found that skipping meals (not associated with Ramadan)
has been associated with preterm delivery. Siega-Riz et al. [2001] studied diets during
the second trimester of pregnancy for over 2000 women in North Carolina and found that
women who did not follow the optimal guidelines of three meals and two snacks a day
were 30 percent more likely to deliver preterm. They suggest that this is consistent with
experimental evidence from animal studies. Herrmann et al. [2001] also reported that
women who fasted for 13 hours or more were three times more likely to deliver preterm.
   While most studies have focussed on birth weight, Mirghani and Hamud [2006] consid-
ered a broader range of birth outcomes. Speciﬁcally, they compared 168 pregnant fasters
to a control group of 156 non-fasting mothers and found signiﬁcantly higher rates of ges-
tational diabetes, induced labor, cesarian sections, and admission to the special baby care
unit.

A.4.2   Longer-term Eﬀects

We are aware of just one previous study of on long-term eﬀects of Ramadan. Azizi et al.
[2004] surveyed outcomes among 191 children enrolled in 15 Islamic primary schools in
Iran and their mothers about Ramadan fasting during pregnancy. Approximately half of
the mothers selected for the analysis sample reported fasting. More than 1,600 mothers
returned questionnaires regarding their fasting behaviour during pregnancy. However,
the fraction of this initial sample who fasted during pregnancy is not reported by Az-
izi et al. [2004]. Among fasting mothers, those fasting during the third trimester were
over-sampled. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the IQ’s of the children were found by mater-
nal fasting behaviour. As mentioned in the main text, Ewijk [2009] analyzes long-term
Ramadan eﬀects using the Indonesian Family Life Study data. This work was inspired
by ours and generally ﬁnds corroborative results.


A.5     Nutrition and the Sex Ratio at Birth
Widely studied in evolutionary biology, the Trivers-Willard hypothesis posits that the
reproductive success of sons is more sensitive to maternal condition than that of daughters
[Trivers and Willard, 1973]. Therefore, parents experiencing better conditions may favor


                                     viii
                        Ramadan Appendix Material


male oﬀspring. More generally, the sex ratio at birth and early childhood may proxy for
unobserved health conditions given disproportionate male susceptibility to fetal and infant
mortality [Kraemer, 2000, Mathews and Hamilton, 2005]. One proposed mechanism by
which adjustment to the sex ratio may take place is through the nutritional status of
the mother while pregnant [Cameron, 2004]. Roseboom et al. [2001] found that prenatal
exposure to the Dutch famine of 1944-45 reduced the sex ratio of live births. Similarly,
Almond et al. [2007] found the sex ratio in China was skewed toward females for cohorts
born during the Great Leap Forward Famine. Askling et al. [1999] showed that women
who experience severe morning sickness were much more likely to have girls.
   A widely-publicized study by Mathews et al. [2008] has for the ﬁrst time drawn a link
between maternal nutrition prior to conception and the sex ratio at birth. The authors
collected detailed information on food intake prior to pregnancy, early in pregnancy (14
weeks gestation) and late in pregnancy (28 weeks gestation) in Britain. They found no
diﬀerences in the rates of male births arising from diﬀerences in nutritional intake either
early or late in pregnancy but found a highly statistically signiﬁcant positive relationship
between high nutritional scores prior to conception and the birth of male oﬀspring. They
further examined the detailed data on sources of nutrition and found that among 133
food items consumed prior to pregnancy, only breakfast cereals was strongly associated
with infant sex. The authors speculated that the mechanism underlying this connection
is that the skipping of breakfast

     “extends the normal period of nocturnal fasting, depresses circulating glucose
     levels and may be interpreted by the body as indicative of poor environmental
     conditions.”

   Mathews et al. [2008] also referenced work by Larson et al. [2001] on in vitro fertiliza-
tion of bovine embryos showing that glucose “enhances the growth and development of
male conceptuses while inhibiting that of females.”
   The study by Mathews et al. [2008] was observational and did not explore the source
of dietary diﬀerences across mothers, nor did it control for some other factors known to
inﬂuence the sex ratio (e.g., partnership status at the time of conception [Norberg, 2004]).
Short of a controlled experiment, the research design utilized here has the advantage of
leveraging plausibly exogenous diﬀerences in maternal fasting.




                                      ix
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


A.6     Hypotheses: Outcomes and Timing
In this section, we distill ﬁndings from the biomedical literature most relevant to our
Ramadan analysis. Appendix Table A1 summarizes the set of health outcomes we might
expect to be aﬀected by fasting (column 1), notes the mechanism (column 2), and lists
the months of prenatal exposure that have been found or suggested to be particularly
important (column 3). These hypotheses are based on either a clearly deﬁned pathway
linking fasting to a particular outcome, or an empirical result that has been established,
irrespective of whether there is an explicit mechanism described in the study. In many of
the studies, the period of in utero exposure was selected by design and therefore does not
exclude eﬀects in other periods.
    In the case of birthweight, we describe four mechanisms through which fasting might
operate and one empirical ﬁnding based on the Dutch famine. Two of the birthweight
mechanisms are tightly linked to exposures occurring in early pregnancy.      For several
outcomes there are no clear hypotheses concerning timing that we could discern; a rea-
sonable hypothesis would be to jointly test the eﬀects of Ramadan exposure during all
gestation months.
    With respect to longer-term eﬀects, in virtually all cases exposure to fasting during
early pregnancy is the predominant hypothesis. For cognitive function, there are several
arguably distinct channels through which prenatal fasting might be detrimental.


B      Data

B.1     Michigan Natality Microdata
Our ancestry-based proxy for Muslim status is coded as follows. For births from 1989
to 1992, we include mothers who report their ancestry as “Arab/Middle Eastern” in
the ITT (whose pregnancies also overlap with a Ramadan). Starting in 1993, several
speciﬁc country codes for ancestry are reported. From 1993 to 2006 our ITT group
includes mothers who report ancestry as: Arab/Middle Eastern, Arab/North African,
Iran, Afghanistan, Mauritania, Somalia, Turkey or Western Sahara. Overall, 96% of our
treatment group report their ancestry as Arab/Middle Eastern, hence we refer to the
group as Arabs.
    We also implement several other sample selection rules to minimize measurement
error and misclassiﬁcation of Muslims into the control group. We dropped births with no
reported ancestry or where the ancestry might possibly include parents who are practicing


                                     x
                            Ramadan Appendix Material


Muslims (e.g. Southeastern Asians). We also dropped non-Arab Blacks to avoid the
possibility that there might be “Black Muslims” in our sample. We also dropped twin
births and restricted the sample to births among mothers between the ages of 14 and 45.
       The summary statistics are shown in Appendix Table A2. Arab mothers reported a
year less education than non-Arab mothers on average, and are substantially more likely
to receive Medicaid (46% versus 27%). Arab families are also larger (average parity is 18%
higher for Arabs). Despite these diﬀerences in socioeconomic measures, birth outcomes
are more similar. Rates of low birth weight and prematurity are actually slightly lower for
Arabs than for non-Arabs. The geographic distribution of Arabs by zipcode in Michigan
is shown in Appendix Figure A2. Somewhat surprisingly perhaps, Arabs do not appear
noticeably more concentrated around the Dearborn and Detroit area than non-Arabs
(Panel A).
       The key variables for assigning in utero Ramadan exposure are birth date and gestation
length. Michigan natality data include exact date of birth and a self-reported date of last
menstrual period (LMP) for about 70 percent of the sample. The problem of selective
reporting of LMP based on socioeconomic status is well known [Hediger et al., 1999].
There is also a ﬁeld containing the physician’s estimate of gestation length, but we do not
know how it is calculated or when during gestation.6 We follow related epidemiological
studies that utilize a simple algorithm for coding gestation (e.g., Siega-Riz et al. [2001],
Herrmann et al. [2001]): gestation based on LMP is used except if it is missing or if
it diﬀers with physician estimated gestation by more than 14 days, in which case the
physician estimated measure is substituted.
       Appendix Figure A3 provides a hypothetical example to illustrate how our daily mea-
sures of Ramadan exposure are calculated. In 1989, Ramadan began on April 7th and
ended on May 6th. For someone who was conceived on April 6th, his or her entire ﬁrst
month of gestation would overlap with Ramadan, i.e. exppct=1. Since during this Ra-
madan, daylight hours averaged about 13.7 hours per day, compared to 15.2 during the
summer solstice, the hours exposure measure (exphrspct) peaks at about 0.9.
   6
    A key concern is that this could be endogenous to Ramadan exposure. For example, if Ramadan
aﬀects fetal size and if physician estimates of LMP are based on measures of fetal size, this could lead to
mis-measurement of the timing of Ramadan exposure. In addition, this measure might not be calculated
uniformly and may depend on the timing of the ﬁrst doctor visit and could therefore, be correlated with
mother’s socioeconomic status.




                                            xi
                         Ramadan Appendix Material


B.2       Uganda Census 2002
The Uganda Census contains roughly 2.5 million records (10% sample). Our main anal-
ysis sample includes men and women ages 20 to 80. Individuals whose birth month or
birth year were imputed are dropped.7 For each outcome measure, we recoded those with
imputed data to missing. The disability question in the Uganda survey instrument asks:
“Does (name) have any diﬃculty in moving, seeing, hearing, speaking diﬃculty, mental
or learning diﬃculty, which has lasted or is expected to last 6 months or more?” The
following speciﬁc disabilities are recorded in the dataset: blind or vision impaired, deaf
or hearing impaired, mute, disability aﬀecting lower extremities, disability aﬀecting up-
per extremities, mental/learning disabilities and psychological disabilities. The original
unharmonized variables label the last two variables “mental retardation” and “mental
illness” while IPUMS-I relabelled them as “mental” and “psychological”. Our own read-
ing of the instructions to the Uganda Census enumerators suggests that this relabelling
was indeed appropriate. The former measure appears to identify those with “mental or
learning disabilities” while the latter identiﬁes those exhibiting “strange behaviors”. A
subsequent question asks about the origin of the reported disability. The responses are
coded into the following categories: congenital, disease, accident, aging, war injury, other
or multiple causes.
      The summary statistics are reported in Appendix Table A3. In contrast to Michigan,
Uganda Muslims tend to have higher average SES. Muslims are less likley to be illiterate
than non-Muslims (30% versus 36%) and completed more schooling. Disability rates for
Muslims are also lower – 3.8% versus 5.2% for non-Muslims. Both Muslims and non-
Muslims share a strong seasonality in the frequency of births by month. For both groups,
birth in June was more than 50% more likely than birth in December. The frequency
distribution across Ramadan ITT gestation months is much more uniform, and similar
between Muslims and non-Muslims.
      ITT assignment is determined by the reported birth month. We found age heaping:
spikes in the number of respondents reporting of ages ending in zeroes (e.g. 20, 30,
40), suggesting measurement error. We therefore excluded records reporting these round-
number ages.
  7
   The IPUMS-I “unharmonized” variables contain imputation ﬂags. We allowed records with “logical
imputations” but dropped records imputed by “hot-deck”.




                                        xii
                         Ramadan Appendix Material


B.3       Iraq Census 1997
The Iraq Census is also a 10 percent sample. We dropped individuals who reported ages
ending in seven because of heaping at those ages. We also drop those reporting birth
months of January and July because of heaping at those months. We also drop those
born before 1958 due to extremely high levels of missing values for month of birth. This
leaves us with a sample of over 250,000 individuals between the ages of 20 and 39 in 1997.
      The reduced number of birth cohorts can potentially aﬀect our ability to separate the
eﬀects of Ramadan exposure from season of birth trends for outcomes that are highly
seasonal. We found school related outcomes to be highly seasonal in Iraq. We suspect
that this is due to institutional factors that determine school starting or leaving ages at
particular dates of the calendar year. We ﬁnd, for example, that mean schooling levels were
about 12 percent higher for those born between September and December than for those
born between February and April. Because of the timing of Ramadan among the 1958 to
1977 cohorts, those born between February through April had no exposure to Ramadan
in the ﬁrst month of pregnancy, while those born between September and December had
mean exposure of about 0.11 thereby inducing a highly positve correlation between early
Ramadan exposure and schooling. In contrast, we ﬁnd no evidence of strong season of
birth patterns in our main outcomes of interest. For example, mean disability rates are
only about 1.2 percent lower for those born in September through December compared
to those born between February and April with no discernible monthly pattern.


B.4       US Census 1980, ACS, 2005-2007
We assigned our Muslim proxy to respondents born in a country which currently has at
least 80 percent Muslims.8 We used the following 38 countries: Saudi Arabia, Soma-
lia, Afghanistan, Maldives, Western Sahara, Turkey, Iran, Algeria, Mauritania, Yemen,
Tunisia, Oman, Comoros, Djibouti, Morocco, Pakistan, Libya, Iraq, Iraq/Saudi Arabia,
Tajikistan, Jordan, Qatar, Senegal, Azerbaijan, Egypt, Mali, Niger, Gambia, Uzbekistan,
Turkmenistan, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Syria, Guinea, Kuwait, Bahrain, West Bank and
Gaza. We excluded individuals who reported languages that would suggest they were
non-Muslims.9 We also dropped Iranian immigrants living in California who are predom-
inantly Jewish.
  8
     We took estimates derived from US State Departments’s International Religious Freedom Report,
the CIA World Factbook and Adherents.com as reported on the following Wikipedia URL:
  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islam by country
   9
     For example, some individuals born in Indonesia may report “Dutch” as their language.



                                        xiii
                           Ramadan Appendix Material


       In order to roughly gauge the extent of classiﬁcation error, we can consider data
from the 2001 Canada Census, which includes measures both of religion and country of
birth. 67% of Canadian immigrants born in our predominantly-Muslim countries reported
Muslim as their religion.10 If the immigration patterns were assumed to be identical, then
this would imply that roughly one in three of our sample of Census sample will not observe
the Ramadan fast because they are not Muslim. Our control sample was restricted to
whites born in the United States who did not report ancestries outside of the US or
Western Europe. We chose not to use reported ancestry for assigning the Muslim proxy
because of high rates of underreporting and the fact that it would combine ﬁrst and second
generation immigrants. We might suspect that that Ramadan observance is higher for
ﬁrst generation immigrants.
       For earnings we use the CPI to convert values into 1997 dollars and restrict the sample
to those aged 20 to 60 years.


B.5        Other Suitable Datasets?
The Uganda and Iraq Census microdata were obtained from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series - International (IPUMS-I). Other potentially relevant IPUMS-I samples
are those for Egypt, Jordan, and Malaysia. Each has a large population of Muslims with
Census data that purportedly include birth month.11 Religion is not reported for Egypt
and Jordan, but like Iraq, are overwhelmingly Muslim. However, in Egypt 85% of the
sample is missing birth month. 40% are missing birth month in Malaysia, and only .5%
of adults report a work disability. In Jordan’s data, birth year and place of birth are
missing.
       In the US, month of birth is not reported in the decennial Census. While the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) reports birth month, it does not disclose religion, detailed
ethnicity, or country of birth.


C         Birth Outcomes by Gestation Length
As noted in the main text, variation in gestation length can generate compositional eﬀects
for pregnancies exposed to Ramadan late in gestation. For example, pregnancies with
exposure to Ramadan in month 9 of pregnancy are exclusively full-term, but ITT estimates
  10
   We thank Kevin Milligan (UBC) for providing these estimates.
  11
   Birth month and religion are available in the census of South Africa (unharmonized variables in
IPUMS-I), but South Africa’s Muslim population is relatively small (roughly 1.5% of the population).



                                         xiv
                           Ramadan Appendix Material


of the month 9 eﬀect include premature births where Ramadan fell after delivery. Even
for earlier months of pregnancy, the relationship to the ITT may diﬀer depending on
gestation length. Finally, gestation itself may respond to the ITT.
       In Appendix Table A4, we vary the samples used to estimate birthweight eﬀects based
on the length of gestation. In column (1) we start with a sample of all births with gestation
length 25 weeks to 42 weeks allowing us to include preterm births. The coeﬃcients for
months 1 to 5 are interpretable for all sample members.12 We then progressively tighten
the sample restriction by increasing the lower bound on gestation age producing samples
of length 31-42 weeks in column (2), 35-42 weeks in column (3) and 39-42 weeks in
column (4). This gradually increases the number of exposure month coeﬃcients that can
be interpreted. Interestingly, this does not appear to have any pronounced eﬀects on the
results. With the larger samples that include some preterm births, exposure during the
sixth months is signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level in two of the three speciﬁcations. The
gestation samples that include pre-term births now provide additional evidence (on top
of the “no gestation” sample results from Table 1 of the main text), that the coeﬃcients
are jointly diﬀerent from zero with signiﬁcance levels ranging from 6.1 percent to 12.4
percent.
       In column (5) we attempt to address the fact that out ITT estimates may be attenuated
by the inclusion of Chaldeans, who are not Muslim but might self identify as Arab.
Speciﬁcally we use the sample of full-term births and drop mothers whose zipcode of
residence has a ratio of Chaldeans to Arabs of greater than 0.5 according to the 2000
Census. This drops our sample by more than 25 percent and raises the standard errors
considerably. However, there is some suggestive evidence of a stronger ITT eﬀect. The
most dramatic change is for exposure in the 7th month of gestation where we now see
an eﬀect: nearly a 60 gram drop in birthweight that is signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level.
The p-value on the F -test of joint signiﬁcance also falls to 0.071 from 0.277 in column
(4). In other speciﬁcations we have not always found much of a diﬀerence between the
overall sample and the sample that drops heavily Chaldean zipcodes. This may be due to
the large geographic overlap in the concentrations of Arabs and Chaldeans zipcodes and
the relatively coarse approach dictated by the available data. In this sub-sample, we are
arguably, estimating the eﬀects of Ramadan exposure among Arabs in less concentrated
areas where observance rates may be lower.
       In columns (6) through (9) we estimate the eﬀects of in utero Ramadan exposure on
  12
    For example, exposure in months 6 to 9 will include the eﬀects of Ramadan exposure in the postnatal
period for the small subsample of those with only 25 weeks gestation.



                                          xv
                           Ramadan Appendix Material


gestation weeks using the same approach on the full sample of Arabs. Among those with
25-42 weeks gestation, we estimate that Ramadan exposure during the second and ﬁfth
months of pregnancy reduces gestational age by a little more than 0.1 weeks or by roughly
a day (p < 0.10). However, these are the only months where exposure is statistically
signiﬁcant and we cannot reject that the ﬁrst ﬁve gestation months jointly, have no eﬀect.
The eﬀect from month 5 exposure weakens a bit as the sample is gradually restricted.
Interestingly, column (9) shows that when the sample is conﬁned to only full term births,
four gestation months (2, 3, 5 and 8) are signiﬁcant at at least the 10 percent level.
Finally, in column (10) with the more restricted sample of non-Chaldean zipcodes we ﬁnd
a highly signiﬁcant eﬀect from second month exposure. In order to assess what portion
of the birthweight eﬀect might be attributed to decreased gestation, we ran a separate
regression of birthweight on gestation for the sample of non-Arab mothers and found that
each additional week of gestation adds about 165 grams. This suggests that a reduction
in gestation of 0.1 weeks is associated with a 16 gram reduction in birthweight. From this
rough exercise, it appears that less than half of the overall reduction in birthweight of
around 40 grams that we typically estimate in Tables 1 and Appendix Table A4 is due to
reduced gestation as opposed intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). For those exposed
in the ﬁrst month of pregnancy, it appears that virtually all of the birthweight reduction
is due to IUGR.


D      Distributional Eﬀects on Birth Weight
In Figure A4 we show which parts of the birthweight distribution are aﬀected by early
exposure to Ramadan fasting. We plot kernal densities comparing the birthweight distri-
bution of those Arabs with no in utero exposure to those who had a signiﬁcant exposure
to Ramadan in the ﬁrst month of gestation (exphrspct1 > 0.5).13 Most of the eﬀect is
in the middle part of the distribution. Speciﬁcally, those with ﬁrst month exposure to
Ramadan are more likely to have birthweight between 2800 and 3200 grams and less likely
to have birthweight between 3250 and 3900 grams.14 This suggests that little of the eﬀect
is at the low end of the distribution among those classiﬁed as “low birthweight” (<2500
grams).
  13
     We also ran linear probability regressions using indicator variables of being in speciﬁc intervals of
the birthweight distribution (e.g. 300-600 grams, 600-900 grams etc.) as an outcome including our other
controls and obtained very similar results.
  14
     There are also small diﬀerences between the samples in the interval from 2100 grams to 2700 grams,
and for birthweight greater than 4500 grams.



                                           xvi
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


References
A Adlouni, N Ghalim, R Sale, N Had, and A Bensliman H Parra and. Beneﬁcial eﬀect
  on serum apo ai, apo b and lp ai levels of ramadan fasting. Clinica Chimica Acta, 271
  (2):179–189, March 1998.

Douglas Almond, Lena Edlund, Hongbin Li, and Junsen Zhang. Long-term eﬀects of
 the 1959-61 china famine: Mainland china and hong kong. NBER Working Paper No.
 13384, September 2007.

Joshua D. Angrist and Jörn-Steﬀen Pischke. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-
  cist’s Companion. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2009.

M Arab. Ketonuria and serum glucose of fasting pregnant women at the end of a day in
 ramadan. The Journal of Physiology, 553(2):637–647, 2003.

Malihe Arab and Shahla Nasrollahi. Interrelation of ramadan fasting and birth weight.
 Medical Journal of the Islamic Academy of Sciences, 14(3):91–95, 2001.

J. Askling, G. Erlandsson, M. Kaijser M, O. Akre, and A. Ekbom. Sickness in pregnancy
   and the sex of the child. Lancet, 354(9195):2053, December 1999.

Fereidoun Azizi, Hossein Sadeghipour, Behnam Siahkolah, and Nasrollah Rezaei-Ghaleh.
  Intellectual development of children born to mothers who fasted during pregnancy.
  International Journal of Vitamin and Nutrition Research, 74(5):374–380, September
  2004.

Elissa Z. Cameron. Facultative adjustment of mammalian sex ratios in support fo the
  trivers-willard hypothesis: evidence for a mechanism. Proceedings of the Royal Society
  B: Biological Sciences, 271(1549):1723–1728, 2004.

TJ Cole. Seasonality and Human Ecology, chapter Seasonal Eﬀects on Physical Growth
  and Human Development, pages 89–106. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1993.

JH Cross, J Eminson, and BA Wharton. Ramadan and birth weight at full term in
  asian moslem pregnant women in birmingham. Archives of Disease in Childhood, 653:
  1053–56, 1990.

E. Dikensoy, O. Balat, B. Cebesoy, A. Ozkur, H. Cicek, and G. Can. The eﬀect of Ramadan
  fasting on maternal serum lipids, cortisol levels and fetal development. Archives of
  gynecology and obstetrics, 279(2):119, 2009.

Janet A. DiPietro, Kathleen Costigan, Marc H. Bornstein, Chun-Shin Hahn, and Aris-
  tide Achy-Brou. Fetal heart rate and variability: Stability and prediction to devel-
  opmental outcomes in early childhood. Child Development, 78(6):1788–1798, Novem-
  ber/December 2007.

PM Eaton and PA Wharton. Applied Nutrition, chapter Sorrento Study of Nutrition in
 Pregnancy, pages 89–91. John Libbey, London, 1982.


                                   xvii
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


Reyn Van Ewijk. Long-term health eﬀects on the next generation of ramadan fasting
  during pregnancy. April 2009. CEP Discussion Paper No 926.

Mary L. Hediger, Mary D. Overpeck, Andrea McGlynn, Robert J. Kuczmarski, Kurt R.
 Maurer, and William W. Davis. Growth and fatness at three to six years of age of
 children born small- or large-for-gestational age. Pediatrics, 104(3):e33, 1999.

Tracy S Herrmann, Anna Maria Siega-Riz, Calvin J Hobel, Chandra Aurora, and Chris-
  tine Dunkel-Schetter. Prolonged periods without food intake during pregnancy increase
  risk for elevated maternal corticotropin-releasing hormone concentrations. American
  Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 185(2):403–412, 2001.

Ann Hoskins. Pregnancy and fasting during ramadan. British Medical Journal, 304(6836):
 1247, May 1992.

ES Hunter and TW Sadler. D-(-)-beta hydroxybutyrate-induced eﬀects on mouse embryos
  in vitro. Teratology, 36:259–64, 1987.

R Husain, MT Duncan, SH Cheah, and SL Chng. Eﬀects of fasting in ramadan on tropical
  asiatic moslems. British Journal of Nutrition, 5833(1):41–48, 1987.

Vincent W.V. Jaddoe and Jacqueline C.M. Witteman. Hypotheses on the fetal origins of
  adult diseases: Contributions of epidemiological studies. European Journal of Epidemi-
  ology, 21:91–102, 2006.

J Joosoph and S.L. Yu. A survey of fasting during pregnancy. Singapore Medical Journal,
  45(12):583–586, 2004.

Amita Kapoor, Elizabeth Dunn, Alice Kostaki, Marcus H. Andrews, and Stephen G.
 Matthews. Fetal programming of hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal function: Prenatal
 stress and glucocorticoids. Journal of Physiology, 572(1):31–44, 2006.

Zohreh Kavehmanesh and Hassan Abolghasemi. Maternal ramadan fasting and neonatal
  health. Journal of Perinatology, 24:748–750, 2004.

Sebastian Kraemer. The fragile male. BMJ, 321(7276):1609–1612, 2000.

SJ Langan, IJ Deary IJ, DA Hepburn, and BM Frier. Cumulative cognitive impairment
  following recurrent severe hypoglycaemia in adult patients with insulin-treated diabetes
  mellitus. Diabetologia, 34:337–344, 1991.

Melissa A. Larson, Koji Kimura, Michael Kubisch, and R. Michael Roberts. Sexual
 dimorphism among bovine embryos in their ability to make the transition to expanded
 blastocyst and in the expression of the signaling molecule ifn-t. PNAS, 98(17):9677–
 9682, 2001.

Abdulwahab M. Makki. Impact of ramadan fasting on birth weight in 4 hospitals in sanaa
 city,yemen. Saudi Medical Journal, 23(11):1419–1420, 2002.



                                    xviii
                       Ramadan Appendix Material


Ashok Malhotra, P.H. Scott, J.S. Scott, H. Gee, and B.A. Wharton. Metabolic changes in
  asian muslim pregnant mothers observing the ramadan fast in britian. British Journal
  of Nutrition, 61(3):663–672, May 1989.

Kamal Mohmoud Saleh Mansi. Study the eﬀects of ramadan fasting on the serum glu-
 cose and lipid proﬁle among healthy jordanian students. American Journal of Applied
 Sciences, 3(8):565–569, 2007.

Fiona Mathews, Paul J. Johnson, and Andrew Neil. You are what your mother eats:
  evidence for maternal preconception diet inﬂuencing foetal sex in humans. Proceedings
  of the Royal Society B, pages 1–8, April 2008.

T.J. Mathews and Brady E. Hamilton. Trend analysis of the sex ratio at birth in the
  united states. National Vital Statistics Reports, 53(20), June 14 2005.

Hisham M. Mirghani, Muntha Salem, and Sarath D. Weerasinghe. Eﬀect of maternal
  fasting on uterine arterial blood ﬂow. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research,
  33(2):151–154, April 2007.

Hisham M. Mirghani, Sarath Weerasinghe, Shamsaa Al-Awar, Lolowa Abdulla, and Mu-
  tairu Ezimokhai. The eﬀect of intermittent maternal fasting on computerized fetal heart
  tracing. Journal of Perinatology, 25:90–92, 2005.

H.M. Mirghani and Omer A. Hamud. The eﬀect of maternal diet restriction on pregnancy
  outcome. American Journal of Perinatology, 23(1):21–24, 2006.

H.M. Mirghani, S.D. Weerasinghe, J.R. Smith, and M. Ezimokhai. The eﬀect of intermit-
  tent maternal fasting on human fetal breathing movements. Journal of Obstetrics and
  Gynaecology, 24(6):635–637, September 2004.

DCP Moore, M Stanisstreet, and CA Clarke. Morphological and physiological eﬀects of
 beta-hydroxybutyrate on rat embryos grown in vitro at diﬀerent stages. Teratology, 40:
 237–51, 1989.

Hidenori Nishina, Lucy R. Green, Hugh H. G. McGarrigle, David E. Noakes, Lucilla
  Poston, and Mark A. Hanson. Eﬀect of nutritional restriction in early pregnancy on
  isolated femoral artery function in mid-gestation fetal sheep. Acta Medica Iranica, 42
  (3):209–212, 2004.

Karen Norberg. Partnership status and the human sex ratio at birth. Proceedings of the
 Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 271(1555):2403–2410, 2004.

A.A. Opaneye, D.D. Villegas, and Ali Abdel Azeim. Islamic festivals and low birthweight
  infants. The Journal of the Royal Society for the Promotion of Health, 110(3):106–107,
  June 1990.

Rebecca C. Painter, Tessa J. Roseboom, and Otto P. Bleker. You are what your mother
  eats: evidence for maternal preconception diet inﬂuencing foetal sex in humans. Re-
  productive Toxicology, 20:345–352, 2005.


                                    xix
                      Ramadan Appendix Material


AM Prentice, A Prentice, WH Lamb, PG Lunn, and S. Austin. Metabolic consequences
 of fasting during ramadan in pregnant and lactating women. Human nutrition. Clinical
 nutrition, 37(4):283–94, July 1983.

J Ramadan, G Telahoun, NS Al-Zaid, and M Barac-Nieto. Responses to exercise, ﬂuid,
  and energy balances during ramadan in sedentary and active males. Nutrition, 15(10):
  735–739, 1999.

T Rizzo, BE Metzger, WJ Burns, and K Burns. Correlations between antepartum mater-
  nal metabolism and child intelligence. New England Journal of Medicine, 325:911–916,
  1991.

Trinka Robinson and Jeanne Raisler. Each one is a doctor for herself: Ramadam fasting
  among pregnant muslim women in the united states. Ethnicity and Disease, 15:S1–99
  to S1–103, Winter 2005.

Tessa J. Roseboom, Jan H.P. Meulen, Anita C.J. Ravelli, Clive Osmond, David J.P.
  Barker, and Otto P. Bleker. Eﬀects of prenatal exposure to the dutch famine on adult
  disease in later life: An overview. Twins Research, 4(5):293–298, October 2001.

Theresa O Scholl, MaryFran Sowers, Xinhua Chen, and Carine Lenders. Maternal glucose
  concentration inﬂuences fetal growth, gestation and pregnancy complications. American
  Journal of Epidemiology, 154(6):514–520, 2001.

Shole Shahgheibi, Ebrahim Ghadery, Arash Pauladi, Sabah Hasani, and Syroos Shah-
  sawari. Eﬀects of fasting during the third trimester of pregnancy on neonatal growth
  indices. Annals of Alquds Medicine, 1426(2):58–62, 2005.

EA Sheehan, F Beck, CA Clarke, and M Stanisstreet. Eﬀects of beta-hydroxybutyrate on
 rat embryos grown in culture. Experentia, 41:273–75, 1985.

Anna Maria Siega-Riz, Tracy Hermann, David A Savitz, and John M Thorp. Frequency
 of eating during pregnancy and its eﬀect on preterm delivery. American Journal of
 Epidemiology, 153(7):647–652, 2001.

Hamed R Takruri. Eﬀect of fasting in ramadan on body weight. Saudi Medical Journal,
  10(6):491–494, 1989.

Edith W. M. T. ter Braak, Inge M. Evers, D. Willem Erkelens, and Gerard H. A. Visser.
  Maternal hypoglycemia during pregnancy in type 1 diabetes: maternal and fetal con-
  sequences. Diabetes/Metabolism Research And Reviews, 19:96–105, 2002.

Robert L. Trivers and Dan E. Willard. Natural selection and the ability to vary the sex
  ratio of oﬀspring. Science, 179(4068):90–92, January 1973.




                                    xx
Table A1: Summary
                y of Hypotheses
                      yp        Concerningg Outcomes Affected by
                                                               y Fastingg and Timingg In Utero


       Outcome                                    Description of Mechanism (studies)                             Gestation month
Birth Outcomes
Birthweightg              Direct effect of low blood glucose
                                                      g       ((Scholl et al
                                                                          al, 2001))                                   6 to   7
Birthweight               Exposure to ketones,
                                        ketones animal studies (Hunter,
                                                                  (Hunter
                                                                  (          1987; Moore
                                                                                    Moore, 1989))                        1
Birthweight               HPA axis (various studies)                                                                   1 to   2
Birthweight               Low birthweight due to shorter gestation (Siega-Riz et al,    al 2001)                       5 to   7
Birthweight               Empirical result --Dutch Famine (Painter
                                                              (         et al 2005))                                   7 to   9
Low Birth Weight          Empirical result (C(Cross et al 1990; A
                                                                Arab and Nasrollahi, 2001))                            4 to   6
G
Gestation
       i                  F i associated
                          Fasting       i d withi h high
                                                    hi h Plasma
                                                          Pl       CRH (Siega-Riz
                                                                         (Si    Ri et al, l 2001)                      5 to   7
NICU                      empirical
                              i i l result
                                         l (Mirghani
                                            (Mi h i and   d Hamud,
                                                            H      d 2006)                                               8
C-section
C section
     ti                   empirical
                              i i l result
                                         lt (Mirghani
                                            (Mi h i and   d Hamud,
                                                            H      d 2006)                                               8
I d d Labor
Induced    L b            empirical
                              i i l result
                                         lt (Mirghani
                                            (Mi h i and   d Hamud,
                                                            H      d 2006)                                               8
S R
Sex Ratio
        ti                Eff t off low
                          Effect    l    glucose,
                                          l       empirical
                                                      i i l result
                                                                 lt (Matthews
                                                                    (M tth      ett al,
                                                                                     l 2008)                             0

Long
L
Long-Term
   g Term
     T     O t
           Outcomes
Diabetes                  Fetal nutrition (various
                                           (         studies))                                                         1 to 3
Heart Disease             Fetal nutrition (various
                                           (         studies))                                                         1 to 6
Cognitive
  g       Function        Exposure
                            p       to ketones,
                                       ketones, animal studies (Hunter,
                                                                   (Hunter
                                                                   (       , 1987;; Moore
                                                                                    Moore,, 1989))                       1
Cognitive
  g       Function        Low blood glucose
                                     g        (Rizzo
                                              (        et al,
                                                          al, 1991))                                                   1 to 3
Cognitive
  g       Function        HPA axis ((Kapoor
                                         p    et al
                                                 al,, 2006))                                                           1 to 2
Cognitive Function        Fetal Heart Rate ((Mirghani
                                             (Mirghani, 2005))                                                         7 to 9
Adult Sex Ratio           HPA axis ((Kapoor et al,
                                                 al 2006))                                                             1 to 2
 Notes: This table is based on a review of selected studies and does not include all relevant studies in the medical
 literature. Studies include both human and animal studies. In many of the studies, the period of in utero exposure was
 selected by design and therefore the fact that an effect was found in the chosen gestation period does not rule out possible
 effects in other periods.
Table A2: Summary Statistics for Michigan Natality Data, 1989-2006
                                              Arab                             Non-Arab
                                   mean       s.d.          N        mean        s.d.         N
Mother’s Age                         27.54         5.72     46979      27.41          5.73   1638059
Mother’s Education                   12.03         3.55     45584      13.18          2.37   1625226
Father’s Age                         33.81         6.48     45588      30.21          6.13   1462349
Father’s Education                   12.92         3.33     43931      13.40          2.39   1428050
Male Child                            0.52         0.50     46983       0.51          0.50   1638213
Tobacco                               0.04         0.19     46203       0.19          0.39   1611440
Alcohol                               0.00         0.04     46170       0.02          0.12   1608527
Maternal Weight Gain                 29.73       12.70      42216      31.04        13.03    1520595
No Prenatal Care                      0.01         0.10     45068       0.01          0.08   1607940
Prenat. Care Begins 1st Trim.         0.86         0.34     45068       0.87          0.34   1607940
Prenat. Care Begins 2nd Trim.         0.10         0.29     45068       0.11          0.31   1607940
Prenat. Care Begins 3rd Trim.         0.03         0.17     45068       0.02          0.13   1607940
Medicaid                              0.46         0.50     46315       0.27          0.45   1616231
Fraction Arab, Zipcode                0.21         0.25     46369       0.01          0.03   1612481
Birthweight                         3325.08     513.65      46896    3427.71       565.23    1635183
Low Birthweight                        0.04       0.21      46988       0.05         0.21    1638244
Infant Death                           0.01       0.07      46988       0.01         0.08    1638244
Parity                                 1.64       1.74      46592       1.39         1.49    1628783
Preterm                                0.06       0.23      46868       0.07         0.25    1633654
Gestation (author’s calc.)            39.27       1.72      46868      39.29         1.85    1633654
Apgar 5 minute                         8.94       0.56      46902       8.94         0.67    1632994
NICU                                   0.03       0.17      46915       0.04         0.19    1634113
Complication                           0.25       0.43      46188       0.28         0.45    1618589
Abnormal Condition                     0.06       0.24      46012       0.07         0.25    1611065
Medical Risk                           0.20       0.40      46169       0.23         0.42    1618107
Medical Risk Diabetes                  0.03       0.16      46169       0.03         0.17    1618107
Born   January                        0.077       0.27      46988      0.078         0.27    1638244
Born   February                       0.074       0.26      46988      0.077         0.27    1638244
Born   March                          0.083       0.28      46988      0.087         0.28    1638244
Born   April                          0.079       0.27      46988      0.084         0.28    1638244
Born   May                            0.084       0.28      46988      0.088         0.28    1638244
Born   June                           0.087       0.28      46988      0.086         0.28    1638244
Born   July                           0.089       0.29      46988      0.089         0.28    1638244
Born   August                         0.091       0.29      46988      0.088         0.28    1638244
Born   September                      0.087       0.28      46988      0.085         0.28    1638244
Born   October                        0.084       0.28      46988      0.083         0.28    1638244
Born   November                       0.081       0.27      46988      0.076         0.27    1638244
Born   December                       0.083       0.28      46988      0.078         0.27    1638244
Mo.   1,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.056       0.15      46868      0.056         0.15    1633654
Mo.   2,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.059       0.15      46868      0.058         0.16    1633654
Mo.   3,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.058       0.15      46868      0.059         0.16    1633654
Mo.   4,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.059       0.15      46868      0.060         0.16    1633654
Mo.   5,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.057       0.15      46868      0.060         0.16    1633654
Mo.   6,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.056       0.15      46868      0.060         0.16    1633654
Mo.   7,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.056       0.15      46868      0.061         0.16    1633648
Mo.   8,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.057       0.15      46865      0.061         0.16    1633617
Mo.   9,   Ram   Hrs   Exposure       0.059       0.16      46861      0.060         0.16    1633475
Table A3: Summary Statistics for Uganda Census Sample
                                        Muslim                             Non-Muslim
                             mean       s.d.            N           mean      s.d.       N
female                         0.494      0.500             81197     0.498     0.500   643300
age                           34.546     12.675             81197    36.697    13.907   643300
illiterate                     0.304      0.460             78990     0.356     0.479   626473
years of schooling             6.944      3.269             60117     6.797     3.599   449968
no schooling                   0.247      0.431             80142     0.290     0.454   635282
employed                       0.660      0.474             74348     0.631     0.483   581842
elementary occupation          0.042      0.200             46284     0.042     0.200   347248
home ownership (males)
# of wives (males)
disability                    0.0380      0.191             80924    0.0521    0.222    640825
blind/vision impaired         0.0106      0.102             80922    0.0149    0.121    640789
deaf/hearing impaired         0.0038      0.062             80923    0.0061    0.078    640781
mute/speech impaired          0.0009      0.030             80921    0.0015    0.038    640780
lower extremities             0.0125      0.111             80921    0.0161    0.126    640794
upper extremities             0.0039      0.062             80921    0.0056    0.075    640779
mental/learning               0.0014      0.037             80921    0.0017    0.041    640777
psychological                 0.0014      0.038             80921    0.0020    0.045    640776
epilepsy                      0.0005      0.023             80921    0.0009    0.031    640777
rheumatism                    0.0009      0.030             80921    0.0016    0.039    640776
congen                        0.0050      0.070             80921    0.0058    0.076    640778
disease                       0.0203      0.141             80924    0.0283    0.166    640803
accident                      0.0056      0.074             80921    0.0079    0.088    640782
occupational injury           0.0053      0.072             80921    0.0074    0.086    640786
warinjury                    0.0007      0.027             80921    0.0013    0.036    640777
aging                         0.0053      0.072             80921    0.0074    0.086    640786
Born   January                  0.105     0.306             81197     0.096    0.294    643300
Born   February                 0.076     0.265             81197     0.075    0.263    643300
Born   March                    0.072     0.258             81197     0.072    0.259    643300
Born   April                    0.110     0.313             81197     0.106    0.308    643300
Born   May                      0.070     0.256             81197     0.070    0.256    643300
Born   June                     0.102     0.302             81197     0.105    0.307    643300
Born   July                     0.094     0.292             81197     0.098    0.298    643300
Born   August                   0.079     0.269             81197     0.083    0.275    643300
Born   September                0.079     0.269             81197     0.081    0.272    643300
Born   October                  0.078     0.268             81197     0.077    0.267    643300
Born   November                 0.069     0.253             81197     0.069    0.253    643300
Born   December                 0.067     0.250             81197     0.068    0.251    643300
rampct1                        0.081      0.215             81197     0.081    0.216    643300
rampct2                        0.079      0.214             81197     0.079    0.215    643300
rampct3                        0.077      0.211             81197     0.078    0.212    643300
rampct4                        0.084      0.219             81197     0.083    0.218    643300
rampct5                        0.086      0.223             81197     0.085    0.221    643300
rampct6                        0.084      0.217             81197     0.083    0.217    643300
rampct7                        0.087      0.222             81197     0.085    0.221    643300
rampct8                        0.090      0.226             81197     0.089    0.226    643300
rampct9                        0.087      0.221             81197     0.087    0.221    643300
Table A4: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Birthweight and Gestation,
                                                         Gestation by Varying Gestation,
                                                                              Gestation Michigan Arabs
                            D
                            Dependent
                                 d    variable
                                         i bl iis Birthweight
                                                  Bi h i h                                            D
                                                                                                      Dependent
                                                                                                           d    variable
                                                                                                                   i bl iis W
                                                                                                                            Weeks
                                                                                                                               k off Gestation
                                                                                                                                     G     i
G
Gestation
      i         (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)                (6)            (7)           (8)             (9)            (10)
 M th
 Month        25
              25-42
                  42         31
                             31-42
                                 42        35
                                           35-42
                                               42         39
                                                          39-42
                                                              42   N
                                                                   Non
                                                                   Non-Chaldean
                                                                         Chaldean
                                                                         Ch ld             25
                                                                                           25-42
                                                                                               42         31
                                                                                                          31-42
                                                                                                              42        35
                                                                                                                        35-42
                                                                                                                            42          39
                                                                                                                                        39-42
                                                                                                                                            42    Non
                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                  Non-Chaldean
                                                                                                                                                        Chaldean
                                                                                                                                                        Ch ld
exposure      weeks
                  k          weeks
                                 k         weeks
                                               k          weeks
                                                              k      39-42
                                                                     39 42 wks k           weeksk         weeksk        weeksk          weeksk      39-42
                                                                                                                                                    39 42 wks k
    1          -31.7
                31 7 *        -32.4
                               32 4 *       -41.6
                                             41 6 **       -40.6
                                                            40 6 **      -35.4
                                                                          35 4              -0.02
                                                                                             0 02          -0.03
                                                                                                            0 03         -0.06
                                                                                                                          0 06           -0.01
                                                                                                                                          0 01          -0.01
                                                                                                                                                         0 01
             (18 4))
             ((18.4)        (17 7))
                            ((17.7)       (17 1))
                                          ((17.1)        (18 9))
                                                         ((18.9)       (22 4))
                                                                       ((22.4)            (0 06))
                                                                                          ((0.06)        (0 06))
                                                                                                         ((0.06)       (0 05))
                                                                                                                       ((0.05)         (0 03))
                                                                                                                                       ((0.03)        (0 04))
                                                                                                                                                      ((0.04)
    2         -43 2 **
              -43.2          -37 1 **
                             -37.1         -29 2 *
                                           -29.2          -33 6 *
                                                          -33.6          -46 5 **
                                                                         -46.5             -0 11 *
                                                                                           -0.11          -0 07
                                                                                                          -0.07         -0 04
                                                                                                                        -0.04           -0 05 *
                                                                                                                                        -0.05          -0 10 ***
                                                                                                                                                       -0.10
             (
             (17.6))        (
                            (16.9))       (
                                          (16.3))        (
                                                         (17.9))        (
                                                                        (21.3))           (
                                                                                          (0.06))        (
                                                                                                         (0.05))       (
                                                                                                                       (0.05))         (
                                                                                                                                       (0.03))        (
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04))
    3          78
               7.8            79
                              7.9           -7.5
                                             75
                                             7.5          -11.3
                                                           11 3
                                                           11.3          -21.1
                                                                          21 1
                                                                          21.1             0.02
                                                                                           0 02           0 03
                                                                                                          0.03          -0.04
                                                                                                                         0 04
                                                                                                                         0.04           -0.07
                                                                                                                                         0 07 **
                                                                                                                                         0.07          -0.06
                                                                                                                                                        0 06
                                                                                                                                                        0.06
             (18 2))
             ((18.2)        (17 4))
                            ((17.4)       (16 8))
                                          ((16.8)        ( 4))
                                                         (18
                                                         (18.4)         ( 0))
                                                                        (22
                                                                        (22.0)            ( 06))
                                                                                          (0
                                                                                          (0.06)         ( 05))
                                                                                                         (0
                                                                                                         (0.05)        ( 05))
                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                       (0.05)          ( 03))
                                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                                       (0.03)         ( 04))
                                                                                                                                                      (0
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04)
    4         -11.3
               11 3          -12.1
                              12 1         -11.7
                                            11 7          -33.0
                                                           33 0 *        -25.8
                                                                          25 8             -0.03
                                                                                            0 03          -0.03
                                                                                                           0 03         -0.04
                                                                                                                         0 04           -0.03
                                                                                                                                         0 03          -0.04
                                                                                                                                                        0 04
             (18.2)
             (18 2)         (17.4)
                            (17 4)        (16.8)
                                          (16 8)         (18.6)
                                                         (18 6)         (22.3)
                                                                        (22 3)            (0.06)
                                                                                          (0 06)         (0.05)
                                                                                                         (0 05)        (0.05)
                                                                                                                       (0 05)          (0.03)
                                                                                                                                       (0 03)         (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                      (0 04)
    5         -24.7
                47           -15.7
                                 7         -20.3          -23.7
                                                              7          -39.9 *           -0.12 *        -0.08         -0.08 *         -0.06 *        -0.08 *
             (18 5)
             (18.5)         (17 8)
                            (17.8)        (17 2)
                                          (17.2)         (19 0)
                                                         (19.0)         (22 7)
                                                                        (22.7)            (0 06)
                                                                                          (0.06)         (0 06)
                                                                                                         (0.06)        (0 05)
                                                                                                                       (0.05)          (0 03)
                                                                                                                                       (0.03)         (0 04)
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04)
    6         -30.6
               30 6    *     -31.6
                              31 6 *       -30.8
                                            30 8 *        -14.4
                                                           14 4          -25.8
                                                                          25 8             -0.08
                                                                                            0 08          -0.09
                                                                                                           0 09         -0.08
                                                                                                                         0 08           -0.02
                                                                                                                                         0 02          -0.03
                                                                                                                                                        0 03
             ( 5))
             (18
             (18.5)         ( 8))
                            (17
                            (17.8)        ( 2))
                                          (17
                                          (17.2)         ( 0))
                                                         (19
                                                         (19.0)         ( 7))
                                                                        (22
                                                                        (22.7)            ( 06))
                                                                                          (0
                                                                                          (0.06)         ( 06))
                                                                                                         (0
                                                                                                         (0.06)        ( 05))
                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                       (0.05)          ( 03))
                                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                                       (0.03)         ( 04))
                                                                                                                                                      (0
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04)
    7         -22 7
              -22.7          -18 2
                             -18.2         -20 7
                                           -20.7          -29 5
                                                          -29.5          -56 8 ***
                                                                         -56.8             0 07
                                                                                           0.07           0 10 *
                                                                                                          0.10          0 08
                                                                                                                        0.08            0 03
                                                                                                                                        0.03           0 01
                                                                                                                                                       0.01
             (
             (18.2))        (
                            (17.5))       (
                                          (16.9))        (
                                                         (18.5))        (
                                                                        (21.8))           (
                                                                                          (0.06))        (
                                                                                                         (0.05))       (
                                                                                                                       (0.05))         (
                                                                                                                                       (0.03))        (
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04))
    8         32 8
              32.8     *     28 5
                             28.5     *    17 6
                                           17.6            9.7
                                                           97            26.9
                                                                         26 9              0 08
                                                                                           0.08           0 06
                                                                                                          0.06          0 01
                                                                                                                        0.01            -0.06
                                                                                                                                         0 06 *
                                                                                                                                         0.06          -0.07
                                                                                                                                                        0 07 *
                                                                                                                                                        0.07
             ( 7 6)
             (17
             (17.6)         ( 6 8)
                            (16
                            (16.8)        ( 6 2))
                                          (16
                                          (16.2)         (17
                                                         ((17.9)
                                                            7 9)        ( 3)
                                                                        (21
                                                                        (21.3)            (0 06)
                                                                                          (0.06)         (0 05)
                                                                                                         (0.05)        (0 05)
                                                                                                                       (0.05)          (0 03)
                                                                                                                                       (0.03)         (0 004))
                                                                                                                                                      (0.04)
    9         -19.9
               19 9          -20.7
                              20 7         -18.4
                                            18 4          -22.1
                                                           22 1          -26.6
                                                                          26 6             0 01
                                                                                           0.01           0 00
                                                                                                          0.00          0 02
                                                                                                                        0.02            -0.01
                                                                                                                                         0 01          -0.02
                                                                                                                                                        0 02
             (17.9)
             (17 9)         (17.2)
                            (17 2)        (16.6)
                                          (16 6)         (18.2)
                                                         (18 2)         (21.6)
                                                                        (21 6)            (0.06)
                                                                                          (0 06)         (0.05)
                                                                                                         (0 05)        (0.05)
                                                                                                                       (0 05)          (0.03)
                                                                                                                                       (0 03)         (0.04)
                                                                                                                                                      (0 04)
joint test,
       test all shaded coeff equal to 0
     l
p -value       0.065         0.124         0.061         0.277          0.071              0.262         0.091          0.116           0.160         0.143
j i t test,
joint t t all
            ll shaded
                h d d coeff
                         ff are equall
   value
p -value      0 156
              0.156         0.330
                            0 330          0 114
                                           0.114         0 830
                                                         0.830          0 207
                                                                        0.207              0 356
                                                                                           0.356         0 069
                                                                                                         0.069          0 098
                                                                                                                        0.098           0 316
                                                                                                                                        0.316         0 430
                                                                                                                                                      0.430
N           43626           43403        42874        30298         21890            43680         43619          43454          42923                21915
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure to daylight hours over subsequent 30 days as fraction of peak daylight hours during
sample period. Gestation is either self reported or physician estimated (see text). Shaded areas show coefficients that are relevant for given
      l C
sample.      l
          Columns  (5) andd (10) exclude   i
                                    l d zipcodesd withith a Ch  ld
                                                            Chaldean/Arab
                                                                      /A b ratio    05 C
                                                                               ti ¿=0.5. Controls
                                                                                            t l iinclude     th
                                                                                                     l d mothers   age, mother’s
                                                                                                                           th ’ age squared, d
mother’s education , tobacco use
                               use, alcohol use
                                             use, parity
                                                  parity, father’s education
                                                                   education, dummy for missing father’s education
                                                                                                         education, father’s age
                                                                                                                             age, father’s age squared ,
number of previous pregnancies that resulted in death at birth, conception month dummies, county dummies and birth year dummies.
Italicized estimates indicate that the estimate may represent post natal exposure for some sample members. Standard errors in parentheses,
*significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table A5: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Other Birth Outcomes by Gestation Month,
                                                                           Month Michigan Arabs
                  ( )
                  (1)           ( )
                                (2)            ( )
                                               (3)           ( )
                                                             (4)            ( )
                                                                            (5)            ( )
                                                                                           (6)            ( )
                                                                                                          (7)            ( )
                                                                                                                         (8)            ( )
                                                                                                                                        (9)
G
Gestation
      i          Low
                 L            Infant
                              I f           5-minute
                                            5 minute
                                                i         Maternal
                                                          M        l    Neonatal
                                                                        N         l
 M th
 Month          Bi th
                Birth          D th
                               Death        APGAR         Weight
                                                          W i ht        Intensive
                                                                        I t i                         Pregnancy
                                                                                                      P              Ab
                                                                                                                     Abnormal l     Congenital
                                                                                                                                    C       it l
exposure
  p            Weight
                    g        Perinatal        score         Gain        Care Unit       C-section
                                                                                        C  section   Complication
                                                                                                          p          Conditions      Anomaly  y
    1           -0.012
                 0 012         0 000
                               0.000          0 008
                                              0.008         0 613
                                                            0.613        -0.019**
                                                                          0 019**         -0.008
                                                                                           0 008        -0.033*
                                                                                                         0 033*        -0.003
                                                                                                                        0 003          0 005
                                                                                                                                       0.005
               (0 009)
               (0.009)        (0 001)
                              (0.001)        (0 021)
                                             (0.021)       (0 549)
                                                           (0.549)        (0 008)
                                                                          (0.008)        (0 015)
                                                                                         (0.015)        (0 018)
                                                                                                        (0.018)       (0 010)
                                                                                                                      (0.010)         (0 006)
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
    2          0.016*
               0 016*
               0.016           0.001
                               0 001        -0.047**
                                             0 047**
                                             0.047          0.380
                                                            0 380          0.008
                                                                           0 008          0.013
                                                                                          0 013         0.040**
                                                                                                        0 040**
                                                                                                        0.040           -0.006
                                                                                                                         0 006
                                                                                                                         0.006         -0.006
                                                                                                                                        0 006
                                                                                                                                        0.006
               (0 009)
               (0.009)        (0 001)
                              (0.001)        (0 020)
                                             (0.020)       (0 523)
                                                           (0.523)        (0 007)
                                                                          (0.007)        (0 015)
                                                                                         (0.015)        (0 017)
                                                                                                        (0.017)        (0 010)
                                                                                                                       (0.010)        (0 006)
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
    3           -0 01
                -0.01        00.003**
                                003**         -0 015
                                              -0.015        -0 286
                                                            -0.286         -0 006
                                                                           -0.006         -0 02
                                                                                          -0.02          0 000
                                                                                                         0.000          0 000
                                                                                                                        0.000          -0 007
                                                                                                                                       -0.007
               (0.009)        (0.001)        (0.020)       (0.543)        (0.008)        (0.015)        (0.018)        (0.010)        (0.006)
    4           -0.003
                 0 003
                 0.003         0.000
                               0 000          -0.008
                                               0 008
                                               0.008        -0.002
                                                             0 002
                                                             0.002        -0.013*
                                                                            0 013*
                                                                            0.013         0 011
                                                                                          0.011          -0.009
                                                                                                          0 009
                                                                                                          0.009        -0.018*
                                                                                                                         0 018*
                                                                                                                         0.018         -0.001
                                                                                                                                        0 001
                                                                                                                                        0.001
               ( 009))
               (0
               (0.009)        ( 001))
                              (0
                              (0.001)        ( 021))
                                             (0
                                             (0.021)       ( 546))
                                                           (0
                                                           (0.546)        (0 008))
                                                                          ((0.008)       ( 015))
                                                                                         (0
                                                                                         (0.015)        ( 018))
                                                                                                        (0
                                                                                                        (0.018)        (0 010))
                                                                                                                       ((0.010)       ( 006))
                                                                                                                                      (0
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
    5           -0.004         0.001          0.004          0.27          -0.007        -0.026
                                                                                         -0.026*         0.015         -0.018
                                                                                                                       -0.018*         -0.003
               (
               (0.009))       (
                              (0.001))       (
                                             (0.021))      (
                                                           (0.551))       (
                                                                          (0.008))       (
                                                                                         (0.016))       (
                                                                                                        (0.018))       (
                                                                                                                       (0.011))       (
                                                                                                                                      (0.006))
    6           0 001
                0.001          0 000
                               0.000        -0.050**
                                              0 050**       -0.006
                                                             0 006         -0.001
                                                                            0 001         0 008
                                                                                          0.008          -0.001
                                                                                                          0 001         0 015
                                                                                                                        0.015          0 005
                                                                                                                                       0.005
               ( 009))
               (0
               (0.009)        ( 001))
                              (0
                              (0.001)        (0 021))
                                             ((0.021)      ( 553))
                                                           (0
                                                           (0.553)        ( 008))
                                                                          (0
                                                                          (0.008)        ( 016))
                                                                                         (0
                                                                                         (0.016)        ( 018))
                                                                                                        (0
                                                                                                        (0.018)        ( 011))
                                                                                                                       (0
                                                                                                                       (0.011)        ( 006))
                                                                                                                                      (0
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
    7           0.003          0.000          -0.011      -1.085**
                                                          -1.085**         -0.006         0.001          -0.011         -0.006         -0.006
               (0 009)
               (0.009)        (0 001)
                              (0.001)        (0 020)
                                             (0.020)       (0 540)
                                                           (0.540)        (0 007)
                                                                          (0.007)        (0 015)
                                                                                         (0.015)        (0 018)
                                                                                                        (0.018)        (0 010)
                                                                                                                       (0.010)        (0 006)
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
    8         -0.020**
               0 020**         0 001
                               0.001          0 010
                                              0.010         0 172
                                                            0.172          -0.004
                                                                            0 004         -0.019
                                                                                           0 019         -0.024
                                                                                                          0 024         -0.004
                                                                                                                         0 004         0 003
                                                                                                                                       0.003
               (0 009)
               (0.009)        (0.001)
                              (0 001)        (0.020)
                                             (0 020)       (0.524)
                                                           (0 524)        (0.007)
                                                                          (0 007)        (0.015)
                                                                                         (0 015)        (0.017)
                                                                                                        (0 017)        (0.010)
                                                                                                                       (0 010)        (0.006)
                                                                                                                                      (0 006)
    9           0 004
                0.004          -0.001
                                0 001
                                0.001         -0.032
                                               0 032
                                               0.032        -0.387
                                                             0 387
                                                             0.387         0 008
                                                                           0.008          0 011
                                                                                          0.011          0 007
                                                                                                         0.007         0 017*
                                                                                                                       0.017*
                                                                                                                       0.017           0 008
                                                                                                                                       0.008
               (0 009)
               (0.009)        (0 00
                              (0.001)
                                 001))       (0 0020)
                                             (0.020)
                                                   0)      (0 53
                                                           (0.532)
                                                              532))       (0 007)
                                                                          (0.007)        (0 0015)
                                                                                         (0.015)
                                                                                               5)       (0 0018)
                                                                                                        (0.018)
                                                                                                              8)       (0 0010)
                                                                                                                       (0.010)
                                                                                                                             0)       (0 006)
                                                                                                                                      (0.006)
joint test
      test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 equal to 0
p -value          0.170        0.410          0.120         0.440          0.110          0.550          0.120          0.090          0.370

j i t test,
joint t t coefficients
             ffi i t on months
                           th 1 tto 9 are equall
    alue
p -value        0 130
                0.130      0 400
                           0.400           00.160
                                              160           0 350
                                                            0.350          0 090
                                                                           0.090          0 470
                                                                                          0.470          0 080
                                                                                                         0.080          0 060
                                                                                                                        0.060          0 280
                                                                                                                                       0.280

N               31857         31857           31817         29285         31824          31726           31745          31709          31710
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure to daylight hours over subsequent 30 days as fraction of peak daylight hours
during sample period
                period. Gestation is either self reported or physician estimated
                                                                       estimated. All samples use births with gestation between 25 and 42
weeks. All regressions include controls for mothers age, mother’s age squared, mother’s education , tobacco use, alcohol use, parity,
father’s education, dummy for missing father’s education, father’s age, father’s age squared, number of previous pregnancies that
resulted
     l d iin death
             d h at birth,
                     bi h conceptioni month  h dummies,
                                                d     i county d dummiesi andd birth
                                                                               bi h year dummies.
                                                                                          d      i    The
                                                                                                      Th sample l drops
                                                                                                                  d      Arab
                                                                                                                         A b mothers
                                                                                                                                 h
living in zipcodes with a large share of Chaldeans.
                                         Chaldeans Italicized estimates indicate that the estimate may represent post natal exposure for
some sample members.
               members Standard errors in parentheses,
                                              parentheses *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table A6: Effects of Ramadan Exposure
                               p      on Disability
                                                  y Outcomes,
                                                    Outcomes, Ugandan
                                                               g      Muslims by
                                                                               y Months Prior to Birth
Months
Prior to                                                               Mental/                              Lower             Upper
Birth            Disability       Sight/Blind      Hearing/Deaf        Learning        Psychological      Extremities       Extremities
   10              -0.127            0.000            -0.080             0.028             0.038             -0.112            0.032
                  (
                  (0.403))          (
                                    (0.216))         (
                                                     (0.132))           (
                                                                        (0.079))          (
                                                                                          (0.080))          (
                                                                                                            (0.236))          (
                                                                                                                              (0.133))
    9             0.793
                  0
                  0.793**
                    793**           00.349*
                                    0.349
                                       349*            00.227*
                                                       0.227
                                                          227*         0.255
                                                                       0
                                                                       0.255***
                                                                         255***            -0.091
                                                                                            0 091
                                                                                            0.091            0 312
                                                                                                             0.312             -0.064
                                                                                                                                0 064
                                                                                                                                0.064
                  (0 368)
                  (0.368)           (0 197)
                                    (0.197)            (0 120)
                                                       (0.120)          (0 073)
                                                                        (0.073)           (0 073)
                                                                                          (0.073)           (0 216)
                                                                                                            (0.216)           (0 122)
                                                                                                                              (0.122)
    8              0 035
                   0.035             -0.078
                                      0 078             0 129
                                                        0.129            0 115
                                                                         0.115             -0.052
                                                                                            0 052            0 011
                                                                                                             0.011             0 021
                                                                                                                               0.021
                  ( 375))
                  (0
                  (0.375)           ( 201))
                                    (0
                                    (0.201)            ( 123))
                                                       (0
                                                       (0.123)          ( 074))
                                                                        (0
                                                                        (0.074)           ( 075))
                                                                                          (0
                                                                                          (0.075)           ( 220))
                                                                                                            (0
                                                                                                            (0.220)           ( 124))
                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                              (0.124)
    7              -0 176
                   -0.176            -0 022
                                     -0.022             0 102
                                                        0.102            0 038
                                                                         0.038             0 071
                                                                                           0.071             -0 355
                                                                                                             -0.355            0 088
                                                                                                                               0.088
                  (0.375)
                  (0 375)           (0.201)
                                    (0 201)            (0.123)
                                                       (0 123)          (0.074)
                                                                        (0 074)           (0.075)
                                                                                          (0 075)           (0.220)
                                                                                                            (0 220)           (0.124)
                                                                                                                              (0 124)
    6              0 152
                   0.152             0 074
                                     0.074              0 132
                                                        0.132            0 11
                                                                         0.11              -0.084
                                                                                            0 084
                                                                                            0.084            -0.191
                                                                                                              0 191
                                                                                                              0.191            0 096
                                                                                                                               0.096
                  (0 382)
                  (0.382)           (0 205)
                                    (0.205)            (0 125)
                                                       (0.125)          (0 075)
                                                                        (0.075)           (0 076)
                                                                                          (0.076)           (0 224)
                                                                                                            (0.224)           (0 126)
                                                                                                                              (0.126)
    5               0 04
                    0.04             -0.004
                                      0 004             0 168
                                                        0.168           0 139*
                                                                        0.139*             -0.044
                                                                                            0 044            -0.085
                                                                                                              0 085            -0.025
                                                                                                                                0 025
                  (0 376))
                  ((0.376)          ( 202))
                                    (0
                                    (0.202)            ( 123))
                                                       (0
                                                       (0.123)          ( 074))
                                                                        (0
                                                                        (0.074)           ( 075))
                                                                                          (0
                                                                                          (0.075)           ( 221))
                                                                                                            (0
                                                                                                            (0.221)           ( 125))
                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                              (0.125)
    4              0 229
                   0.229             0 039
                                     0.039              0 044
                                                        0.044           0 127*
                                                                        0.127*             -0
                                                                                           -0.036
                                                                                              036            -0 007
                                                                                                             -0.007             0 19
                                                                                                                                0.19
                  (
                  (0.379))          (
                                    (0.203))           (
                                                       (0.124))         (
                                                                        (0.075)
                                                                              )           (
                                                                                          (0.076))          (
                                                                                                            (0.222))          (
                                                                                                                              (0.126))
    3              0 059
                   0.059             0 124
                                     0.124              0 071
                                                        0.071            0 049
                                                                         0.049             0 004
                                                                                           0.004             -0.158
                                                                                                              0 158
                                                                                                              0.158            -0.017
                                                                                                                                0 017
                                                                                                                                0.017
                  (0 391)
                  (0.391)           (0 210)
                                    (0.210)            (0 128)
                                                       (0.128)          (0 077)
                                                                        (0.077)           (0 078)
                                                                                          (0.078)           (0 229)
                                                                                                            (0.229)           (0 130)
                                                                                                                              (0.130)
    2              -0.307
                    0 307            -0.272
                                      0 272                0            0.153**
                                                                        0  153**           -0.007
                                                                                            0 007            -0.095
                                                                                                              0 095            0 012
                                                                                                                               0.012
                  ( 373))
                  (0
                  (0.373)           ( 200))
                                    (0
                                    (0.200)            (0 122))
                                                       ((0.122)         (0 074))
                                                                        ((0.074)          ( 074))
                                                                                          (0
                                                                                          (0.074)           ( 219))
                                                                                                            (0
                                                                                                            (0.219)           ( 124))
                                                                                                                              (0
                                                                                                                              (0.124)
    1              -0 158
                   -0.158            0 018
                                     0.018              0 052
                                                        0.052            0 101
                                                                         0.101             -0 017
                                                                                           -0.017            -0 106
                                                                                                             -0.106            -0 042
                                                                                                                               -0.042
                  (
                  (0.405))          (
                                    (0.217))           (
                                                       (0.132))         (
                                                                        (0.080))          (
                                                                                          (0.081))          (
                                                                                                            (0.237))          (
                                                                                                                              (0.134))
j i t ttest,
joint     t coefficients
               ffi i t on months
                             th 1 tto 9 equall tto 0
   value
      l
p -value             0.380
                     0 380          0.580
                                    0 580               0 680
                                                        0.680            0 060
                                                                         0.060             0 780
                                                                                           0.780             0 370
                                                                                                             0.370             0 830
                                                                                                                               0.830
M
Mean              3 80%
                  3.80%              1.06%
                                     1 06%             0.38%
                                                       0 38%             0.14%
                                                                         0 14%             0.14%
                                                                                           0 14%             1.25%
                                                                                                             1 25%             00.39%
                                                                                                                                  39%
N                 80924              80922             80923             80921             80921             80921              80921

N
Notes: All entries
               i are coefficients
                        ffi i     on Ramadan
                                     R   d exposure measured
                                                           d as the
                                                                 h percent off days
                                                                               d    overlapping
                                                                                        l   i with
                                                                                                i h Ramadan
                                                                                                    R   d during
                                                                                                            d i the
                                                                                                                 h nine
                                                                                                                    i
months preceding birth (rampct)
                         (rampct). Each outcome is multiplied by 100
                                                                  100, so that coefficients are in units of percentage points
                                                                                                                       points. All
regressions include an indicator for female
                                     female, birth month dummies,                                             dummies.
                                                         dummies district of birth dummies and birth year dummies
Table A7: Effects of Ramadan Exposure on Causes of Disabilities,
                                                   Disabilities Ugandan
                                                                 g      Muslims by
                                                                        Muslims, y Months Prior to Birth

M th
Months                  U l t d to
                        Unrelated t prenatal
                                         t l nutrition
                                               t iti                          P ibl Related
                                                                              Possibly R l t d to
                                                                                               t prenatal
                                                                                                      t l nutrition
                                                                                                            t iti
P i to
Prior t
Bi th
Birth            A id t
                 Accident          Occ. IInjury
                                   O        j          W Injury
                                                       War  I j               A i
                                                                              Aging          Di
                                                                                             Disease         Congenital
                                                                                                             C         it l
    9               -0.060
                     0 060             00.059
                                          059             0.054
                                                          0 05
                                                            054            0.373***
                                                                           0  373***
                                                                              373              0.199
                                                                                               0 199
                                                                                                  99             00.059
                                                                                                                    059
                  (0 142))
                  ((0.142)           (0 074))
                                     ((0.074)           (0 052))
                                                        ((0.052)            (0 136))
                                                                            ((0.136)         (0 267))
                                                                                             ((0.267)          (0 074))
                                                                                                               ((0.074)
    8              0 042
                   0.042              -0 023
                                      -0.023             0 001
                                                         0.001               0 137
                                                                             0.137            -0 025
                                                                                              -0.025            -0 023
                                                                                                                -0.023
                  (0.133)            (0.070)            (0.049)             (0.127)          (0.250)           (0.070)
    7              -0.102
                    0 102
                    0.102             -0.063
                                       0 063
                                       0.063             0.000
                                                         0 000               -0.034
                                                                              0 034
                                                                              0.034           -0.248
                                                                                               0 248
                                                                                               0.248            -0.063
                                                                                                                 0 063
                                                                                                                 0.063
                  (0 137)
                  (0.137)            (0 072)
                                     (0.072)            (0 050)
                                                        (0.050)             (0 132)
                                                                            (0.132)          (0 259)
                                                                                             (0.259)           (0 072)
                                                                                                               (0.072)
    6              -0.025
                   -0 025             00.050
                                         050             0.043
                                                         0 043              0.222*
                                                                            0 222*            -0.369
                                                                                              -0 369            00.050
                                                                                                                   050
                  (0 139)
                  (0.139)            (0 073)
                                     (0.073)            (0 051)
                                                        (0.051)             (0 134)
                                                                            (0.134)          (0 262)
                                                                                             (0.262)           (0 073)
                                                                                                               (0.073)
    5              0.127
                   0 127              -0.009
                                       0 009
                                       0.009            -0.085*
                                                         0 085*
                                                         0.085               -0.022
                                                                              0 022
                                                                              0.022           0.100
                                                                                              0 100             -0.009
                                                                                                                 0 009
                                                                                                                 0.009
                  (0 137)
                  (0.137)            (0 072)
                                     (0.072)            (0 050)
                                                        (0.050)             (0 132)
                                                                            (0.132)          (0 258)
                                                                                             (0.258)           (0 072)
                                                                                                               (0.072)
    4               0 179
                    0.179              0 018
                                       0.018              0 064
                                                          0.064               0 055
                                                                              0.055           -0.252
                                                                                               0 252             0 018
                                                                                                                 0.018
                  (0 139))
                  ((0.139)           (0 073))
                                     ((0.073)           (0 051))
                                                        ((0.051)            (0 133))
                                                                            ((0.133)         ( 261))
                                                                                             (0
                                                                                             (0.261)           (0 073))
                                                                                                               ((0.073)
    3              -0.09              0.031              0.047
                                                            47               0.110            0.006             0.031
                  (0 144)
                  (0.144)            (0 075)
                                     (0.075)            (0 053)
                                                        (0.053)             (0 138)
                                                                            (0.138)          (0 270)
                                                                                             (0.270)           (0 075)
                                                                                                               (0.075)
    2               0 161
                    0.161             -0.063
                                       0 063              0 021
                                                          0.021              -0.011
                                                                              0 011           -0.158
                                                                                               0 158            -0.063
                                                                                                                 0 063
                  (0 138))
                  ((0.138)           ( 072))
                                     (0
                                     (0.072)            (0 050))
                                                        ((0.050)            ( 132))
                                                                            (0
                                                                            (0.132)          ( 259))
                                                                                             (0
                                                                                             (0.259)           ( 072))
                                                                                                               (0
                                                                                                               (0.072)
    1               0.002             -0.086              0.057               0.051           -0.044            -0.086
                  (
                  (0.144))           (
                                     (0.076))           (
                                                        (0.053))            (
                                                                            (0.138))         (
                                                                                             (0.271))          (
                                                                                                               (0.076))
j i t test,
joint t t coefficients
             ffi i t on months
                           th 1 tto 9 equall tto 0
   value
p -value           0 710
                   0.710          00.730
                                     730                 0 460
                                                         0.460               0 210
                                                                             0.210            0 750
                                                                                              0.750             0 730
                                                                                                                0.730
jjoint test,
       test, coefficients on months 1 to 9 are equal
                                                q
    value
 p -value             0 640
                      0.640            00.640
                                          640            0 400
                                                         0.400               0 210
                                                                             0.210            0 730
                                                                                              0.730             0 640
                                                                                                                0.640
Mean               00.56%
                      56%             00.53%
                                         53%             0.07%
                                                         0 07%              0.53%
                                                                            0 53%             2.03%
                                                                                              2 03%             00.50%
                                                                                                                   50%
N                   80924              80922             80923              80921             80921              80921
Notes: All entries are coefficients on Ramadan exposure measured as the percent of days overlapping with Ramadan during th
months preceding birth (rampct). Each outcome is multiplied by 100, so that coefficients are in units of percentage points. A
regressions include an indicator for female, birth month dummies, district of birth dummies and birth year dummies.
Figure A1: Women’s Weight Change Around Ramadan in Gambia




Source: Cole (1993)
Figure A2: Michigan Arab Population by Zipcode

          Panel A: Quartiles of the Arab Population




          Panel B: Ratio of the Chaldean to Arab Population




Source: Author's calculations using the 2000 Census SF3 file
                                       Fi
                                       FigureA3:
                                              A3
                      FirstGestationMonthExposuretoRamadan
                      First Gestation Month Exposure to Ramadan
            1

           0.9

           0.8
           08

           0.7
           07

           0.6
           06




       e
     ure
   osure
           0.5
           05




  posure
Exposure
           0.4                                                    Ramadan

           0.3
           03                                                     exppct1
           0.2
           02                                                     exphrspct1
           0.1

            0
             3/1/89          4/1/89            5/1/89
                                 Conception Date
                                 ConceptionDate
                                                         Figure
                                                         Fi     A4
                                                                A4:
                              Distributional Effect of First Month Exposure on Birthweight
                   0.001

                  0.0009
                  0 0009

                  0.0008
                  0 0008

                  0 0007
                  0.0007




             ty
                  0.0006




          nsity
         ensity
                  0.0005




   nall density
                  0.0004




 ernal
Kernal
                  0.0003
                  0 0003

                  0.0002
                  0 0002

                  0.0001

                      0
                       1500     1800   2100   2400     2700         3000     3300    3600       3900   4200   4500   4800
                                                                       Birthweight

                                                     not in utero          1st month exposure
