NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

A FAITH-BASED INITIATIVE:
DOES A FLEXIBLE EXCHANGE RATE REGIME REALLY FACILITATE CURRENT ACCOUNT ADJUSTMENT?
Menzie D. Chinn
Shang-Jin Wei
Working Paper 14420
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14420
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We thank Charles Engel, Graciela Kaminsky and Franc Klaassen for very helpful comments. Chinn
acknowledges the financial support of faculty research funds of the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Menzie D. Chinn and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

A Faith-based Initiative: Does a Flexible Exchange Rate Regime Really Facilitate Current
Account Adjustment?
Menzie D. Chinn and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 14420
October 2008, Revised December 2011
JEL No. F3
ABSTRACT
The assertion that a flexible exchange rate regime would facilitate current account adjustment is often
repeated in policy circles. In this paper, we compile a data set encompassing data for over 170 countries
are included, over the 1971-2005 period, and examine whether the rate of current account reversion
depends upon the de facto degree of exchange rate fixity, as measured by two popular indices. We
find that there is no strong, robust, or monotonic relationship between exchange rate regime flexibility
and the rate of current account reversion, even after accounting for the degree of economic development,
the degree of trade and capital account openness. We also find that the endogenous selection of exchange
rate regimes does not explain the observed lack of correlation.
Menzie D. Chinn
Dept. of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
mchinn@lafollette.wisc.edu
Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu

“We also agreed that an orderly unwinding of global imbalances, while sustaining global
growth, is a shared responsibility involving ... greater exchange rate flexibility ...”
G-20 Communiqué, Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors, Cape
Town, South Africa, November 17-18, 2007.
“The third part of the strategy [to address global current account imbalances] was to increase

exchange rate flexibility in order to facilitate the adjustment of the current account over time.”
John Taylor, Professor of Economics at Stanford University, speech at the IMF on April
21, 2006.
“From a global perspective, exchange rate flexibility ... would also help contribute to an orderly
process for resolving global current account imbalances.”

IMF Staff, “People’s Republic of China: Staff Report for the 2006 Article IV
Consultation.”

I. Introduction
It is often asserted that a more flexible exchange rate regime would promote current
account adjustment. The three quotes at the beginning of the paper come from a group of large
national governments, a prominent academic, and a premier international financial institution,
respectively. Moving to a more flexible exchange rate in order to facilitate current account
adjustment is a frequent policy recommendation made by the IMF and others. Curiously, this is
not a proposition that emerges from formal models in international macroeconomics as codified
in the graduate-level textbooks by Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) and Vegh (forthcoming). The lack
of a formal model is not a problem for the proposition if it is considered self evident by now.
Indeed, the logic was expounded more than half a century ago by Milton Friedman in his famous
essay, “The case for flexible exchange rates” (Friedman, 1953). However, the Friedman essay
was written during an era of limited financial integration which could be different from today’s
world with substantially more cross-border capital flows. In any case, there is no systematic
1

statistical evidence that we can find supporting this supposition, for either the recent period of
elevated financial integration, or the earlier period. Until one finds persuasive evidence, the
policy recommendation is only a faith-based initiative – based on something widely assumed to
be true, actively peddled to countries as a truth, but with little solid empirical support.
Indeed, it is not difficult to find counter-examples. While both Egypt and China have a
relatively rigid exchange rate regime, Egypt has a relatively fast current account convergence but
China does not. On the other hand, while both South Africa and Japan have a flexible exchange
rate regime, South Africa has a relatively fast convergence but Japan does not. While we can
come up with other examples, there is a limit to how much we can learn from individual cases.
In this paper, we seek to address this deficiency by systematically investigating any
relationship in the data between exchange rate regimes and speed of current account adjustment.
Rather than using officially announced exchange rate regimes, we appeal to de facto regimes in
place. We utilize two well-established and familiar approaches to classifying a country’s
exchange rate regime on a de facto basis, by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003a,b), and by
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), respectively.
It is important to note that we focus on the speed of current account convergence toward
the mean. If an “orderly current account adjustment” has other connotations, they would lie
outside the scope of our investigation. Moreover, we are not making the claim that a faster
current account adjustment necessarily represent higher welfare., In general, a free float does not
necessarily lead to efficient levels of exchange rates, as highlighted by Corsetti et al.
(forthcoming). The mapping between welfare and exchange rate regime depends on whether the
financial market is complete and prices are flexible and whether exporters predominantly follow
“local currency pricing” or “producer currency pricing,” among other things. Our goal is more

2

limited, in that we seek to determine whether more rapid adjustment in a statistical sense occurs
under more flexible regimes. Given the enormous effort by international financial institutions
and some national governments in linking more flexible regimes with faster current account
adjustments, this research question should still have important relevance for economic policy
making.
To anticipate the results, after experimenting with a large number of statistical
specifications, we find no support in the data for the notion that countries on a more flexible
exchange rate regime robustly exhibit a faster convergence of their current account (as a
percentage of their GDP) to the long run equilibrium, regardless of which de facto exchange rate
regime classification scheme we employ. This is true when we control for trade and financial
openness; and when we separate large and small countries.
To be sure, the current account balance does have a tendency to revert to its long run
steady state; it does not wander off or stay away from the long run equilibrium forever. This is
clearly reflected in our empirical work. However, the speed of adjustment is not systematically
related to the degree of flexibility of a country’s nominal exchange rate regime.
This empirical result presents a challenge to the Friedman (1953) hypothesis on the merit
of a flexible regime in promoting faster external adjustment, and a challenge to a key policy
recommendation by international financial institutions in using exchange rate flexibility to
reduce global current account imbalances. To understand why the pattern may be reasonable, the
second part of our analysis examines whether the nature of a country’s nominal exchange rate
regime significantly affects the pace of real exchange rate adjustment. The current account
responds to real exchange rate, not the nominal exchange rate. If the real exchange rate
adjustment does not depend on the nominal exchange rate regime, then the current account

3

adjustment would not depend on nominal exchange rate regime either. Indeed, we find that the
real exchange rate adjustment is not systematically related to how flexible a country’s nominal
exchange rate regime is. Again, this is true regardless of which de facto exchange rate regime
classification we use. If anything, there is slight, but not very robust evidence that less flexible
nominal exchange rate regimes sometimes exhibit faster real exchange rate adjustment. While
the evidence on real exchange rate adjustment is suggestive, we hope this paper could inspire
additional work in re-thinking the role of a nominal exchange rate regime in an economy’s
external adjustment.
The literature on current account is too large to be comprehensively summarized here. In
terms of relatively recent theoretical work, Blanchard (2007) points out that one cannot
automatically assume that a current account imbalance needs to be corrected by a policy unless
one has clearly identified the relevant distortions. For recent empirical work on estimating
current account adjustment, an excellent set of papers is collected in Clarida (2007), which in
turn contains references to the earlier literature. As far as we know, the existing literature has not
systematically addressed the question of whether a flexible exchange rate regime speeds up
convergence of the current account. In this sense, this paper fills an important void.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out the empirical
methodology, data, and benchmark results. Section 3 conducts a series of extensions and
robustness checks. Finally, Section 4 concludes.

II. Benchmark Statistical Results
We start by explaining our econometric specifications and the definitions and sources of
the key variables. We then present and discuss benchmark regressions results.

4

A. Methodology
We estimate the rate at which current account balances (expressed as a share of GDP)
revert to their mean values, using variations on this basic autoregression:
cait = ρ 0 + ρ1cait −1 + vit

(1)

Where cait is the current account to GDP ratio for country i in year t.1 One can determine how
the autoregressive coefficient varies with the exchange rate regime in a variety of ways. The
simplest would be to order the exchange rate regimes by degree of flexibility, and then interact
with the lagged endogenous variable. Since this approach imposes a monotonic relationship
between the degree of exchange rate flexibility and the rate of current account reversion, we do
not focus on this approach in our presentation.2 Rather, we discuss estimates obtained by either
of two methods: (i) stratifying the sample by exchange rate regime and running separate
regressions by regime, or (ii) interacting binary dummy variables for each regime with the
lagged current account, and estimating the differential effects in a single regression.
For simplicity of exposition, equation (1) assumes a fixed mean value of the current
account. Subsequently, we allow this mean to vary over time. In general, a country’s current
account need not be zero even in the steady state. Kraay et al. (2005) arrive at this result by
treating foreign asset holdings (cumulative current account balance) as a portfolio choice
problem. Ju and Wei (2007) argue that the relative size of frictions to capital flows versus
frictions to goods trade can affect the size of current response to a given shock. As a result, the
average size of current account across countries could partly reflect the relative importance of
frictions to capital flows versus goods trade. Caballero et al. (2009) focus on the implications of
cross-country differences in financial development. They argue that a country with a weak
financial development tend to send savings to a country with a strong financial system. As a
5

result, the weak-finance country runs a current account surplus while the strong-finance country
runs a deficit. If one models financial frictions differently, Ju and Wei (2010) argue that the
current account patterns become less clear cut. An intensified competition in the marriage market
as triggered by a rise in the ratio of young men to young women could lead to a rise in the
aggregate savings rate and a rise in the current account imbalance (see Du and Wei, 2010, for a
theoretical model and some cross-country evidence, and Wei and Zhang, forthcoming, for
household and regional-level evidence from China.) While the current account would still be
balanced in the steady state, a higher sex ratio could produce a large and positive current account
that persists for many periods. In a finite sample, this may show up as a non-zero mean for the
current account. In order to be general, we do not restrict the mean of the current account to be
zero..
The first approach relies upon estimating equation (1) for each category of exchange rate
regime. The second approach involves estimating (2):
k

k

j =0

j =0

cait = ρ 0 + ρ1cait −1 + θ 0 j ∑ regime jit + θ1 j (cait −1 × ∑ regime jit ) + vit

(2)

The variable regime is the de facto exchange rate measure.3 (As an extension, we allow for both
country fixed effects and year fixed effects. This does not alter the basic conclusion of the
paper.)
The first approach imposes the fewest assumptions, but might yield imprecise estimates
due to substantially decreased number of observations for each regression. The second approach
will yield the same point estimates as obtained in the first approach but different estimated
standard errors. The validity of this approach for making inference depends on the condition that
the error term is distributed in a similar fashion across exchange rate regimes.

6

It’s important to allow a different constant for each regime, given the Friedman
hypothesis (1953) which argued that flexible exchange rates would be consistent with more rapid
adjustment. In our context, one might think that flexible exchange rate regimes would generate
smaller current account imbalances on average. There is some evidence of this effect in the
aggregate, and for the non-industrial countries (although it is entirely absent for industrial
countries), on an unconditional basis.4
In all instances, we would like to control for other structural variables that might also
affect the rate of reversion. In the case of equation (2), we augment the equation with level and
interaction effects.
k

k

j =0

j =0

cait = ρ 0 + ρ1cait −1 + θ 0 j ∑ regime jit + θ1 j (cait −1 × ∑ regime jit ) + controlsit + vit

(3)

Where the list of controls includes different measures of economic openness, including trade and
financial openness, described in greater depth below.

B. Data
The current account and trade openness data are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. The trade openness variable is the standard measure (the sum of
imports and exports divided by GDP). 170 countries are included, over the 1971-2005 period.
The sample encompasses both developed and developing countries (as classified by the IMF).
The de facto exchange rate regime variables come from two sources: the Levy-Yeyati
and Sturzenegger (2003a,b) and the Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) measures. The Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger index ranges from 1 to 5, with 1 indicating “inconclusive” determination, 2 free
float, 3 dirty float, 4 dirty float/crawling peg, and 5 fix. In this study, we drop 1’s, and subtract 2
off the index, so that the revised index ranges from 0 to 3 (hereafter the LYS index).
7

The Reinhart and Rogoff index ranges from 1 to 14, ranging from more to less fixity. We
aggregated the series into 3 categories. The first is fixed (from no legal tender to de facto peg);
the second is intermediate (from pre announced crawling peg to moving band that is narrower
than or equal to ± 2%); the third is floating (managed floating to freely floating).5 These
categories are then reversed so the index (hereafter the RR index) ranges from low values (high
flexibility) to high values (high fixity).
While it is well understood that a country’s actual exchange rate regime often differs
from its de jure regime, Frankel (2007) notes that the two popular de facto classification schemes
have a correlation of only 0.40, indicating that they have much disagreement over how to
classify a given country in a given year. Given this disagreement, we opt to work with both
classification schemes. Figures 1 and 2 present the histograms for the LYS and RR indices,
respectively. The number of observations on LYS and RR are comparable, at around 4000. There
are some differences in the distribution of regimes, but the same general pattern is replicated.
The fewest observations are in the freest floating category, while the greatest number of
observations is found in the most fixed category.

C. The Basic Results
We estimate country by country the autoregressive parameter in (1), incorporating shifts
due to different exchange rate regimes. Since some countries are only on the same exchange rate
regime for a short period, a caveat is that some of the autoregressive parameters are estimated
over relatively short samples. In any case, one sees in Figure 3 a slight impression of higher
degrees of persistence as one moves to higher degrees of exchange rate fixity.6 However, a closer
examination indicates that the impression is being driven by the lack of negative coefficients in

8

the least flexible regimes. The mean of the estimated coefficients are virtually the same across
regimes. This result holds up if a deterministic trend is included in the specifications; the
resulting distributions are displayed in Figure 4. The bottom line: No clear evidence that more
flexible exchange rate regimes are associated with a faster current account adjustment.
Other ways to formally quantify the effect of each regime is to stratify the data by each
regime and run separate regressions, or alternatively to interact the LYS variable with the
autoregressive parameter in a pooled regression.
First we present the results obtained by stratifying the sample by exchange rate regime. In
Tables 1A and 1B, the LYS index is used to categorize the regimes. Moving from left to right is
increasing degrees of fixity. In the first four columns of Table 1A, pertaining to the full sample,
the degree of persistence is 0.63 under the most flexible regime, and rises to 0.76 and 0.79 as the
regime gets progressively less flexible. Thus far, these results are in accord with the conventional
wisdom. However, this is not robust or at least non-linear. When one gets to the most fixed
regime, the degree of persistence declines to 0.74. Beyond the point estimates, it is important to
note one cannot reject the hypothesis that any pair of these AR(1) coefficients are the same.
Therefore, there is no statistical evidence that a more flexible exchange rate regime is associated
with a faster current account adjustment.
There is a high degree of heterogeneity in the sample, given the sample encompasses
both industrial, developing and oil exporting countries. Focusing on the industrial countries, one
finds the greatest degree of persistence (essentially a random walk) in an intermediate regime
category. In any case, the industrial countries have not been the focus of the policy discussions.
Rather it is the non-industrial countries upon which most analysts have concentrated on.

9

Moving to Table 1B, one finds that indeed the fastest rate of reversion is in the floating
category. However, once again the relationship is nonlinear. Increasing degrees of fixity lead to
greater persistence, until one gets to the fixed regime. Then the degree of persistence declines.
This pattern is replicated if one focuses on non-oil-exporting non-industrial countries. While this
outcome might be taken as partial vindication of the conventional wisdom, it is of interest that
transition that is most relevant to the current policy debate is that between the fixed and dirty
float/crawling peg. And here the results are counter to what has been argued. For instance,
China’s move from a de facto fixed regime to a dirty float would result – if other countries’
experience is any guide based on our estimation – in slower current account reversion.
An alternative means of identifying the differences in current account persistence across
regimes is to use interactive dummies, as indicated in equation (2). The only substantive
difference between the two methods involves the second moment; the dummy variable approach
assumes that the same error distribution applies to all regimes. To verify this, note that in Table 2,
the point estimate for the full sample rate of reversion under freely floating is the same using the
two methods. The estimated coefficient on the interaction term (lagcurrent1) is the implied effect
on the reversion coefficient of being in the dirty float versus the free float, in the LYS schema.
Adding 0.132 to 0.630 yields 0.762, which equals the point estimate in column (2) of Table 1A.
The only additional information provided by this dummy variable approach is that it allows for
direct assessment of whether the differences in reversion rates are statistically significant or not.7
Consider column 1 (all Countries) in Table 2. Using a standard t-test, none of the
coefficients on the interaction terms are statistically significant. In other words, there are no
statistically significant differences in estimated degrees of persistence across exchange rate
regimes. This continues to be true when we look at various subsamples of countries (the set of

10

industrial countries in Column 2, developing countries in Column 3, and ex-oil developing
countries in Column 4), with the sole exception of the industrial country category. There, the
current account in the managed floating category exhibits more persistence than in either the
floating or other categories (including fixed). This exception is hardly the case in which most
policy discussions have been focused on. These results hold if country fixed effects or time fixed
effects are included in the specifications (not reported to save space).8
Are our results sensitive to the measure of de facto exchange rate regime? To address this
question, Tables 3A and 3B report the results using the Reinhart and Rogoff classification of
exchange rate regimes (now there are only three different regimes, instead of four), and the
stratification approach (analogous to Table 1A, B). A similar pattern is detected. Focusing on the
non-industrial country results (Table 3B), one finds in columns 1-3 that while the intermediate
regimes exhibit slower reversion than the floating, it is also slower than that exhibited by the
fixed regimes. Excluding the oil exporters does not change the basic pattern. Interestingly, now
the fastest rate of reversion is for the fixed regimes!
The bottom line of this section is a conspicuous absence of a strong and robust
association in the data between the degree of exchange rate flexibility and the speed of current
account adjustment. This empirical pattern rejects the widely accepted wisdom in the corridors of
international financial institutions and powerful national treasuries that more exchange rate
flexibility brings about a faster speed of current account adjustment.

III. Extensions and Other Robustness Tests
The conclusion of the last section could arise either because it is true, or because the
empirical relationship is mis-specified. In order to ensure that our results are robust, we

11

undertake several additional checks, including controlling for other plausible determinants of the
speed of current account adjustment, accounting for nonlinearities and asymmetries, and
investigating the possible endogeneity of exchange rate regimes.

A. Allowing for Trends
The basic specification outlined in equation (1) incorporates mean reversion. An
alternative is to allow for trends in the current account to GDP ratio. Consistent with the
approach adopted in the literature, we detrend the current account ratio before testing for patterns
across exchange rate regimes. The results, reported in Tables 4A and 4B (for four different
samples), suggest little change in the conclusions one would take from the analysis.
All the autoregressive coefficients drop relative to the results based on un-detrended data.
And in the full sample (Table 4A), the floating exchange rate regime exhibits the most rapid rate
of reversion. However, in contrast to the data without detrending, this pattern is not true for the
industrial country grouping; there the most rapid rate of reversion comes from the dirty
float/crawling peg regime, although with only a few observations.
Our focus is on the developing countries, reported in Table 4b. While the most rapid rate
of reversion (toward the HP-defined trend) is for the pure floaters, the slowest rate of reversion is
estimated for the dirty float regime (for both non-industrial and non-industrial ex-oil country
groupings). The fixed regime in fact exhibits the second highest speed of convergence. We
conclude that once again, moving from a fixed regime to a less fixed regime does not necessarily
lead to more rapid adjustment of the current account.

B. Adding Variables: Openness to trade and to capital flows

12

Two key missing regressors are trade openness and capital account openness. One might
conjecture that greater trade openness makes it easier for trade account to respond to real
exchange rate changes, and therefore is associated with a faster current account reversion. On the
other hand, greater capital account openness makes an economy more susceptible to financing
shocks, which may result in more frequent current account reversals. Without controlling for the
effects of trade and capital account openness, the true relationship between exchange rate
regimes and current account adjustment may be more difficult to detect.
There are a number of variables that could be used to proxy for trade and capital account
openness. We appeal to two commonly used and easy to interpret measures. For trade openness,
we use the sum of imports and exports to GDP ratio (OPEN). On the capital account openness
side, we appeal to the Chinn and Ito (2006) financial openness index (KAOPEN). This measure
is the first principal component of four categories of restrictions on external transactions,
including dual foreign exchange rates, restrictions on current account transactions, restrictions on
capital account transactions and finally the surrender of export proceeds. We switch the sign so
that higher values of this index represent greater financial openness.
Table 5A presents the results from specifications incorporating these variables (in the
context of the LYS index). Notice first in the full sample that the estimated rates of reversion do
differ from those obtained in Table 2. This outcome is to be expected, to the extent that the
openness terms, when interacted with the lagged current account balance, are statistically
significant. What the results indicate is a lack of a clear pattern – for any country grouping –
between degrees of exchange rate fixity and current account persistence. The estimated
autoregressive coefficient (holding at zero trade and financial openness) is never the highest in

13

the fixed regime. Rather it is often the dirty float/managed peg category that exhibits the greatest
persistence.
Here are some other notable points. First, in the dummy variable regressions (not shown),
current account balances in the fixed exchange rate regimes exhibit less persistence than the
freely floating regimes. In the full sample and the non-industrial country sample, the difference is
statistically significant. Second, trade openness does not appear to be an important determinant
of current account persistence, but financial openness does. In the dummy variable regressions
(not shown), a country with a more open capital account tends to exhibit a greater persistence in
current account imbalance, and this is true in every country grouping. The effect is statistically
significant for every grouping save the non-industrial ex-oil group, and is most pronounced for
the industrial country group. Similar results are obtained using the Reinhart-Rogoff measure,
although in this case, we also find lower persistence for the non-industrial ex-oil group as well.
One question is whether treatment of openness as a continuous variable, as in Table 5, is
appropriate. One could alternatively ask if the rates of reversion differ under fixed and flexible
exchange rates when each openness indicator is viewed as dichotomous. Then one could
examine the rate of adjustment under four combinations of high/low trade and financial openness.
In order to examine this issue, we defined high trade and financial openness as instances where
the indicators are higher than the mean values. For the combinations to have an interesting
impact, the coefficients on the resulting dummy variables need to be statistically significant.
For the non-industrial countries, these dummy variables do not exhibit statistical
significance in many cases (results not reported). For floating rates, countries with high trade
openness display higher reversion, irrespective of financial openness. For fixed-rates countries,
high financial openness is associated with slower reversion, regardless of trade openness. These

14

results are only slightly different from those reported in Table 5B. Holding constant trade and
financial openness, there is no evidence that a move to a more flexible exchange rate regime
necessarily produces a faster current account convergence.

C. Nonlinearities and Asymmetric Effects
A number of observers have pointed out that large current account deficits appear to
adjust in a different fashion from small deficits.9 This suggests that there are nonlinearities and
threshold effects in current account adjustment that we need to test for. In addition, Ghosh,
Terrones, and Zettelmeyer (2008) argue that such effects might invalidate our results.
To address the first issue of nonlinearity, we proceed by estimating for each regime:
cait = ρ 0 + ρ1cait −1 + ρ 2cait −1 cait −1 + controlsit + vit

(4)

It would be possible to account for nonlinearities in equation (3) for the pooled sample, but at the
cost of introducing many additional interaction terms (e.g., regime by current account size).
Hence, we rely upon separate regressions on stratified samples. We allow for the nonlinearity to
enter in a smooth – rather than discrete – fashion.10
The results of estimating equation (4) are presented in Table 6. They show clear evidence
of nonlinear effects. However, accounting for these effects does not overturn our previous
conclusions. The nonlinear effect is obscured in the full sample encompassing industrial and
non-industrial countries, and shows up only for the fixed exchange rate regime. It is true that in
that instance, larger balances – either large or small – induce faster reversion, at least in a
statistical sense. However, the other coefficients associated with the posited nonlinearity are not
statistically significant. Similarly, inference regarding the strength of the nonlinear effects is
hampered in the industrial country sample by the small number of observations in certain
15

categories. The only conclusion that can be made is that the rate of reversion under fixed rates
does not appear to be any slower than flexible rates. This is true either controlling for and
holding constant the absolute size of the current account balance, or taking into account the
average size of the absolute current account balance.
Since the issue of current account adjustment and exchange rate regimes is centered on
non-industrial countries, we direct our attention to Table 6B. Holding constant the average
absolute current account balance, the rates of reversion in the dirty float/crawl regime and the
fixed regime appear about equal. Evaluating the reversion coefficient at the respective means of
the average absolute current account balances, it would appear that reversion in the fixed
category is definitely faster than under dirty float/crawling peg category.11
A separate but related issue is whether reversion rates differ when a surplus is being run,
as opposed to a deficit. In order to examine this type of asymmetry, we define a dummy variable,
posCA = 1 if CA > 0, and 0 otherwise, and estimate the following equation:
cait = ρ 0 + ρ1cait −1 + ρ3cait −1 posCAit −1 + controlsit + vit

(5)

The coefficient ρ1 represents the rate of reversion when the current account balance is negative,
whereas the sum of two coefficients ρ1 + ρ 3 represents the rate of reversion when the current
account balance is positive. The estimates are reported in Table 7.
While there is some evidence of an asymmetry in the full sample, this seems to be an
artifact of pooling. Among industrial countries, there is an indication that the asymmetry exists
only for those on floating rates, and in this case there is no evidence of reversion. The point
estimate is 1.36, suggesting explosive behavior for surplus countries.12 Even when the balance is
negative, the evidence for reversion is weak, since the point estimate is 0.96. In contrast, under
fixed rates, the rate of reversion is 0.67, and no evidence for this type of asymmetry.
16

Turning attention to the most important categories, the non-industrial and non-industrial
ex-oil countries, one finds the asymmetry shows up only in the intermediate categories. When
countries are experiencing current account deficits, it’s clearly true that the rate of reversion is
slowest in the dirty float/crawling peg regime. When experiencing a current account surplus,
there is some evidence that the intermediate regimes have the fastest rates of reversion. The
evidence is particularly marked for the non-industrial countries (taking out the oil exporters
weakens the result, so only in the dirty float/crawling peg regime does the rate of reversion look
substantially faster than in the other regimes). One notable result is that the floating regime and
fixed regime rates of reversion are about the same regardless of whether these countries are
running a surplus or deficit.
We also investigated whether the nonlinear effect shows up after accounting for
asymmetry. While there is some evidence of both effects being present, only in one case are both
effects manifested simultaneously: non-oil non-industrial countries under a fixed exchange rate
regime. Reversion is faster when the current account balances are bigger, and are yet faster when
the current account balance is positive. In no other case do both effects show up. In other words,
sometimes the nonlinear effect is symmetrical, and in other instances, the nonlinear effect only
occurs (at statistically significant levels) when balances are positive or negative.
An important finding in these set of results allowing for both nonlinearities and
asymmetries is that the slowest rate of reversion in each category of countries is often though not
always the dirty float/crawling peg regime.13 In any case, after allowing for asymmetries and
non-linearity, we still do not find robust evidence that increasing exchange rate flexibility would
deliver a faster current account adjustment.

17

D. Size
Country size could affect pattern of current account dynamics: for a large country, the
only way for its current account deficit to shrink, is for the rest of the world to do an opposite
adjustment. This means that the adjustment of a large country’s current account depends on
factors that affect other countries’ adjustment, potentially including other countries’ exchange
rate regimes (Ju and Wei, 2007). A simple way to account for this possibility is to run separate
regressions for large and small economies.
Table 8 reports results stratified by economic size. We used both the dollar measure and
the PPP measure of GDP to split the samples by average GDP. That is, for each year, we
calculated the average GDP for the entire sample, and placed countries in either the high or low
sub-sample. We then re-estimated the dummy variable specifications to examine whether the
effect of exchange rate regimes differed depending on economic size.
We report only the results for PPP-defined size (the results using market exchange rates
are similar, but less statistically significant). First note that a simple autoregressive
characterization (no controls) indicates very similar degrees of current account persistence across
large and small countries. However, differences become highlighted when additional controls are
added. With the exchange regime dummy variables are included, the large country current
account balances are much less persistent than those for the smaller countries, even though few
of the regime variables are statistically significant. The big difference comes when the openness
variables are also included. Then for the large countries, all regimes exhibit less persistence than
the free float, although the difference is not significant for the dirty float/crawling peg.
Another way to break the groups into large and small is to focus on the G-7 countries as
opposed to all others. In this case, the most important features are that, unconditionally, G-7

18

current account balances are much more persistent than other countries’ (results not reported).
When regime and openness effects are allowed for, it appears that financial openness in
particular induces much greater persistence (especially in the G-7 countries, although the effect
is visible for both sets of countries).
Turning to the regime results, for the G-7, a dirty float/crawling peg induces much greater
persistence, in both economic and statistical terms. For the non-G-7, a fixed exchange rate
induces much less persistence. This effect is statistically significant. This seems counter to the
general presumption (although it must be allowed that the result obtains only when the openness
variables are included).
E. Inflation
One could argue that the exchange rate regimes proxy for other, more fundamental,
factors. Given the popularity of nominal anchor argument as a means of reducing inflation, it
makes sense to examine robustness by including inflation in our regressions.
We augment the basic specifications using dummies for the LYS indicator variable with
CPI inflation measured as the log difference in the CPI (the results are not reported to save
space). It turns out that we retain the basic pattern highlighted in Table 2. In particular, exchange
rate regimes still do not display a statistically significant impact on reversion rates, and to the
extent that they do, more rigid regimes are associated with faster reversion rates after controlling
for inflation. Indeed, the only instances in which the inflation rate variable comes into play are
those involving the industrial countries. There, higher inflation is associated with faster reversion.

F. Endogeneity

19

The preceding discussion assumes that one can take the exchange rate regime selection as
exogenous with respect to current account persistence. But we cannot take this assumption for
granted. Hence, we undertake an examination to see whether the conclusions are robust to
possible endogeneity of exchange rate regimes.
What variables enter into the determination of de facto exchange rate regimes? LevyYeyati and Sturzenegger (2003b) present evidence that the regime selection depends upon initial
foreign exchange reserves, a dummy for islands, economic size, area and average exchange rate
regime in the region.
Motivated by their results, we use a two-stage procedure to re-estimate the equations for
specifications excluding and including openness variables. In the first stage, we estimate a
multinomial probit model for each indicator variable (regime 0 through regime 3, ranging from
floating to fixed), using as regressors the initial foreign exchange reserve to GDP ratio, GDP in
PPP terms, land area, and a dummy variable for islands. The probit regressions yield
probabilities which we then use in the second stage regressions. Note that the probit regressions
are more successful for the extreme regimes than for the intermediate regimes.
The second stage regression results are reported in Table 9. In the regressions excluding
openness variables, they indicate that, except for the industrial countries, there is no evidence
that differing exchange rate regimes are associated with statistically significantly differing rates
of current account reversion. And in this case, the implied rates of adjustment for the
intermediate regimes do not make a lot of sense. In any case, there is little evidence that there is
a difference in the adjustment rates between the fully floating and fully fixed regimes.
A Hausman test for the exogeneity of the regime variables rejects in almost all cases
involving non-industrial countries. Hence, treating the regime indicator variables as endogenous

20

is appropriate. The Sargan test statistic for overidentifying restrictions fails to reject in all
instances. In a pure statistical sense, these instruments are uncorrelated with the error term in the
main regression.
We also attempted to back out binary indicator variables based on the predicted
probabilities from the multinomial probit regressions. However, because the model has a difficult
time predicting the intermediate regimes, the estimated dirty float and dirty float/crawling peg
variables are collinear, and hence we are unable to obtain independent effects from each of these
regimes. We find that the rate of adjustment in the fully fixed regime is not statistically different
from that of the fully flexible regime; hence, once again we fail to discern a strong association
between exchange rate rigidity in nominal terms and current account adjustment.

IV. Exchange Rate Regimes and Persistence of the Real Exchange Rate
Why doesn’t a more flexible exchange rate regime generate a faster convergence of the
current account? This section aims to investigate this question. Our hypothesis is that the current
account responds to real exchange rate, not nominal exchange rate. If the real exchange rate
adjustment does not depend very much on the nominal exchange rate regime, then the current
account adjustment would not depend very much on nominal exchange rate regime either. We
now examine whether the nature of a country’s nominal exchange rate regime significantly
affects the adjustment process of its real exchange rate.
In order to accomplish this aim, we repeat a similar process in the previous section,
except that we replace the current account with real effective exchange rates - CPI-deflated
trade-weighted indices14 - as calculated by the IMF.

21

We estimate the basic specification, then augment with dummy variables for the regime,
and then incorporate the openness measures. In Table 10, one finds that the results indicate little
evidence that the nature of the exchange rate regime matters. In column 1, a simple AR(1)
specification indicates a 20% rate of real exchange rate reversion for the entire sample of
countries; adding in regime interaction terms yields an essentially unchanged rate of reversion
(22%), and no hint that any of the interaction terms with exchange rate regimes are anywhere
near statistical significance (column 2). This conclusion is not altered at all by the inclusion of
two openness measures. The rate of reversion is still the same (21%).
As an aside, it is interesting that we find that real exchange rates are mean reverting. This
result is in line with other panel studies of real exchange rates (e.g., Murray and Papell, 2005). In
addition, greater trade openness is associated with faster reversion of the real exchange rate. This
finding does not fit in with Cheung and Lai (2000), Cheung et al. (2001), and Cashin and
McDermott (2006), but is in accord with the panel study of Alba and Papell (2007). (Trade
openness is also associated with a stronger real exchange rate on average).
These results appear to be driven by the developing countries; they do not appear in the
industrial country category (columns 4-6). It is notable that for the developing countries the
estimated rate of real exchange rate persistence is not altered noticeably when one includes
indicators for exchange rate regimes, and measures of economic openness.
It turns out that the results – at least pertaining to the exchange rate regime – do depend
upon whether one accounts for time fixed effects or not.15 In Table 11, the specifications are
augmented with time fixed effects. More fixed exchange rate regimes are not generally
associated with slower reversion. That is, going from a floating rate to a dirty float/crawling peg

22

does not result in a slower rate of reversion. However, we do find that – except for the industrial
country sample – the fixed regime induces substantially slower real exchange rate reversion.16
To put this into perspective, for the non-industrial ex-oil countries, the rate of reversion
under flexible rates is 0.37. Under fixed exchange rates, the rate of reversion is 0.18. The halflife of a deviation in the former case is 1.5 years, while in the latter it is 3.5 years. However, this
result is somewhat sensitive to the choice of specifications and country samples. For example,
without the two openness measures (as in Columns 2, 5, and 8), there is no statistical difference
between fixed and flexible exchange rate regimes.
To summarize, there is no strong and robust evidence of a monotonic relationship from
more flexibility in an exchange rate regime to a faster speed in the convergence of real exchange
rates toward the long run equilibrium. This pattern is consistent with a lack of a strong and robust
relationship between exchange rate regimes and adjustment speed of current accounts.

V. Conclusion
The notion that more flexibility in an exchange rate regime implies speedier adjustment
in current account is very plausible ex ante. The only problem is that it does not hold in the data.
In this paper, we examine the connection between the two for over 170 economies during 19712005. We make use of two leading classification schemes of de facto exchange rate regimes. The
key finding is an utter absence of any robust association between the de facto nominal exchange
rate regime and the speed of current account adjustment.
We further explore the reasons behind the disconnect. What matters for current account
adjustment is real, not nominal, exchange rate. Yet, there is no strong monotonic relationship
between flexibility of a nominal exchange regime and the speed of convergence in real exchange

23

rates. This finding again is independent of which de facto exchange rate regime classification
scheme we use.
Accounting for the most obvious explanations – such as the omission of important
determinants of current account reversion – fails to overturn these findings. The endogeneity of
the exchange rate regimes also does not seem to explain the lack of a relationship between
exchange rate regimes and rates of current account adjustment.
We therefore conclude that there is no robust and systematic association between a
country’s nominal exchange rate regime and the speed of current account adjustment. If public
policies can work on the level of real exchange rate directly, they may have some hope of
altering the pattern of current account imbalances. However, changing nominal exchange rate
regimes does not reliably alter the pace of real exchange rate reversion.
We regard our empirical results as a challenge to the well-known Friedman (1953)
hypothesis in favor of a flexible exchange rate regime. This is true even in cases where the
degree of financial openness is low, as it was during the time when Friedman first forwarded his
argument. Hence, our results pose a challenge to an increasingly assertive policy
recommendation by international financial institutions on the virtue of a flexible regime in
promoting current account adjustment. We hope future work will be inspired by the evidence in
the paper to re-think the role of a nominal exchange rate regime in an economy’s external
adjustment.

24

Data Appendix
The data used in this paper were drawn from a number of different sources. We provide below a listing of
the mnemonics for the variables used in the analysis, descriptions of these variables and the source(s)
from which the primary data for constructing these variables were taken. A listing of the countries in the
final sample, along with the country groupings used in the analysis, is provided in the working paper
version of this paper. For most countries, data were available from 1971 through 2005.

Mnemonic

Source*

Variable description

CAGDP

WDI

Current account to GDP ratio

REER

IFS

Real effective exchange rate, CPI deflated

OPEN

WDI

Openness indicator: ratio of exports plus imports of goods and nonfactor
services to GDP

RYUS

WDI

Real GDP in USD

RYPPP

WDI

Real GDP in PPP terms

RER

IFS

Real effective exchange rate

KAOPEN**

CI

Capital account openness

LYS

LYS

Levy-Yeyati/Sturzenegger de facto exchange rate regime measure

RR

RR

Reinhart/Rogoff de facto exchange rate regime measure

AREA

Rose

Area in square km

ISLAND

Rose

Island dummy

Reserves

IFS

Foreign exchange reserves ex. gold

* These are mnemonics for the sources used to construct the corresponding. CI: Chinn and Ito (2006);
WDI: World Development Indicators (2006). IFS: International Financial Statistics. LYS: Levy-Yeyati

25

and Sturzenegger (2003), updated to 2004 from http://200.32.4.58/~fsturzen/Base_2005.zip . RR:
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004), updated to 2004 by Eichengreen and Razo-Garcia from
http://www.econ.berkeley.edu/~eichengr/updated_rr_nat_class.pdf .
Rose denotes data set downloaded from http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/arose/StabData.zip .

RR is an aggregated version of the Reinhart Rogoff index, with a reversed ordering. RR1 encompasses

regimes from freely floating to managed floating; RR2 encompasses regimes from moving band
that is narrower than or equal to ± 2% to pre announced crawling peg to; RR3 encompasses
regimes from de facto peg to no legal tender.

** KAOPEN is the first principal component of four indices; in order to simplify interpretation, this
variable is adjusted such that the minimum value is zero, i.e., KAOPEN ranges between zero and some
positive value.

26

References
Alba, Joseph and David H. Papell, “Purchasing Power Parity and Country Characteristics:
Evidence from Panel Data Tests,” Journal of Development Economics 83 (2007), 240-251.
Baxter, Marianne and Alan C. Stockman, “Business Cycles and the Exchange Rate Regime,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 23 (1989), 377-400
Blanchard, Olivier, “Current Account Deficits in Rich Countries?” Mundell-Fleming Lecture,
IMF Staff Papers 54 (2007), 191-219.
Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, “An Equilibrium Model of
‘Global Imbalances’ and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review 98 (2008), 358-393.
Cashin, Paul and C. John McDermott, “Parity Reversion in Real Exchange Rates:
Fast, Slow, or Not at All?” IMF Staff Papers 53 (2006), 89-119.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, Menzie Chinn, and Eiji Fujii, “Market Structure and the Persistence of
Sectoral Real Exchange Rates,” International Journal of Finance and Economics 6 (2001), 95–
114.
Cheung, Yin-Wong, and Kon S. Lai, “On Cross-Country Differences in the Persistence of Real
Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics 50 (2000), 375–397
Chinn, Menzie D., “A Primer on Real Effective Exchange Rates: Determinants, Overvaluation,
Trade Flows and Competitive Devaluations,” Open Economies Review 17 (2006), 115-143.
Clarida, Richard (Ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment?
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007).
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito, “What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
Institutions, and Interactions,” Journal of Development Economics 82 (2006), 163-192.
Corsett, Giancarlo, Luca Dedola, and Sylvain Leduc, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Open
Economies,” in B. Friedman and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics,
Volume III (Amsterdam: Elsevier, forthcoming).
Du, Qingyuan, and Shang-Jin Wei, “A Sexually Unbalanced Model of Current Account
Imbalances,” NBER working paper no. 16000 (2010).
Edwards, Sebastian, “Financial Openness, Sudden Stops and Current Account Reversals,” NBER
working paper no. 10277 (2004).
Eichengreen, Barry and Razo-Garcia, Raul, “The International Monetary System in the Last and
Next Twenty Years,” Economic Policy 21 (2006), 393-442.

27

Flood, Robert, and Andy Rose, “Fixing exchange rates A virtual quest for fundamentals,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 36 (1995), 3-37.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 2007, “Exchange Rate Regimes:Current Issues in Research and Policy,”
Lecture at the IMF Institute.
Friedman, Milton, “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” (pp. 157-203) in M. Friedman,
Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1953).
Ghosh, R. Atish , Marco Terrones, and Jeromin Zettelmeyer, “Exchange Rate Regimes and
External Adjustment: New Answers to an Old Debate,” unpublished manuscript (Washington,
D.C.: IMF, August 5, 2008).
Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Current Account Adjustment: Some New Theory and
Evidence,” NBER working paper no. 13388 (2007).
Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, “Domestic Institutions and the Bypass Effect of Financial
Globalization,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (2010), 173-204.
Kraay, Aart, Norman Loayza and Luis Servén, and Jaime Ventura, “Country Portfolios,” Journal
of the European Economic Association 3 (2005), 914-945.
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger, “A de facto Classification of Exchange Rate
Regimes: A Methodological Note,” unpublished manuscript (2003a).
Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger, “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the Impact
of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth,” American Economic Review 93 (2003b), 1173–1193.
Mark, Nelson C. and Donggyu Sul, “PPP Strikes Out: The Effect of Common Factor Shocks on
the Real Exchange Rate,” unpublished manuscript (University of Notre Dame and University of
Auckland, 2008).
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, and Assaf Razin, “Sharp Reductions in Current Account Deficits:
An Empirical Investigation,” NBER working paper No. 6310 (1997).
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian-Maria, and Assaf Razin, “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises:
Empirical Regularities,” NBER working paper No. 6620 (1998).
Murray, Christian, and David Papell, 2005, “Do Panels Help Solve the Purchasing Power Parity
Puzzle?” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 23 (2005), 410-415.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1996, Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
(Cambridge: MIT Press).
Reinhart, C.M. and K. Rogoff, 2004, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1) (February): 1-48.
28

Vegh, Carlos, Open Economy Macroeconomics for Developing Countries (Cambridge: MIT
Press, forthcoming).
Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising
Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).

29

Table 1A: Current Account Persistence by Country Sample, by Regime
(1)

CA(-1)
Constant

Floating
0.630
(0.111)***
-0.010
(0.004)***
769

(2)

(3)
All
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
0.762
0.788
(0.068)*** (0.065)***
0.002
-0.006
(0.003) (0.003)**
278
388

(4)

(5)

Fixed
0.735
(0.030)***
-0.012
(0.002)***
2125

Floating
0.867
(0.044)***
-0.001
(0.001)
209

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.38
0.55
0.64
0.58
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

0.71

(6)
(7)
Industrial Countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
1.060
0.893
(0.066)*** (0.120)***
0.003
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.004)
50
35
0.88

0.8

(8)
Fixed
0.929
(0.033)***
0.000
(0.001)
279
0.78

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. Exchange rate regimes are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger definitions.

Table 1B: Current Account Persistence by Country Sample, by Regime
(9)

CA(-1)
Constant

Floating
0.596
(0.122)***
-0.014
(0.005)***
560

(10)
(11)
(12)
Non-Industrial Countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
0.726
0.781
0.728
(0.078)*** (0.068)*** (0.031)***
0.000
-0.007
-0.014
(0.004) (0.004)*
(0.002)***
228
353
1846

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.34
0.5
0.62
0.57
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

(13)

(14)
(15)
(16)
Non-Industrial Countries ex-Oil
Floating Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
0.564
0.717
0.797
0.701
(0.133)*** (0.071)*** (0.072)*** (0.039)***
-0.016
-0.001
-0.006
-0.020
(0.006)***
(0.004)
(0.004) (0.003)***
529
209
331
1579
0.33

0.49

0.65

0.51

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. Exchange rate regimes are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger definitions.

Table 2: Current Account Persistence, by Country Sample
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.630
(0.111)***
0.132
(0.130)
0.158
(0.128)
0.105
(0.115)
0.012
(0.005)**
0.004
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.010
(0.004)***
3560

Industrial
Countries
0.867
(0.044)***
0.193
(0.079)**
0.026
(0.125)
0.062
(0.055)
0.003
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
573

NonIndustrial
Countries
0.596
(0.122)***
0.131
(0.145)
0.185
(0.140)
0.132
(0.126)
0.014
(0.007)**
0.007
(0.006)
0.000
(0.006)
-0.014
(0.005)***
2987

All
CA(-1)
CA(-1) x LYS1
CA(-1) x LYS2
CA(-1) x LYS3
LYS1
LYS2
LYS3
Constant

(4)
NonIndustrial
Countries
ex-oil
0.564
(0.133)***
0.153
(0.151)
0.233
(0.152)
0.137
(0.139)
0.016
(0.007)**
0.011
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.006)
-0.016
(0.006)***
2648

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.57
0.79
0.56
0.52
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. LYS1 is a dummy variable for dirty float regime; LYS2 is a dummy variable for dirty float/crawling peg; LYS3 is a dummy
variable for fixed.

31

Table 3A: Current Account Persistence, by Country Sample, by Reinhart Rogoff Exchange Rate Regime
(1)

CA(-1)
Constant

Floating
0.663***
(0.0639)
-0.005*
(0.003)
619

(2)
All
Band/Crwl
0.799***
(0.0595)
-0.005**
(0.002)
1275

(3)
Fixed
0.719***
(0.0455)
-0.015***
(0.003)
1179

(4)

(5)
(6)
Industrial Countries
Floating
Band/Crwl Fixed
0.925***
0.840***
0.946***
(0.0427)
(0.0424)
(0.0417)
-0.000
-0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.002)
(0.001)
204
307
200

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.442
0.666
0.51
0.784
0.663
0.84
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. Exchange rate regimes are based on Reinhart-Rogoff definitions. “Free fall” regime observations omitted.

Table 3B: Current Account Persistence, by Country Sample, by Reinhart Rogoff Exchange Rate Regime

CA(-1)
Constant

(7)
(8)
(9)
Non-Industrial Countries
Floating
Band/Crwl Fixed
0.621***
0.795***
0.688***
(0.071)
(0.063)
(0.048)
-0.007**
-0.006** -0.021***
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.003)
415
968
979

(10)

(11)
(12)
Non-Industrial ex-oil
Floating
Band/Crwl Fixed
0.656***
0.800***
0.655***
(0.084)
(0.066)
(0.054)
-0.009**
-0.007** -0.026***
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
348
921
905

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.391
0.662
0.47
0.445
0.673
0.431
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. . Exchange rate regimes are based on Reinhart-Rogoff definitions. “Free fall” regime observations omitted.

32

Table 4A: HP Detrended Current Account Persistence, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate Regime
(1)
Floating
CA(-1)
Constant

0.114
(0.152)
-0.001
(0.001)
770

(2)
(3)
All countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl

Fixed

(5)
(6)
Industrial countries
Floating
Dirty float

0.485
(0.119)***
0.007
(0.003)**
279

0.287
(0.116)**
-0.002
(0.002)
388

0.161
(0.042)***
0.000
(0.001)
2139

0.457
(0.079)***
0.000
(0.001)
209

0.484
(0.177)***
0.000
(0.003)
50

0.205
(0.237)
-0.001
(0.003)
35

0.423
(0.069)***
0.001
(0.001)
281

0.08

0.03

0.19

0.18

0.01

0.17

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.01
0.15
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Robust standard errors in parentheses

(4)

(7)
Dirty/Crwl

(8)
Fixed

Table 4B: HP Detrended Current Account Persistence, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate Regime
(9)
Floating
CA(-1)
Constant

0.098
(0.156)
-0.001
(0.002)
561

(10)
(11)
Developing countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl

Fixed

0.486
(0.121)***
0.009
(0.004)**
229

0.288
(0.117)**
-0.002
(0.002)
353

0.158
(0.042)***
0.000
(0.002)
1858

0.058
(0.165)
0.000
(0.002)
530

0.448
(0.140)***
0.009
(0.003)***
210

0.335
(0.122)***
0.000
(0.002)
331

0.170
(0.050)***
-0.001
(0.002)
1595

0.08

0.03

0.00

0.18

0.11

0.03

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.01
0.15
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Robust standard errors in parentheses

(12)

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Developing countries ex-oil exporters
Floating Dirty float
Dirty/Crwl Fixed

Notes: Dependent Variable: HP Detrended CA. Exchange rate regimes are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger definitions.

33

Table 5A: Current Account Persistence with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate Regime
(1)

CA(-1)

CA(-1) x Trade
Openness

Floating
0.725
(0.055)***

(2)

(3)
All
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
0.536
0.832
(0.102)*** (0.150)***

(4)

(5)

Fixed
0.656
(0.073)***

Floating
0.809
(0.123)***

(6)
(7)
Industrial Countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
0.569
1.959
(0.382) (0.644)***

(8)
Fixed
0.657
(0.107)***

0.086
(0.073)

0.257
(0.084)***

-0.067
(0.116)

0.037
(0.075)

-0.127
(0.21)

0.368
(0.570)

-1.845
(0.848)**

0.064
(0.110)

0.059
(0.019)***

-0.001
(0.057)

0.078
(0.030)**

0.034
(0.017)*

0.063
(0.027)**

0.188
(0.091)**

0.166
(0.087)*

0.108
(0.035)***

-0.001
-0.001
0.000
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.009)
Financial Openness
0.002
0.001
0.002
(0.001)**
(0.002)
(0.002)
Constant
-0.006
0.000
-0.006
(0.003)**
(0.007)
(0.006)
Observations
727
245
357
Adjusted R-squared
0.6
0.58
0.65
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

-0.008
(0.004)*
0.007
(0.001)***
-0.009
(0.003)***
1917
0.54

0.007
(0.005)
0.003
(0.001)**
-0.010
(0.003)***
206
0.72

-0.029
(0.033)
0.000
(0.003)
0.008
(0.015)
36
0.92

0.006
(0.013)
0.004
(0.003)
-0.010
(0.006)
31
0.83

0.001
(0.003)
0.002
(0.001)**
-0.007
(0.003)**
266
0.79

CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. Exchange rate regimes are based on Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger definitions.

34

Table 5B: Current Account Persistence with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate Regime
CA(-1)
CA(-1) x Trade Openness

Floating
0.705
(0.078)***
0.101
(0.09)

CA(-1) x Financial
Openness

Non-Industrial Countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
0.436
0.834
0.647
(0.130)*** (0.161)*** (0.076)***
0.323
-0.067
0.041
(0.097)***
(0.120)
(0.080)

0.047
-0.050
0.079
(0.035)
(0.072) (0.034)**
Trade Openness
0.000
0.005
-0.001
(0.01)
(0.010)
(0.010)
Financial Openness
0.001
-0.003
0.002
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.000)
Constant
-0.007
-0.006
-0.005
(0.004)*
(0.010)
(0.010)
Observations
521
209
326
Adjusted R-squared
0.57
0.55
0.64
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

0.032
(0.018)*
-0.008
(0.005)*
0.007
(0.002)***
-0.009
(0.004)**
1651
0.52

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA.

35

Non-Industrial Countries ex-Oil
Floating Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
0.690
0.675
0.839
0.630
(0.069)*** (0.177)*** (0.173)*** (0.091)***
0.101
0.103
-0.052
0.063
(0.090)
(0.120)
(0.120)
(0.090)
0.067
(0.031)**
-0.001
(0.010)
0.003
(0.002)*
-0.008
(0.003)**
490
0.62

0.065
(0.088)
-0.002
(0.010)
0.004
(0.000)
0.002
(0.010)
190
0.54

0.068
(0.034)**
0.008
(0.010)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.010
(0.010)
305
0.67

0.020
(0.026)
-0.007
(0.010)
0.006
(0.002)***
-0.014
(0.005)***
1407
0.51

Table 6A: Current Account Persistence and Nonlinearity with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate
Regime
(1)

VARIABLES
CA(-1)
CA(-1) x |CA(-1)|
CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness
Financial
Openness
Constant

Floating
current

(2)
(3)
All
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
current
Current

(4)

(5)

Fixed
current

Floating
current

0.772***
(0.080)
-0.349
(0.277)

0.456***
(0.130)
0.838
(0.566)

0.853***
(0.155)
0.031
(0.219)

0.865***
(0.063)
(0.190)

1.225***
(0.165)
-3.226*
(1.740)

0.104
(0.080)

0.148**
(0.067)

-0.081
(0.131)

0.101
(0.068)

0.021
(0.021)
0.000
(0.005)

0.075
(0.053)
0.003
(0.007)

0.069**
(0.028)
0.002
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.004
(0.003)
647

0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.008)
186

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.599
0.596
Implied AR(1)
0.76
0.51
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Robust standard errors in parentheses

(6)
(7)
Industrial Countries
Dirty/Crwl
Dirty float
current
current

Fixed
current

(2.606)

1.773***
(0.511)
-4.975**
(1.797)

0.783***
(0.153)
-1.596**
(0.753)

-0.262
(0.235)

1.287**
(0.507)

-0.895
(0.730)

0.131
(0.160)

-0.008
(0.017)
-0.004
(0.004)

-0.056
(0.045)
0.003
(0.006)

0.222**
(0.087)
-0.004
(0.032)

0.113
(0.093)
0.0346***
(0.011)

0.097***
(0.034)
0.002
(0.004)

0.003
(0.002)
-0.007
(0.006)
301

0.000
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.004)
1476

-0.002**
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
183

-0.006
(0.006)
-0.010
(0.014)
29

-0.005
(0.006)
-0.022**
(0.009)
24

0.000
(0.001)
-0.003
(0.003)
229

0.667
0.85

0.554
0.79

0.714
1.14

0.933
0.17

0.864
1.61

0.787
0.73

-0.904***

36

0.479
(0.351)

(8)

-7.552***

Table 6B: Current Account Persistence and Nonlinearity with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate
Regime
(9)

VARIABLES
CA(-1)
CA(-1) x |CA(-1)|
CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness
Financial
Openness
Constant

(10)
(11)
(12)
Non-Industrial Countries
Floating Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
current
current
Current
current
0.735***
(0.104)
-0.253
(0.310)

0.329**
(0.157)
1.057*
(0.609)

0.842***
(0.165)
0.049
(0.223)

0.841***
(0.069)

0.117
(0.090)

0.189**
(0.074)

0.023
(0.027)
0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.007*
(0.004)
464

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Non-Industrial Countries ex-Oil
Fixed
Floating Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
current
current
current
current
0.452**
(0.184)
0.823
(0.639)

0.833***
(0.187)
0.024
(0.202)

0.830***
(0.083)

(0.195)

0.700***
(0.084)
-0.191
(0.272)

-0.078
(0.133)

0.108
(0.069)

0.131
(0.086)

0.142
(0.094)

-0.053
(0.129)

0.134*
(0.073)

0.052
(0.064)
0.005
(0.008)

0.068**
(0.029)
0.001
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.018)
-0.003
(0.004)

0.023
(0.027)
0.003
(0.005)

0.060
(0.072)
0.005
(0.009)

0.066**
(0.029)
0.010
(0.008)

-0.027
(0.021)
-0.004
(0.005)

0.001
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.011)
157

0.003*
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.007)
277

0.001
(0.001)
-0.010*
(0.005)
1247

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.009***
(0.003)
435

0.000
(0.003)
-0.009
(0.011)
144

0.001
(0.002)
-0.012*
(0.007)
259

0.001
(0.001)
-0.012**
(0.005)
1073

0.654
0.85

0.537
0.76

0.631
0.69

0.555
0.50

0.682
0.83

0.525
0.75

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.572
0.558
Implied AR(1)
0.72
0.40
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Robust standard errors in parentheses

-0.876***

37

-0.951***

(0.210)

Table 7A: Current Account Persistence and Asymmetry with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate
Regime
(1)

VARIABLES
CA(-1)
CA(-1)xd(CA(-1)>0)
CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness
Financial
Openness
Constant

Floating
current

(2)
(3)
All
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
current
current

(4)

(5)

Fixed
current

Floating
current

(6)
(7)
Industrial Countries
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
current
current

(8)
Fixed
current

0.706***
(0.060)
0.127
(0.171)

0.640***
(0.125)
-0.237
(0.242)

0.970***
(0.140)
-0.438*
(0.241)

0.664***
(0.084)
0.057
(0.116)

0.964***
(0.115)
0.400**
(0.158)

0.330
(0.400)
0.286
(0.586)

2.339***
(0.699)
0.376
(0.452)

0.667***
(0.135)
0.083
(0.102)

0.082
(0.086)

0.184***
(0.060)

-0.095
(0.119)

0.051
(0.085)

-0.426**
(0.210)

0.522
(0.468)

-2.368**
(0.954)

0.106
(0.166)

0.027
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.005)

0.070
(0.055)
0.003
(0.007)

0.065**
(0.031)
0.008
(0.010)

0.009
(0.023)
-0.001
(0.005)

-0.042
(0.034)
0.003
(0.006)

0.121
(0.168)
-0.018
(0.047)

0.024
(0.142)
0.045***
(0.009)

0.076**
(0.032)
0.005
(0.004)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.005**
(0.003)
647

0.001
(0.002)
0.003
(0.008)
186

0.003*
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.006)
301

0.000
(0.001)

-0.002***
(0.001)

-0.014***
(0.004)
1476

-0.007***

(0.003)
183

-0.002
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.019)
29

-0.009
(0.007)
-0.033***
(0.009)
24

0.000
(0.001)
-0.007*
(0.004)
229

0.683

0.535

0.709

0.906

0.849

0.784

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.599
0.593
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

38

Table 7B: Current Account Persistence and Asymmetry with Openness, by Country Sample, by Exchange Rate
Regime
(9)

VARIABLES
CA(-1)
CA(-1)xd(CA(-1)>0)
CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness
Financial
Openness
Constant

(10)
(11)
(12)
Non-Industrial Countries
Floating
Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
Fixed
current
current
current
current

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
Non-Industrial Countries ex-Oil
Fixed
Floating Dirty float Dirty/Crwl
current
current
current
current

0.684***
(0.077)
0.115
(0.191)

0.580***
(0.137)
-0.481*
(0.258)

0.961***
(0.143)
-0.480*
(0.258)

0.628***
(0.088)
0.082
(0.120)

0.662***
(0.070)
0.151
(0.204)

0.629***
(0.150)
-0.457
(0.296)

0.930***
(0.138)
-0.522*
(0.278)

0.590***
(0.101)
0.074
(0.178)

0.096
(0.102)

0.251***
(0.064)

-0.085
(0.123)

0.065
(0.087)

0.100
(0.096)

0.219**
(0.095)

-0.051
(0.113)

0.089
(0.100)

0.028
(0.024)
0.000
(0.006)

0.048
(0.060)
0.008
(0.008)

0.0607*
(0.032)
0.008
(0.010)

0.004
(0.023)
0.000
(0.005)

0.026
(0.024)
0.000
(0.006)

0.053
(0.067)
0.009
(0.008)

0.0599*
(0.033)
0.017*
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.028)
-0.001
(0.006)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.008**
(0.004)
464

0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.010)
157

0.00316*
(0.002)
-0.004
(0.006)
277

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)
-0.009
(0.006)
259

-0.023***

(0.004)
1247

0.000
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.010)
144

0.001
(0.001)

-0.019***

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.010***
(0.003)
435

0.672

0.519

0.632

0.559

0.704

0.5

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.572
0.56
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

39

(0.005)
1073

Table 8: Current Account Persistence by Country Size
(1)
CA(-1)

0.760
(0.042)***

CA(-1) x LYS1
CA(-1) x LYS2
CA(-1) x LYS3
LYS1
LYS2
LYS3

(2)
Large
0.475
(0.271)*
0.076
(0.297)
0.239
(0.280)
0.269
(0.277)
0.009
(0.007)
0.003
(0.005)
0.001
(0.007)

CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
Trade Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Financial
Openness
Constant

-0.005
(0.002)**
1126

-0.006
(0.004)
889

(3)

(4)

1.021
(0.111)***
-0.358
(0.204)*
-0.165
(0.119)
-0.275
(0.091)***
0.006
(0.006)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.005)

0.731
(0.028)***

(5)
Small
0.691
(0.050)***
0.119
(0.092)
0.121
(0.096)
0.026
(0.059)
0.014
(0.005)***
0.005
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.004)

(6)
0.652
(0.073)***
0.111
(0.093)
0.086
(0.099)
-0.012
(0.054)
0.014
(0.005)***
0.005
(0.006)
-0.005
(0.004)

-0.144
(0.130)
-0.006
(0.006)

0.066
(0.070)
-0.005
(0.004)

0.017
(0.026)

0.043
(0.018)**

0.003
(0.001)*
0.000
(0.003)
770

-0.012
(0.003)***
2655

0.005
(0.001)***
-0.008
(0.004)**
2462

0.53

0.56

-0.011
(0.002)***
3365

Observations
Adjusted Rsquared
0.64
0.61
0.5
0.55
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. LYS1 is a dummy variable for dirty float regime; LYS2 is a dummy variable for dirty float/crawling peg; LYS3 is a dummy
variable for fixed.

40

Table 9: Current Account Persistence Accounting for Regime Endogeneity
(1)

CA(-1)
CA(-1) x LYS1hat
CA(-1) x LYS2hat
CA(-1) x LYS3hat
LYS1hat
LYS2hat
LYS3hat

(2)

(3)

All
0.766**
(0.355)
-0.621
(1.684)
0.988
(1.182)
-0.202
(0.331)
0.194***
(0.058)
0.156***
(0.050)
-0.023***
(0.009)

Industrial
1.255***
(0.324)
3.831**
(1.775)
-2.322
(2.573)
-0.916***
(0.299)
0.146**
(0.064)
-0.002
(0.062)
-0.0134*
(0.008)

NonIndustrial
0.512
(0.472)
-0.115
(2.102)
1.416
(1.251)
0.040
(0.439)
0.220**
(0.096)
0.161***
(0.058)
-0.024
(0.017)

-0.033***
(0.010)
2877
-0.033***
(0.010)
2877
0.553

-0.009
(0.007)
454
-0.009
(0.007)
454
0.805

-0.035*
(0.020)
2423
-0.035*
(0.020)
2423
0.534

60.684
0.000
0.724
0.395

2.454
0.484
1.491
0.222

53.445
0.000
0.019
0.890

(4)
NonIndustrial ex
oil

Observations
Adjusted R-sq
Wu-Hausman test
p-value
Sargan test
p-value

(7)

-0.032
(0.020)
2170
-0.032
(0.020)
2170
0.533

0.730*
(0.404)
-0.176
(2.227)
0.404
(1.664)
-0.185
(0.373)
0.167***
(0.064)
0.150*
(0.079)
-0.025**
(0.013)
0.061
(0.085)
0.019
(0.019)
0.003
(0.004)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.031***
(0.012)
2309
-0.031***
(0.012)
2309
0.576

NonIndustrial
0.377
(0.570)
0.653
(2.918)
0.999
(1.697)
0.132
(0.498)
0.215**
(0.101)
0.156*
(0.087)
-0.024
(0.021)
0.068
(0.090)
0.014
(0.020)
0.004
(0.004)
0.001
(0.001)
-0.037
(0.022)
1916
-0.037
(0.022)
1916
0.558

2.454
0.484
1.491
0.222

41.567
0.000
2.137
0.144

4.810
0.186
1.531
0.216

35.669
0.000
2.506
0.113

0.739
(0.505)
-1.216
(2.375)
1.393
(1.373)
-0.167
(0.465)
0.193*
(0.108)
0.144**
(0.057)
-0.026
(0.017)

Financial Openness

Observations
Constant

(6)
Industrial
1.707***
(0.392)
4.552**
(1.990)
-6.806**
(3.209)
-1.592***
(0.559)
0.147*
(0.082)
-0.128
(0.090)
-0.048***
(0.014)
0.447**
(0.210)
0.034
(0.024)
0.0175***
(0.005)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.009
(0.009)
393
0.009
(0.009)
393
0.813

CA(-1) x Trade
Openness
CA(-1) x Financial
Openness
Trade Openness

Constant

(5)
All

41

(8)
NonIndustrial ex
oil

0.610
(0.626)
-0.381
(3.614)
1.210
(1.740)
-0.125
(0.533)
0.182
(0.120)
0.157*
(0.082)
-0.023
(0.020)
0.079
(0.100)
0.003
(0.022)
0.001
(0.004)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.034
(0.021)
1710
-0.034
(0.021)
1710
0.559

21.499
0.000
2.082
0.149

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Dependent Variable: CA. LYS1hat is a predicted dummy variable for dirty float regime; LYS2hat is a predicted dummy variable for dirty
float/crawling peg; LYS3hat is a predicted dummy variable for fixed. Wu-Hausman test is test for exogeneity of the three regime variables. Sargan test is
a test for overidentifying restrictions.

42

Table 10: Real Exchange Rate Persistence, by Country Sample
(1)
REER(-1)

0.797

(2)
All
0.782

(0.024)***

(0.056)***

(0.053)***

-0.042
(0.075)
-0.101
(0.111)
0.064
(0.083)
0.181
(0.349)
0.450
(0.507)
-0.248
(0.386)

-0.029
(0.072)
-0.115
(0.106)
0.093
(0.073)
0.121
(0.340)
0.517
(0.487)
-0.377
(0.339)

REER(-1) x LYS1
REER(-1) x LYS2
REER(-1) x LYS3
LYS1
LYS2
LYS3
REER(-1) x
Trade Openness

(3)
0.785

(4)

(5)
Industrial
0.624
0.579

(0.055)***

(6)
0.704

(0.103)***

(0.102)***

0.035
(0.159)
-0.124
(0.152)
0.075
(0.104)
-0.171
(0.732)
0.611
(0.701)
-0.351
(0.490)

-0.119
(0.141)
-0.107
(0.159)
0.022
(0.095)
0.546
(0.647)
0.518
(0.729)
-0.106
(0.445)

(7)

(8)
Non-industrial
0.803
0.814

(0.024)***

(9)
0.832

(0.054)***

(0.060)***

-0.063
(0.077)
-0.120
(0.110)
0.032
(0.084)
0.280
(0.360)
0.529
(0.503)
-0.073
(0.390)

-0.034
(0.074)
-0.125
(0.106)
0.074
(0.076)
0.136
(0.353)
0.557
(0.483)
-0.270
(0.352)

(10)
(11)
(12)
Non-industrial ex-oil
0.779
0.733
0.728
(0.030)***

(0.043)***

(0.066)***

0.001
(0.083)
-0.033
(0.095)
0.097
(0.099)
-0.002
(0.394)
0.140
(0.444)
-0.366
(0.471)

0.019
(0.083)
-0.068
(0.096)
0.126
(0.094)
-0.092
(0.403)
0.307
(0.449)
-0.500
(0.450)

-0.115
(0.052)**

-0.122
-0.135

-0.130
(0.056)**

-0.134
(0.057)**

1.749

1.957

-0.055
(0.037)
0.408
(0.602)
0.267
(0.171)
1.454

0.932

0.840

-0.007
(0.029)
0.423
(0.233)*
0.025
(0.139)
0.918

1.037

1.205

-0.036
(0.044)
0.410
(0.242)*
0.148
(0.206)
1.420

(0.256)***

(0.481)***

(0.462)***

(0.112)***

(0.245)***

(0.295)***

(0.139)***

(0.205)***

(0.333)***

Observations
2489
1936
1728
687
Number of cn
92
90
88
24
R-squared
0.64
0.63
0.66
0.46
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

571
23
0.47

515
22
0.49

1802
92
0.65

1365
67
0.64

1213
66
0.67

1587
92
0.61

1176
59
0.59

1024
58
0.64

REER(-1) x
Financial Openness

0.956

1.001

-0.029
(0.024)
0.359
(0.212)*
0.129
(0.112)
1.129

(0.111)***

(0.258)***

(0.255)***

Trade Openness
Financial Openness
Constant

Notes: Dependent Variable: REER. LYS1 is a dummy variable for dirty float regime; LYS2 is a dummy variable for dirty float/crawling peg; LYS3 is a
dummy variable for fixed.

43

Table 11: Real Exchange Rate Persistence with Time Fixed Effects, by Country Sample
(1)
REER(-1)

0.776

(2)
All
0.739

(0.024)***

(0.055)***

(0.050)***

-0.011
(0.071)
-0.092
(0.110)
0.089
(0.080)
0.034
(0.331)
0.411
(0.507)
-0.381
(0.368)

0.001
(0.070)
-0.102
(0.104)
0.122
(0.068)*
-0.023
(0.329)
0.455
(0.478)
-0.533
(0.313)*

REER(-1) x LYS1
REER(-1) x LYS2
REER(-1) x LYS3
LYS1
LYS2
LYS3
REER(-1) x
Trade Openness

(3)
0.731

(4)

(5)
Industrial
0.624
0.585

(0.057)***

(6)
0.696

(0.097)***

(0.112)***

-0.026
(0.142)
-0.071
(0.195)
0.059
(0.093)
0.091
(0.655)
0.357
(0.915)
-0.290
(0.439)

-0.135
(0.151)
-0.096
(0.214)
-0.040
(0.107)
0.609
(0.695)
0.462
(0.997)
0.173
(0.500)

(7)

(8)
Non-industrial
0.768
0.731

(0.026)***

(9)
0.719

(0.056)***

(0.063)***

-0.011
(0.072)
-0.092
(0.111)
0.095
(0.082)
0.023
(0.338)
0.387
(0.506)
-0.425
(0.383)

0.013
(0.069)
-0.100
(0.104)
0.141
(0.071)*
-0.099
(0.330)
0.426
(0.475)
-0.650
(0.332)*

(10)
(11)
(12)
Non-industrial ex-oil
0.750
0.645
0.627
(0.032)***

(0.046)***

(0.071)***

0.062
(0.077)
0.017
(0.099)
0.164
(0.093)*
-0.304
(0.363)
-0.107
(0.462)
-0.739
(0.443)

0.067
(0.077)
-0.016
(0.099)
0.192
(0.085)**
-0.336
(0.373)
0.046
(0.460)
-0.885
(0.405)**

-0.107
(0.056)*

-0.057
(0.165)

-0.113
(0.057)*

-0.104
(0.058)*

1.763

1.965

-0.061
(0.038)
0.047
(0.784)
0.289
(0.175)
1.553

1.089

1.218

-0.023
(0.028)
0.352
(0.255)
0.110
(0.128)
1.635

1.174

1.615

-0.046
(0.040)
0.309
(0.253)
0.206
(0.186)
2.123

(0.287)***

(0.494)***

(0.587)**

(0.118)***

(0.322)***

(0.338)***

(0.149)***

(0.298)***

(0.370)***

Time Fixed Effects
yes
yes
yes
yes
Observations
2489
1936
1728
687
Number of cn
92
90
88
24
R-squared
0.68
0.68
0.73
0.52
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

yes
571
23
0.53

yes
515
22
0.57

yes
1802
92
0.71

yes
1365
67
0.71

yes
1213
66
0.77

yes
1587
92
0.67

yes
1176
59
0.67

yes
1024
58
0.74

REER(-1) x
Financial Openness

1.052

1.236

-0.032
(0.021)
0.326
(0.245)
0.162
(0.100)
1.487

(0.113)***

(0.265)***

(0.257)***

Trade Openness
Financial Openness
Constant

Notes: Dependent Variable: REER. LYS1 is a dummy variable for dirty float regime; LYS2 is a dummy variable for dirty float/crawling peg; LYS3 is a
dummy variable for fixed.

44

8
6
Density
4
2
0
0

1

2

3

lys

Figure 1: Levy-Yeyati and Sturzennegger index (higher values are more fixed)

10
8
6
Density
4
2
0
1

1.5

2
irrx

2.5

3

Figure 2: Reinhart and Rogoff index, aggregated and inverted (higher values are more
fixed). “Freely falling” regime observations omitted

1

2
1
0
-1

arco0

arco1

arco2

arco3

Figure 3: Individual autoregressive coefficients (no trend) for LYS categories (higher
indicates more fixity).

2

2
1
0
-1

arco0

arco1

arco2

arco3

Figure 4: Individual autoregressive coefficients (with trend) for LYS categories (higher
indicates more fixity).

3

Endnotes
1

We check for higher order autoregressive terms, and find that an AR(1) is sufficient for the annual

data. The sole exception is for the category of non-industrial countries (and non-industrial ex.-oil
exporters) under a fixed exchange rate regime. In that case the 2nd lag is typically statistically
significant. However, the pattern of persistence, as measured by the sum of the autoregressive
coefficients, is unchanged relative to the baseline specification.
2

We did estimate regressions of this form, and did not obtain any significant results. Subsequent

results indicate a lack of the requisite monotonicity which explains why this approach does not yield
significant estimates.
3

We have also employed the de jure index based upon the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange

Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions instead of the de facto measures. The results indicate no
systematic relationship.
4

A panel regression of the absolute value of current account balances on regime dummies indicates a

significant positive effect for the fixed exchange rate dummy in the full, and non-industrial country
samples. Industrial countries exhibit no pattern, either allowing for fixed effects or not.
5

This means we have omitted the “freely falling” regime observations, following Graciela Kaminsky’s

observation that such episodes are fundamentally distinct from freely floating.
6

The samples have been truncated below at -1.5 and above at 2, to eliminate imprecisely estimated

coefficients.
7

It has been pointed out that the response of current account reversion to exchange rate regime might

differ if the regimes change every year or couple of years. Hence, we have checked to see if the results
remain unchanged if we drop all observations where the regime has changed over the past three years.
We then find that for LDC samples, CA persistence does rise with exchange rate fixity, but that this
4

finding is not robust to inclusion of openness variables. Once these variables are included, there is no
evidence that greater exchange rate fixity leads to greater exchange rate persistence.
8

If country fixed effects are included, then the estimated rates of reversion for all regimes and country

groupings rise – that is persistence is less marked once each current account is allowed to revert to a
country-specific mean.
9

See for instance Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1997, 1998) and Edwards (2004).

10

Ghosh et al. (2008) finds that large surpluses, defined as surpluses above the 75 percentile, are more

persistent in fixed and intermediate regimes, while large deficits exhibit less persistence in
intermediate regimes. We cannot replicate these exact results, using our measures of de facto exchange
rates and our sample of countries. We also find that the results vary substantially by country grouping.
The industrial country grouping, in particular, exhibits different patterns from the non-industrial
country grouping.
11

Here, we incorporate the nonlinear effects only when the relevant coefficient is statistically

significant.
12

There are too few observations in the dirty float and dirty float/crawling peg categories to make

inferences.
13

While Ghosh et al. (2008) pool over all countries in a given regression, we break down by groupings

in our finest detail. Our specification is in principle more general and more flexible. In addition, our
samples are also larger.
14

See Chinn (2006) for a discussion of effective exchange rates.

15

Mark and Sul (2008) have argued that the standard practice of using time fixed effects overstates the

rate of convergence when there is serial correlation in the common factor. To the extent that their
argument is valid in our sample, it would tend to reduce the discrepancy between the reversion rates
estimated for each exchange rate regime.
5

16

Cashin and McDermott (2004) obtain similar results using the Reinhart-Rogoff classifications.

6

