NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS POLAND AT RISK OF A BOOM-AND-BUST CYCLE IN THE RUN-UP TO EURO
ADOPTION?
Barry Eichengreen
Katharina Steiner
Working Paper 14438
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14438

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

This paper was prepared for the National Report on Poland's Membership in the Euro Area, commissioned
by the National Bank of Poland. It was begun while Steiner was visiting UC Berkeley, whose hospitality
is acknowledged with thanks. We thank Bernhard Mahlberg for helpful comments. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Barry Eichengreen and Katharina Steiner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Is Poland at Risk of a Boom-and-Bust Cycle in the Run-Up to Euro Adoption?
Barry Eichengreen and Katharina Steiner
NBER Working Paper No. 14438
October 2008
JEL No. F0,F15
ABSTRACT
We ask whether Poland is at risk of the boom-bust problem that has afflicted economies around the
time of euro adoption. Our answer, inevitably, is mixed. On the one hand the fact that Poland is an
outlier, credit-growth wise, accentuates the danger of a boom if one believes in mean reversion. Our
econometrics indicate that the fall in interest rates that will flow from expectations of euro adoption
will further feed that boom. On the other hand the fact that interest rates have already converged part
way to euro-area levels (and more extensively than in earlier adopters that experienced a sharp fall
in rates and a pronounced credit boom), especially in the case of lending to firms, suggests that this
shock may be less intense in Poland. And it is certainly conceivable that the same policies and country
characteristics (not always visible to the econometrician) that have restrained credit growth in the past
may continue to do so in the future. The broader literature also points to two set of factors, the first
of which makes the danger of an unsustainable credit boom more immediate, the second of which
makes it more remote. In the first category are the continuing limitations of the supervisory framework
and the weakness of the finance minister in the budget-making process. In the second are a record
of rigorous prudential supervision and the existence of relatively competitive labor markets.

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
Katharina Steiner
vienna university of economics and business admini
vienna, austria
katharina.steiner@uni-wien.ac.at

Is Poland at Risk of a Boom-and-Bust Cycle in the Run-Up to Euro Adoption?
Barry Eichengreen and Katharina Steiner1
September 2008

1.

Introduction
This paper takes as a given that Poland will adopt the euro and asks how it should

manage the transition.2 It considers the boom-bust problem that has afflicted economies around
the time of euro adoption. It analyzes why those boom-bust cycles occurred. It explores the
consequences. It asks what might have ensured superior outcomes.
Poland is not Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Spain, Estonia, Lithuania or Latvia. It is
important, in other words, to avoid mechanical comparisons. Compared to other countries that
did or are experiencing credit booms in the run-up to euro adoption, the growth of credit to the
private sector has been relatively subdued.3 The increase in housing prices has been relatively
limited. Residential mortgage debt as a percent of GDP remains relatively low.4 The challenge is
that it is not always clear in which direction the differences point. On the one hand, that Poland
has not displayed similar excesses could mean that it has the problem of booming bank lending,
excessive wage growth, and housing-market speculation under control. Firm supervision and
regulation, cautious monetary and fiscal policies, and competitive product and factor markets
may mean that Poland is at less risk of these excesses than its predecessors. On the other hand, it
could simply be that euro adoption has remained sufficiently remote that there has been little
1

University of California, Berkeley and Vienna University of Economics and Business Administration, respectively.
This paper was prepared for the National Report on Poland’s Membership in the Euro Area, commissioned by the
National Bank of Poland. It was begun while Steiner was visiting UC Berkeley, whose hospitality is acknowledged
with thanks. We thank Bernhard Mahlberg for helpful comments.
2
The current plan is for euro adoption in 2011.
3
Some might add the qualifier “until recently.”
4
To avoid misunderstanding, it is important to emphasize that all these are statements about Poland relative to
comparator countries.

1

reason to expect signs of its effects. But not long from now, as euro adoption draws near, the
same dynamics evident in the early adopters may develop. Indeed, insofar as there is still scope
for movements in prices and quantities, a displacement of Polish markets may occur.
This is not the first paper to consider the credit-boom problem in the run-up to euro
adoption.5 Nor is it the first to consider strategies for managing the transition in Central and
Eastern Europe.6 But it differs from its predecessors in several ways. It does not focus just on
member states that experienced pronounced booms in the run-up to euro adoption; it seeks to
avoid the problem of selection bias by considering the population of relevant countries. And it
looks more closely at Poland’s situation, taking as its focus the structure of its financial markets
and the organization of supervision and regulation.
Section 2 describes the now familiar boom-and-bust scenario. Section 3 then reviews the
experience of other catch-up economies that have adopted the euro. While highlighting the
credit-boom-and-bust cycle experienced in some such countries, it also emphasizes the existence
of heterogeneity within this subset of EU member states and points to the absence of
destabilizing dynamics in some members. This then leads to a discussion of why experience has
varied so widely.
Section 4 through 6 then take a closer look at Poland. Section 4 looks more closely at
credit market and real estate developments. Sections 5 and 6 then ask whether Poland can avoid
the kind of boom-bust cycle that has afflicted other catch-up economies adopting the euro.
Section 5 analyzes Poland’s susceptibility to a credit boom by estimating credit-market dynamics
in a large sample of emerging market economies and using that model to forecast the evolution
of private credit. But forecasting exercises only being as reliable as the assumptions that go into
5

See for example Blanchard (2006), Fagan and Gaspar (2008) and Martin and Schiknecht (2008). Appendix Table
A is a summary of contributions to the literature that take the sort of econometric approach that we implement below.
6
On this see Borowski and Brzoz-Brezezina (2004) and Darvas and Szapary (2008).

2

them, some uncertainty about the country’s susceptibility nonetheless remains. Section 6
suggests that the outcome will turn on four issues. First, how sharply will interest rates come
down? Second, how effectively will wage discipline be maintained? Third, will the government
be able to resist pressures for increased spending? Fourth, will bank regulators effectively
restrain the impulse for an unsustainable credit boom?
Section 7 summarizes the implications of the preceding analysis.

2.

The Boom-Bust Scenario
The standard boom-bust scenario for catch-up economies focuses on real interest rates.

Prior to the adoption of the euro, real and nominal interest rates are high, reflecting capital
scarcity and imperfect policy credibility. As accession to the euro area approaches, inflation and
nominal interest rates converge toward euro-area levels. Short rates are driven to equality by
capital mobility and the ECB’s practice of assigning the short-term sovereign debt instruments of
all euro-area member governments to the same liquidity category, implying the same haircut
when accepting them as collateral. Convergence of inflation tends to be slower: there is more
inertia in product and labor markets, and catch-up economies continue to be characterized by
relatively high inflation owing to the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
The consequent decline in real interest rates will stimulate consumption and investment
spending. Households and firms will demand additional credit to finance their spending, and the
financial system will respond. The decline in real interest rates will put upward pressure on asset
prices, including the price of real estate. Strong demand will make for a buoyant labor market,
encouraging workers to escalate their wage demands. With investment up and savings down, the

3

current account deficit will widen. Debt service costs having declined, the government will be
tempted to increase spending.
But if the strong growth of real wages persists, international competitiveness will
deteriorate. Export growth will slow, and import competition will intensify. As profits are
squeezed, firms will cut back on investment, and as growth slows, households will curtail their
consumption. As demand falls off, unemployment will rise, and the country will discover that it
is saddled with a real overvaluation that can be eliminated only through years of grinding
deflation. There will be little scope for using stabilizing policy, since the country lacks monetary
independence and the government will have accumulated a substantial debt. The party will be
over. The souvenirs will be the memories and the hangover.
A few observations about this story may be helpful. First, the impact effect will depend
on the extent of the drop in real interest rates, which will in turn depend on the change in
nominal rates and on how far above euro-area levels they were prior to the transition. It will
depend on the continuing inflation differential and on how far behind the euro area the country is
in per-capita-income terms. We should not expect the same real interest rate effect in all cases.
Second, the reaction of households and firms is not entirely irrational. Lower real interest
rates mean positive wealth effects for net foreign debtors. A lower cost of capital will mean
faster growth for capital-scarce economies. It thus makes sense for firms to invest more. It
makes sense for households to increase their consumption in anticipation of higher future
incomes. One would expect to see faster growth in the short run as the economy traverses to a

4

higher capital/output ratio.7 One would expect to see transitional current account deficits since
the increase in consumption precedes the increase in income.
Third, it is necessary to add disequilibrium dynamics for this temporary acceleration to
become an unsustainable boom followed by an extended recession. Real wages have to rise by
more than is justified by the increase in the capital stock. Households have to boost their
consumption by more than is justified by higher future incomes. The financial system has to
increase credit to the public sector by more than is prudent given the fundamentals. The
government has to increase its spending by more than is warranted by the decline in debtservicing costs.8
Putting the point this way not meant to deny these possibilities. To the contrary, it is
natural for agents, never having seen this adjustment before, to extrapolate from the present. It is
not surprising that they overreact. But there is no reason to expect an equally severe
overreaction in all times and places. The extent to which real wages rise and competitiveness
deteriorates will depend on the structure of the labor market. The extent of the credit boom will
depend on the structure of the financial system and on how it is regulated. Whether fiscal policy
is a problem or a solution will depend on the political circumstances of the government. The
extent to which everyone extrapolates the present and overreacts will depend on how many other

7

These are presumably the mechanisms through which membership in the EU and the euro area are supposed to
give rise to what is known in EU parlance as “convergence” – that is, to closing the gap between per capita incomes
in the poorer and richer member stats.
8
Not simply because, like other agents, it gets carried away by the boom but also because it may have been forced
to contract public spending or raise taxes by more than is politically sustainable in the period when it was seeking to
quality for admission to the euro area, creating a tendency to relax fiscal discipline immediately thereafter –
something that the Stability and Growth Pact is designed to address but has not always succeeded in doing in
practice.

5

catch-up economies have experienced such problems previously and how successfully lessons
are drawn from their experience.9

3.

Comparative Experience
Figure 1 shows the behavior of real interest rates in catch-up economies adopting the euro,

other recent entrants to the euro area, and Poland. A sharp drop in real rates (constructed here as
the government bond rate adjusted for concurrent CPI inflation) is evident in Greece, Ireland,
Portugal and Spain. Rates drop from more than five per cent to the neighborhood of zero in all
four cases before moving back up.10 That there has been some reversal is not surprising: zero is
not an equilibrium level for real interest rates. In all four cases the decline in real interest rates
began several years before adoption of the euro. In four cases it persisted for several years
following the change-over.11
It is harder to generalize about the remaining cases. In Slovenia real interest rates had
already declined to low levels in 2003, and with the country’s high income there was relatively
little Balassa-Samuelson inflation. It is thus not surprising that there is not much evidence of a
real interest rate decline as euro adoption drew near. Malta and Cyprus similarly have relatively
high incomes and well-developed financial systems. Evidently their relatively small and
specialized economies make for volatile real interest rates, complicating inference. In Poland
9

Another way of understanding these points is in the context of exchange-rate-based stabilizations, which are close
cousins to euro adoptions. These are episodes where countries bring down inflation by pegging the exchange rate
and—hopefully—using that space to implement complementary policies. The decline in inflation is likely to be
gradual (though how gradual is a matter of dispute; see Sargent 1986). Interest rates will come down faster. There
will be a large capital account surplus and current account deficit as investment surges and flight capital is
repatriated. Households will go on a spending spree. Unless fiscal policy is tightened or other measures are taken to
damp down demand, there will be an erosion of competitiveness, and eventually boom will turn to bust. This can be
thought of as a more extreme version of the same phenomenon considered here. Models of the process include
Calvo and Vegh (1999) and Antolia and Buffie (2006).
10
It is not surprising that the timing and, indeed, the shape of this reversal is different in Ireland, given that
country’s distinctive industry structure and sensitivity to global high-tech activity.
11
In Portugal the trend was interrupted in 1999-2000.

6

real interest rates measured on the same basis as in the other countries have already come down
from 6 per cent to less than 4 per cent – that is, half way to a reasonable equilibrium level of 2
per cent. This would seem to imply that the need for a further adjustment and the danger of the
associated dislocations, while still there, are less than in the first four cases.
The figures that follow consider the experience of these same countries in the two years
prior to euro adoption, in the two years following the changeover, and the two years after that
(see Figures 2 to 4).12 For Poland we use the two most recent years of data at time of writing.
Growth and inflation trajectories are heterogeneous, not surprisingly given that these
variables are affected by myriad other influences in addition to euro adoption.13 Portugal
appears unusual in that its growth rate already slowed in its first two years under the euro, a
pattern that is not evident elsewhere. Either the competitiveness problem was unusually quick to
develop in Portugal, or something else in addition to euro adoption was working to depress
growth.14
One explanation suggested by Blanchard (2006) is that Portugal’s exports have a
relatively low technology content, placing the country squarely in the sights of China.
According to the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2005),
some 60 per cent of Portugal’s exports are relatively low tech, compared to 30 per cent for the
euro area. Sustaining output and employment growth thus would have required a decline in unit
labor costs relative to other euro area members, where Portugal saw a substantial rise. This
explains why Portugal’s experience differed from Ireland’s and Spain’s, but it does not explain
why it differed from Greece’s. According to ESCB (2005), Greece had an even higher share of
low-tech goods in its exports than Portugal—67 versus 61 per cent—in 2000-1. (In contrast,
12

Data permitting.
Notably events elsewhere in the EU and the world.
14
Or both.
13

7

Spain had 41 per cent, Ireland 14 per cent.) Evidently, something else was at work in addition to
the technology content of exports.
Another possibility is that real wages surged ahead even more strongly than in other
catch-up economies, both before and after euro adoption, owing not to market behavior but to
public-sector settlements. Comparing public- and private-sector wages shows that it was the
former that led the increase. In Portugal spending ministries did not face hard budget constraints
owing to the decentralized nature of fiscal policy making. The education ministry could agree to
generous increases in teachers’ pay (teachers being among their constituents) without having to
worry about how to fund them.15 Hallerberg and Wolff (2006) show Portugal as having weaker
budgetary institutions than Ireland and Spain according to their measures of procedural
centralization and agenda-setting power of the finance minister. And with public-sector wages
surging ahead, private-sector salaries followed.
A related hypothesis is that Portugal entered the period with relatively large fiscal deficits
as a result of weak budgetary institutions.16 Even member states with relatively large deficits in
the late 1990s could become founding members of the euro area because they had the ability to
prevent the project from going forward, something that is not true of new EU members seeking
to join the euro area subsequently. And as a relatively small country, Portugal was then subject
to stringent application of the Stability and Growth Pact, its deficit/GDP ratio having risen
further to 4.2 per cent by 2001.17 That member states now seeking to adopt the euro will have to
show greater fiscal discipline in the two preceding years (since they lack leverage to block the
15

In Portugal the relevant minister leads negotiations with the corresponding public-sector union; see European
Industrial Relations Observatory (2007).
16
The decentralization of budgetary procedures and the lack of agenda-setting power of the finance minister allowed
primary expenditure as a share of GDP to rise from 34 per cent of GDP in 1990-92 to 37 per cent in 1993-5, 38 per
cent in 1996-8 and nearly 41 per cent in 1999-2001. Data from Braga de Macedo (2007).
17
Application has become somewhat less stringent as the country’s doldrums have deepened, allowing the budget
deficit to widen again.

8

process) is reassuring from this point of view. That they may similarly be subject to stringent
application of the Stability and Growth Pact is not unless one is sure that there would otherwise
be a tendency for fiscal policy to run out of control.

4. A Closer Look at Credit and Real Estate Market Developments in Poland
In this section we take a closer look at developments in Poland. Our focus is on credit
aggregates and developments in the real estate market.
Since 2003, credit has grown more slowly in Poland than in any other Central and
Eastern European country.18 Figure 5 shows that credit to households and firms followed a
broadly similar pattern in Poland and in Central and Eastern Europe as a whole in the 1990s but
diverged thereafter. To be sure, even before 2000 there were differences between Poland and the
rest of the region: in Poland credit to firms grew unusually fast in 1998; credit to households
continued to increase until 2000 whereas it slowed down in the group of comparator countries.
But the most persistent and visible divergences are after the turn of the century. In the CEE-10 as
a group, credit to households expanded at rates in excess of 30 per cent per annum and peaking
in 2004 at a growth rate of nearly 60 per cent. In Poland, in contrast, the growth of credit to
households has remained relatively subdued, hovering between 10 and 20 per cent per annum
prior to 2006, when its growth rate reached 30 per cent. Even then, this credit aggregate was
growing at a slower path than the CEE-10 average. One explanation for this is that the
classification of bank loans as nonperforming was relatively rigorous and stringent in Poland (at
least through 2003). Having to classify a relatively large number of loans as nonperforming left
Polish banks cash strapped (Breuss, Fink and Haiss 2004). See also Figure 6. Subsequently,

18

Throughout our comparison group is the CEE-10 made up of Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Romania, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Croatia and Bulgaria.

9

loans previously classified as substandard were reclassified as satisfactory, and credit to
households took off (National Bank of Poland 2004).
Credit to firms has grown more slowly both in Poland and the region as a whole. But the
contrast between Poland and the CEE-10 is equally dramatic. In Poland, credit to firms trended
downward in the first half of the present decade, actually shrinking in 2004-5. This is in contrast
to the CEE-10, where the growth rate was not only positive and significantly higher than in
Poland but also trending upward.19 Investment by Polish firms was therefore relatively subdued.
Firms used a significant portion of their retained earnings to pay off foreign-currencydenominated liabilities. Possible explanations include the fact that demand growth was not as
buoyant as in CEE-10 as a whole, the relatively strict classification of loans as nonperforming,
which constrained lending to firms by Polish banks (as described above) and political uncertainty
(including some discussion of the possibility of reversing earlier privatizations). As with credit
to households, there are signs (in the data for 2006-7) that the period of very slow growth of
credit to firms may now be over. Still, experience to date is rather different than in the rest of the
region.
Figure 7 disaggregates not by type of borrower but by currency of denomination. Again,
broadly similar movements (punctuated by temporary divergences like the rapid growth of
foreign-currency denominated credit in Poland in 1998) give way to persistent divergences after
the turn of the century. Between 2002 and 2007, both the domestic-and foreign-currency
components of credit to the private sector grow more slowly in Poland than in the rest of the

19

The Czech and Slovak Republics also experienced negative growth rates of credit to firms at the beginning of the
decade, but those growth rates recovered fast.

10

region.20 Again, there are hints that the period of relatively subdued credit growth may be
coming to an end. In particular the growth of foreign-currency-denominated credit shoots up in
2006 at the same time that its growth is decelerating in the rest of the region. In 2007, Poland
follows the trend of the comparator group with a decrease in foreign currency credit. The
majority of Polish foreign currency loans are denominated in Swiss francs, but there are also
foreign currency loans in euros and U.S. dollars. The bulk of these foreign currency loans are
housing loans secured by mortgages.21 This suggests where risks may be concentrated going
forward.22
The prices associated with these quantities can be seen in Figures 8-9. Figure 8 does not
point to big differences between Poland and the rest of the region in the cost of domestic- and
foreign-currency-denominated borrowing.23 Figure 9, which again distinguishes households and
firms, is more suggestive. The main change in recent years has been the significant decline in
the cost of loans to Polish firms, which was concentrated in the period 2001-2003. This may
have been due to growing competition from foreign banks, whose presence in the Polish market
increased significantly in this period. The cost of borrowing has also declined for households,
but less dramatically. The result is that borrowing costs for Polish firms are now
indistinguishable from those of firms in the euro area. Polish households, in contrast, continue to
face significantly higher costs than their euro-area counterparts. This suggests that if there is
going to be a further drop in interest rates with euro adoption, this will be mainly evident in loans

20

While private credit in foreign currency in CEE-10 increased by 23 percentage points between 2002 and 2005, it
declined from 19 percent in 2002 to -3 percent in 2005 in Poland. The only other country besides Poland where the
growth of private credit was consistently negative in this period was the Czech Republic.
21
See Polish National Bank (2007).
22
We will have more to say about the Polish housing market below.
23
See Luca and Petrova (2007) for an analysis of drivers of foreign currency credit to firms in CEECs.

11

to households, including those for housing-related purposes. Evidently, this is where concerns
over the credit-boom-and-bust phenomenon need to focus.
Finally, the real estate market has behaved differently in Poland than the rest of the region
(see Figure 10). In the five years ending in 2007, housing prices rose by less than 2 per cent per
annum, slower than anywhere else in Central and Eastern Europe (Egert and Mihaljek 2007).
The behavior of rents is consistent with the relatively subdued behavior of prices: since the turn
of the century rents on cooperatively owned properties have essentially been flat in nominal
terms, while rents on privately and communally owned properties have risen by about 6 per cent
per annum, this in a period when CPI inflation has been averaging 3.5 per cent. But house prices
as a share of disposable income are the lowest of any EU country. The share of housing loans in
total commercial bank lending to households was lower than in any country but the Czech
Republic.24 The ratio of mortgage debt to GDP as of the end of 2006 was lower than anywhere
in the European Union except Romania and Slovenia. The rate of growth of that ratio from 2002
through 2006 was slower than anywhere but Slovenia. Mortgage debt per capita is lower than
anywhere but Romania. Loan-to-value ratios on typical new mortgages are as low or lower than
anywhere in the EU but Hungary.25 All this said, real estate prices have been frothy in the center
of Warsaw, and the fastest growing component of credit to households has been for housing.26
Roughly 40 per cent of those loans are foreign-currency denominated. Again this points to the
likely location of risks in the not-too-distant future.
The fact that bank credit to the private sector as a share of GDP remains low—at 30 per cent
in 2006 considerably lower than in most of the comparator countries—similarly suggests that
there may be scope for a lending surge. In Ireland, Portugal and Spain the ratio of private credit
24

Egert and Mihaljek (2007), Table 2.
Data in this and the preceding four sentences are from Miles and Pillonca (2008).
26
IMF (2008b), Figure 1, p.21.
25

12

to GDP was in the range of 45 per cent to 75 per cent prior to the adoption of the euro and rose to
more than 100 per cent subsequently. Using earlier data, Cottarelli, Dell’Ariccia and VladkovaHollar (2003) estimated an equilibrium ratio of bank credit to the private sector to GDP for a
country with Poland’s characteristics on the order of 70 per cent. Their estimate should now
probably be regarded as a lower bound.27 The size of the disequilibrium thus points to the nonnegligible possibility of a credit boom.

5. An Econometric Analysis of Credit Market Dynamics
One way of addressing the question of whether Poland is likely to experience a credit
boom is to build a model of the determinants of private credit (as a share of GDP) and to
extrapolate on the basis of forecasts of the independent variables. We use a balanced panel of
annual data for 50 middle-income countries including Poland and covering the period 19962006.28 We estimate a model which includes factors driving demand and supply for credit
(building on previous studies such as Cottarelli, Dell’Ariccia and Vladkova-Hollar 2005):
-

+

-

+

PCGDP = ƒ (INTR, RGDPC, INFL, INDX)

(1)

where PCGDP is the ratio of private credit to GDP, INTR is the average nominal interest rate,
RGDPC is GDP per capita in constant prices, INFL is the year-on-year CPI inflation rate, and
INDX is a financial openness index measuring the absence of capital controls. (LN in the table
below indicates that a variable is expressed in logs.) Specification tests tell us that the data
27

The estimates in Egert, Backe and Zumer (2006) point to somewhat higher equilibrium levels, although the
authors emphasize the uncertainty surrounding their estimates. Those in Kiss, Nagy and Vonnak (2006) suggest
somewhat lower equilibrium levels. Details are in Appendix A.
28
The sample is based on the World Trade Organization of middle-income countries. The Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, the Slovak Republic and Trinidad and Tobago graduated to the high-income category into 2006 according
to the WTO, as did Slovenia in 1997 and Singapore somewhat earlier. The country list and other information related
to estimation are in Appendix B.

13

should be entered in logs rather than levels; in the one case where this is not clear (that of capital
account openness), we enter the variable both ways. We also include country dummies where
these are needed to pick up shifts in the structural relationship.29
Expected signs of the variables are indicated above where they appear in eqn. 1. We
expect the interest rate to enter negatively: as interest rates come down, whether for reasons of
euro adoption, because of unrelated capital inflows or otherwise, we expect private credit to
boom. Higher levels of per capita income are indicative of economic and financial development
and stability conducive to the growth of credit markets and the demand for credit. Low and
stable inflation should similarly be conducive to the development of credit markets. Finally we
expect a more open capital account (a higher value of INDX) to be associated with a higher
private credit ratio insofar as this is indicative of a more liberalized financial environment.
Results are in Table 4. The “a” columns show the estimates when we control for country
fixed effects. (The two variants differ by whether capital account openness is entered in levels or
logs.) All coefficients are statistically significant and enter with their expected signs; the rsquared is relatively high, and the Hausman test accepts the use of country fixed effects.
Estimates including time-fixed effects (not reported) differ in that the coefficient on INDX is not
significantly different from zero, but this version has a relatively low r-squared and, in any case,
the Hausman test rejects the use of time fixed-effects in favor of period-random effects. We
therefore report instead estimates using period random effects in the “b” columns. The Hausman
test accepts this specification, the distribution of residuals is normal, and the coefficients are all
significant. The one anomaly here, for which we don’t have an explanation, is the negative
29

Most of these are quite intuitive. The list of retained country dummies is Brazil starting in 1998 (currency crisis
and inflation stabilization), Colombia starting in 2000 (new reporting system for data), the Dominican Republic
starting in 2003 (banking crisis), Indonesia starting in 1999 (currency and financial crisis), Suriname starting in 2002
(new data reporting system), Ukraine starting in 1998 (new and improved data reporting system) and Guyana
(reason for the structural break not clear to us).

14

coefficient on the capital account openness variable. Finally in the “c” columns we include both
country fixed and time random effects.30 The coefficients are all significant and have the
expected signs. We take this as the preferred specification.31
Using this model we can ask whether Poland is a significant outlier. We construct the
fitted value of private credit to GDP for Poland for 2006 and compare it with the actual value.
As expected, the actual value of private credit as a share of GDP (33.3 per cent) is well below the
fitted values shown in Table 5. Our preferred specification in column 2c suggests that the
credit/GDP ratio in 2006 should have been 10 percentage points higher than its actual value.
(The country-fixed-effects-based estimates point to slightly smaller discrepancies but are
basically compatible. The time random effects estimates, with their anomalous coefficients on
the openness index among other things, point to much larger discrepancies.)
Say that the discrepancy disappeared in two years (that the credit/GDP ratio rose by 5
percentage points in each year). With nominal GDP growing at 5 per cent, private credit in
nominal terms would have to be expanding at almost 10 per cent a year.32 This suggests that
there is scope for at least a modest credit boom if Poland converges to predicted levels of credit
in a relatively short period of time. That said, annual rates of growth of nominal credit of 10 per
cent are not as alarming as those seen in some other euro-adopting countries. And a ratio to

30

We also considered a variety of other estimators, such as country random effects and two way random effects, all
of which yielded broadly compatible results but none of which were obviously preferred on the basis of the standard
specification tests.
31
We also conducted a number of sensitivity analyses of the results. Most of the results were robust to estimating
the equation in first differences; only the coefficient on the interest rate showed instability. Estimating the equation
for the Central and Eastern European countries again produced similar results, although a smaller sample meant
lower levels of precision. In addition, limiting the sample to Central and Easern Europe allowed us to enter a
measure of nonperforming loans (as a share of GDP) – data that we do not have for other regions – which turned out
to be statistically significant as well. We did some exploration with other explanatory variables – the ratio of public
debt to GDP and a measure of corruption/transparency were statistically significant in some specifications. But we
stuck with our initial specification for purposes of counterfactual simulation so as to limit the danger of data mining.
32
There are of course second-round effects: the rise in the denominator of the credit/GDP will raise credit growth a
bit more according to our estimates.

15

GDP of 43 per cent is not as alarming as the ratios in excess of 80 per cent in countries like
Estonia and Latvia in 2006.
A more speculative way of using this model is to assume forecasts for the independent
variables for 2010 and to compute the predicted value of the dependent variable. We extrapolate
the independent variables linearly on the basis of recent growth rates. We then extrapolate the
dependent variable, asking what the credit ratio will look like in 2010 if things continue
unchanged.
If the situation in 2005-06 persists, extrapolation suggests a credit/GDP of 58 per cent, up
from 33 per cent in 2006. Again this points to an annual rate of growth of nominal credit slightly
in excess of 10 per cent.33 If we extrapolate all the independent variables and use our preferred
model (column 2c), we get a predicted ratio for 2010 of 52 per cent. This suggests an annual
average rate of nominal credit growth on the order of 8 ½-9 per cent.

6. Is There a Boom-Bust Cycle in Poland’s Future?
How much at risk is Poland of the kind of boom-bust cycle that has afflicted other catchup economies adopting the euro? The answer turns, in our view, on four issues. First, how
dramatically will interest rates come down? Second, will wage discipline be maintained? Third,
will the government be able to resist pressure for increased public spending? Fourth and finally,
will bank regulators effectively restrain the impulse for an unsustainable credit boom? Our
answer to the first question, “not that dramatically,” is somewhat reassuring. Our answers to the
second, third and fourth questions, alas, are maybe, maybe and maybe.
a) How dramatically will interest rates come down?

33

Again assuming nominal GDP growth of 5 per cent per annum.

16

Poland’s real interest rates have already come down half-way from typical catch-upeconomy levels to post-euro-adoption levels, as noted above, both because nominal interest rates
are relatively low and because growth is five per cent, lower than in cases like Ireland in the
1990s. This suggests that the financial impulse will be less than in earlier catch-up economies
adopting the euro. However, as shown in Figure 15, interest rates on loans to households are still
much higher in Poland than in the euro area. The decline in interest rates has been due mainly to
the decline in rates on credit to firms which still leaves scope for a significant impulse from
declining rates on credit to households.
b) Will wage discipline be maintained?
A key question is how labor market institutions will respond. As interest rates come
down with the adoption of the euro and spending increases, will the pressure of demand pass
through into wage settlements, eroding the competitiveness of exports? Evidence on what kind
of labor market arrangements encourage appropriate adjustments and which ones are conducive
to the kind of problems alluded to in the preceding sentence is notoriously fragile. For what it is
worth the hump-shaped hypothesis of Calmfors and Driffill (1988) suggests that both highly
decentralized and highly centralized/coordinated systems are likely to work relatively well in this
context. In highly centralized and coordinated labor markets, social pacts can be negotiated to
restrain the growth of wages in the boom period. In relatively atomistic markets, wages will be
free to adjust downward when the boom ends. In intermediate systems where union membership
and bargaining coverage are extensive but not encompassing or well coordinated, these happy
outcomes are less likely. Different sectoral unions will not internalize the implications of their
wage setting for wage setting by other sectoral unions. Leapfrogging will occur. It will be
difficult to negotiate a social pact to restrain wage inflation. Similarly, when the boom ends,

17

there will be resistance to being the first union to agree to wage reductions. Insiders, who shape
union policy, will have different incentives than their unemployed brethren.
Poland appears to be fairly far out in the direction of competitive labor markets.34 Union
density is low by EU standards (union coverage somewhat less so, reflecting the ability of the
government to extend agreements by employers to non-unionized workers in the same sector
when this is a “vital social interest”).35 Employment protection legislation is modest by the
standards of Greece, Spain and certainly Portugal (which had the most restrictive regulations at
the beginning of the present decade).36 Wages in different sectors appear to move differently
depending on the particular demand conditions facing them.37 There is a very large effective
number of unions, according to Visser (2004) the largest number of any EU country.
Historically, there has been a relatively low correlation between public sector wages and real
wage growth in Polish manufacturing, which militates against Portugal-style wage inflation
driven by public sector settlements.38
All this is reassuring. Indeed, labor market developments in recent years have not been
too bad. While productivity growth and labor force participation may not be all that could be
hoped for, the growth of unit labor costs has been contained, and competitiveness has been
maintained.39 Through 2007 the unit-labor-cost-based real exchange rate was still below 2000

34

Precise rankings differ. That of Visser for 2003 ranks only France and the UK head of Poland in terms of degree
of labor market decentralization. See Visser (2004).
35
This is required under the terms of the Labour Code (OECD 2004).
36
See OECD (2004) and Boeri and Garibaldi (2006).
37
See Stockhammer and Onaran (2006).
38
Boeri and Garibaldi (2006) find a lower correlation in Poland and Hungary than in any of the other Central and
Eastern European economies (they do not, however, consider the Baltics).
39
This is consistent with the view of Boeri and Garibaldi (2006) that not too much should be made of the slow
growth of employment, which reflects the continuing efforts of firms to streamline and reduce labor hoarding.

18

levels, an evolution that compares favorably with that in Hungary, the Czech Republic and
(even) Slovakia.40
Less reassuring are two additional observations. First, relatively competitive labor
markets are likely to be less good at restraining wage growth during the boom than facilitating
adjustment during the bust. The euro-adoption boom will be real: with lower interest rates,
spending will surge, and with additional demand for domestic goods, labor markets will tighten
and wages will surge. This suggests that Poland will not avoid the boom-bust cycle, although the
bust may be less painful than elsewhere. Second, there is less than full agreement on the humpshaped hypothesis. We may know less about how institutional arrangements translate into labor
market outcomes than the preceding discussion suggests.
c) Will the government be able to resist pressure for increased spending?
Among the sources of wage pressure in the boom period are permissive public-sector pay
policies. This is a specific instance of the general problem of inadequate fiscal discipline in
booms. Theory suggests what kind of fiscal institutions are conducive to the maintenance of
fiscal discipline. The budgetary process should be centralized and give the finance minister
agenda-setting powers. Parliament should have limited options for disregarding the minister’s
deficit target. There should be obstacles to legislative amendments to the budget in mid-year,
but the finance minister should have options for restoring balance if the deficit widens.
Hallerberg and von Hagen (2006) consider Poland’s fiscal institutions in this light.41
They give the country poor marks for budget preparation. Although the finance minister has
agenda setting power—he circulates a document specifying the target deficit—spending

40

IMF (2008b), p.6.
A number of other studies undertake this exercise, including Ylaoutinen (2005), Gleich (2006), and Frabizio and
Mody (2006). The advantage of the Hallerberg and von Hagen study is that the authors trace the evolution of
Poland’s budgetary institutions over time.

41

19

ministers can respond to his circular with individual budget bids, and their response can lead to
changes in the budget balance figure. Importantly, the final decision on the government’s budget
proposal is made by the full cabinet, not the finance minister, creating common-pool problems of
a sort likely to result in excessive deficits. Poland does better at the legislative stage. Parliament
cannot change the deficit target submitted by the government. The government can call for new
elections if parliament fails to adopt a budget. Finally, the country scores high in terms of
implementation. Changing the budget in mid-course is difficult (a supplementary law is
required), transfers of expenditures across budgetary categories require the approval of the
finance minister, and the finance minister has the power to block expenditures when the deficit
widens unexpectedly. Weighing these considerations, Hallerberg and von Hagen rank Poland
slightly above the Central and Eastern European average, behind Estonia, Latvia and Slovenia
but ahead of the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania.42
There is some reassurance in the fact that the three Central and Eastern Europeans
coming in ahead of Poland are all strong-currency countries. (One has already adopted the euro,
one has a currency board, and one operates within the narrow-band ERM-II.) Overall, Poland
comes close to matching their combination of budgetary discipline and flexibility.43 It falls short
mainly because of the weakness of the finance minister. Although the finance minister can veto
transfers of funds across spending categories and take steps to narrow the deficit when it widens,
as noted above, he requires the consent and support of his cabinet colleagues heading up the
various spending ministries when formulating the budget, which often results in his being at their
42

The data for these other countries are for 2002, their indicators not having been updated subsequently. Timing
appears to explain why the estimates in different studies differ. Thus, there was a new constitution in 1997 and a
new Public Finance Act in 1998 that significantly strengthened budgeting institutions in Poland. There also have
been changes over time in the power of the finance minister (which was greater in 2001 than 2006), and there are
differences in assessment depending on whether indices are constructed on the basis of interviews with policy
makers or statutory provisions. See the discussion in Hallerberg and von Hagen (2006), p.36.
43
According to this particular ranking.

20

mercy. Polish finance ministers have repeatedly resigned or been dismissed for failing to get
their cabinet colleagues to agree to spending limits. This does not provide reassurance for how
the government will respond to the pressure for public spending created by a euro-accession
boom. The picture, perhaps inevitably, is mixed.
d) Will regulators restrain the impulse for an unsustainable credit boom?
The question here is whether the financial system is well regulated, creating confidence
that boom-and-bust dynamics will continue to be avoided as euro adoption approaches. In
support of a positive answer is the fact that Polish banks are well capitalized.44 There is the fact
that the Polish Commission for Banking Supervision (the precursor of the current Financial
Supervisory Authority) promulgated a set of best practices for mortgage-related lending in 2006.
The hope is that this will encourage banks to carefully manage both the rate of growth and
composition of their mortgage lending.
It may help to put these issues in context. Financial reform in Poland started with the
Balcerowicz plan in 1990. This plan combined liberalization with macroeconomic stabilization
and aimed at creating the legal, economic, financial and administrative conditions needed for
transformation to a functioning market economy. Excessive issuance of money was halted, and
interest rates were raised to contain inflation.45 The National Bank of Poland (NBP) was
prohibited by the parliament from extending long-term credits to the government. Cheap credits
and preferential lending by the central bank to state owned firms were curtailed. Supervision of
the lending business of commercial banks was reinforced.

44

See e.g. Cottarelli, Dell’Ariccia and Vladkova-Hollar (2003).
Among the main challenges was the establishment of a stable, convertible, national currency, the reduction of the
high government deficit and external debt burden. Establishment of a demand and supply driven price system,
privatization and the establishment of free trade were only some of the additional measures included in the
Balcerowicz plan. For more details see Sachs and Lipton (1990).

45

21

Yet the volume of non-performing loans continued to rise during the transition recession
of 1991-2.46 Banks had little incentive to provision against potential loan losses and some had
not accumulated enough capital reserves. In 1992 supervision was intensified to prevent
gambling to survive. Tighter capital requirements were implemented and the NBP acquired the
legal power to enforce capital adequacy and loss provisioning standards. The law also imposed
limits on how much a bank could lend to a single borrower.47 Polish banks were twinned with
Western banks to increase their knowledge of modern banking techniques. Employees were
offered additional training.48 Foreign banks were asked to rehabilitate a private domestic bank in
financial distress when entering the Polish market.
Despite these efforts, the quality of Polish banks’ credit portfolios remained poor (Barisitz
2007). An Enterprise and Bank Restructuring Program (EBRP) was therefore adopted in 1993 to
address the undercapitalization and bad loan problems. Specialized regional banks were obliged
to undergo credit evaluations to qualify for the program. For those who qualified, one-time
recapitalization based on the value of their non-performing loan portfolios at the end of 1991
followed. Banks were also obliged to work out restructuring agreements with bad debtors or
forced bankruptcy reorganization or liquidation of those debtors within a fixed period. This
approach strengthened financial discipline on firms and forced banks to develop and provide
adequate risk assessment capacities.49 Restructuring was extended to the cooperative banking
sector in 1994. Two cooperative banks (PKO BP and PEKAO SA) and the state agricultural

46

See Barisitz (2007).
No loan could be for more than 10 percent of capital and total loans to a single borrower could not exceed 15
percent of capital (Mondschean and Opiela 1997).
48
The IMF and the World Bank supported this effort (Mondschean and Opiela 1997).
49
At the same time, the restructuring agreements with bad debtors failed to achieve fundamental changes in the
management and operation of non-financial firms. The restructuring agreements which banks signed with debtors
dealt primarily with financial conditions and did not address fundamental management or operational changes on the
part of the debtor.
47

22

bank (BGZ), were recapitalized in a more centralized approach compared to the above
mentioned program (Barisitz 2007).50
In the mid 1990s, new accounting principles were introduced and a general deposit
insurance scheme was implemented. Bank privatization continued, although the state treasury
retained significant stakes. As a result, unclear property rights hampered bank restructuring. In
1997, banking supervision was reorganized and management processes modernized. A new
Independent Commission for Banking Supervision responsible for identification and decision
making concerning the design of supervisory regulations was established. Executive power
remained with the NBP. Foreign owners meanwhile were allowed to control a majority of the
equity of banks and the last remaining stakes of the state treasury were sold to private owners.51
Competition in banking increased with foreign owned banks expanding domestic retail business.
Harmonization with EU legislation accelerated with the run-up to EU accession. In 1999
the NBP set two pre-accession priorities within the National Program of Preparations for
Membership in the European Union (NBP, 1999): the adjustment of the NBP for operation
within the European System of Central Banks and the harmonization of Polish banking
regulations with Community legislation. In 2004, with Poland’s accession to the EU, European
legislation on banking, such as the single banking license which aims at facilitating the set-up of
branches in different European countries, was introduced in the Polish market. In 2005, banking
supervision was again enhanced with the implementation of risk-based consolidated supervision.
In 2006, “Recommendation S” (issued by the Commission for Banking Supervision on
March 15th, 2006) was introduced with the goal of improving the banks’ practices concerning

50

According to Reininger, Schardax and Summer (2001), costs of recapitalization in Poland were lower than in any
other CEE country .
51
For more details on privatization and consolidation of the Polish banking sector, again see Mondschean and
Opiela (1997).

23

credit exposure and strengthening risk management and disclosure to comply with international
practices. The risk weight on housing loans with loan-to-value ratios exceeding 50 percent was
raised to 100 percent. Default risk assessments and regular stress tests for the banks’ mortgage
portfolios were recommended. More information is to be provided to customers to increase their
awareness of risks of foreign-currency borrowing. Banks were advised to offer zloty loans first.
They were instructed not to apply lower customer creditworthiness standards when extending
foreign currency loans. Regulators also warned that further steps to curb foreign currency
lending would be implemented as necessary. All this suggests that vigorous supervision and
regulation limit the danger of an unsustainable credit boom in the run-up to the euro.
At the same time, there are weaknesses in the supervisory framework. Barisitz (2007)
identifies “the often arbitrary and inefficient application of new regulations in Poland which also
reflects lingering deficiencies of the court system. Attaching collateral can be costly.
Information systems on credit histories have room for improvement.” Due to the short lending
history in Poland, foreclosure practices remain largely untested. IMF (2007a, p.30) has observed
that attempts to clamp down on foreign currency and housing credit growth might simply drive
business into the nonbank sector, which would increase supervisory challenges without reducing
the associated risks.

7. Conclusions and Recommendations
Financial stability in Poland has rested in recent years on a combination of systematic and
idiosyncratic factors that have moderated the rate of credit growth. By systematic factors we
mean things like a relatively strict approach to loan classification and other prudential
regulations, especially before 2004. By idiosyncratic factors we mean things like the behavior of

24

housing prices.52 The result has been to leave credit aggregates below the levels in other Central
and Eastern European economies and below the levels one would expect on the basis of the
experience of emerging markets generally.
This observation frames the question of whether Poland is at risk of a boom-and-bust-like
credit cycle in the run-up to euro adoption. On the one hand the fact that Poland is an outlier,
credit-growth wise, accentuates the danger of a boom if one believes in mean reversion. Our
econometrics indicate that the fall in interest rates that will flow from expectations of euro
adoption will further feed that boom. On the other hand the fact that interest rates have already
converged part way to euro-area levels (and more extensively than in earlier adopters that
experienced a sharp fall in rates and a pronounced credit boom), especially in the case of lending
to firms, suggests that this shock may be less intense in Poland. And it is certainly conceivable
that the same policies and country characteristics (not always visible to the econometrician) that
have restrained credit growth in the past may continue to do so in the future.
The broader literature also points to two set of factors, the first of which makes the
danger of an unsustainable credit boom more immediate, the second of which makes it more
remote. In the first category are the continuing limitations of the supervisory framework and the
weakness of the finance minister in the budget-making process. In the second are a record of
rigorous prudential supervision and the existence of relatively competitive labor markets.
Thus, while Poland is not doomed to follow other euro adopters that have experienced
disruptive boom-and-bust cycles in the run-up to the euro, neither should this risk be minimized.
Policy makers must remain vigilant as the date of euro adoption approaches, and they must then

52

Housing price developments are of course a consequence as well as a determinant of credit-market developments,
although they are affected also by other factors.

25

act in response to movements in interest rates, wages, housing prices and credit aggregates
signaling the immanence of this danger.
A final somewhat reassuring factor is that Poland’s transition to the euro is unlikely to
occur for several more years. By that time a number of additional catch-up economies
presumably will have made the move to the single currency. Polish officials are aware of the
danger of the credit-boom problem that can accompany entry (Rybinski 2007). The more
countries that suffer from it—and the more that demonstrate how it can be successfully
averted— the more likely Polish policy makers are to draw appropriate lessons.

26

Appendix A: Related Work on Determinants of Credit Growth
Author

Brzoza-Brzezina
(2005)

Kiss et al.
(2006)

Backe et al.
(2006)

Cottarelli et al.
(2003)

IMF (2007)

Time span

1995/Q4-2003/Q4
Quarterly data

1995-2004
Annual data

1993/Q4-2004/Q4
Quarterly data

1973-1996
Annual data

1998/Jan2005/Dec
Monthly data

CEE-8, selected
euro countries

Total of 43
developed and
transition
economies

24 countries from
North and Latin
America,
Southeast Asia
and Western
Europe

PL

Identification of
determinants of
private credit
development >
simulation of
possible loan
developments

Identification of
determinants of
private credit
development and
the equilibrium
credit/GDP levels

Identification of
determinants of
private credit
development >
analysis of the
equilibrium
credit/GDP level

Identification of
determinants of
private credit
development, the
equilibrium
credit/GDP level >
trend forecasts

Identification of
determinants of
private credit
development

Method

VECM for
individual
countries

Dynamic panel,
error correction
framework,
pooled mean
group estimator,
IV technique

Dynamic panel,
pooled and fixed
effect OLS,
DOLS, MGE

Random effects
GLS estimation
procedure

OLS

Dependent
variable

Real private credit

Aggregated and
disaggregated
credit/nom. GDP

Private
credit/nom. GDP

Private
credit/nom. GDP

Change of real
disaggregated
private credit

Real 3-month
money market rate

Real short term
interest rate

Nominal short and
long term interest
rate

Dummy variables
to account for
structural breaks
of the dependent
variable

Change in real
average gross
wages

Real GDP

GDP/capita (PPP
based)

GDP/capita (PPS
based); industrial
production

GDP/capita (PPP
based)

Change in
industrial
production

Inflation (CPI)

Inflation index to
account for
variability and
threshold effects

Non performing
loans

Bank credit to the
public sector

Stock of public
debt/nom. GDP

Change in
unemployment
rate

Financial
liberalization
index

Liberalization
index and index
on entry
restrictions

Change in real
policy rate

Existence of
public and private
registries

Accounting index

Housing prices

Legal origin

Country
sample

Research
question

Explanatory
variables

CEE-11

Inflation (CPI)

Source: Own compilation.

27

Appendix B: Data and Sources
Country sample:
23 Latin American countries: Argentina (AR), Belize (BZ), Bolivia (BO), Brazil (BR), Chile (CL),
Colombia (CO), Costa Rica (CR), Dominican Republic (DO), Ecuador (EC), El Salvador (SV),
Guatemala (GT), Guyana (GY), Honduras (HN), Jamaica (JM), Mexico (MX), Nicaragua (NI), Panama
(PA), Paraguay (PY), Peru (PE), Suriname (SR), Trinidad and Tobago (TT), Uruguay (UY), Venezuela
(VE)
6 South-, East-Asian countries: China P.R.: Mainland (CN), Indonesia (ID), Malaysia (MY), Singapore
(SG), Thailand (TH)
21 Central, Eastern and Southeastern European countries (CEECs):
Albania (AL), Belarus (BY), Bulgaria (BG), Croatia (HR), Czech Republic (CZ), Estonia (EE), Hungary
(HU), Latvia (LV), Lithuania (LT), Moldova (MD), Republic of Montenegro, Poland (PL), Romania
(RO), Russia (RU), Slovak Republic (SK), Slovenia (Sl), Ukraine (UA), Turkey (TR)
Korea, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BA), Montenegro, the Republic of Serbia and Turkey were
excluded from the sample in order to have a balanced panel.
Time span:
1996 - 2006
Although the short time span suggests using quarterly data, we apply annual data and follow BrzozaBrzezina (2005, 24) who argues that “since the new Member States have undergone a deep transformation
and their time series are not particularly long, models, especially based on quarterly data, are not always
of top quality.”

28

Appendix C: Variables and Definitions
Private credit: claims on the private sector, stocks
Source: IMF (2008b).
Interest rate: lending rate, percent per annum, averages; AR, BO, CL, DO, SV, NI, PE, UY: lending rate
(foreign currency, USD), percent per annum, seasonal adjusted
Source: IMF (2008b).
GDP Nom.: nominal gross domestic product, flows
Source: IMF (2008b); United Nations Statistics Division (2008; SR, 2002-2004); WIIW (2008).
GDP Deflator: GDP deflator at constant prices (2000=100), averages
Source: IMF (2008b); Econstats (SR).
Inflation: change in consumer price index, percent per annum, averages, exchange rate index
Source: IMF (2008b).
Index of financial liberalization: index measuring the extent of openness in capital account transactions
Source: Chinn and Ito (2007).
Dummy variables:
Brazil: sturctural break in private credit to GDP (pcgdp), 1998-2006, no reason indicated.
Colombia: structural break in pcgdp, 2000-2006, new reporting system for data.
Dominican Republic: structural break in pcgdp, 2004-2006, no reason indicated.
Guyana: structural break in pcgdp, 1998-2002, no reason indicated.
Indonesia: structural break in pcgdp, 1999-2006, no reason indicated.
Suriname: structural break in pcgdp, 2002-2006, data based on changed and improved classification
system of data.
Ukraine: structural break in pcgdp, 1998-2006, changed and improved classification of data.

Source: IMF (2008c).

29

References
Antolia, Manoj and Edward Buffie (2006), “Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilization, Durables
Consumption, and Stylized Facts,” unpublished manuscript, Indiana University (July).
Blanchard, Olivier (2006), “Adjustment within the Euro: The Difficult Case of Portugal,”
unpublished manuscript, MIT (February).
Backe, Peter and Tina Zumer (2005), “Developments in Credit to the Private Sector in Central
and Eastern European EU Member States: Emerging from Financial Repression – A
Comparative View,” Focus on Economic Integration 2, pp.83-109.
Barisitz, Stephan (2007), Banking in Central and Eastern Europe 1980-2006: From Communism
to Capitalism, Abingdon: Routledge,
Boeri, Tito and Pietro Garibaldi (2006), “Are Labour Markets in the New Member States
Sufficiently Flexible for EMU?” Journal of Banking and Finance 30, pp.1393-1407.
Borowski, Jakub and Michal Brzoz-Brezezina (2004), “Designing Poland’s Macroeconomic
Strategy on the Way to the Euro Area,” unpublished manuscript, National Bank of Poland
(April).
Braga de Macedo, Jorge (2007), “Competitiveness and Convergence in Portugal,” Working
Paper no.4, Ministry of Economies and Innovation (November).
Breuss, Fritz, Fink, Gerhard and Peter Haiss (2004), “How Well Prepared are the New Member
States for the European Monetary Union?” Journal of Policy Modeling 26, pp.769-791.
Broza-Brzezina, Michal (2005), “Lending Booms in the New EU Member States: Will Euro
Adoption Mater?” ECB Working Paper no. 543 (November).
Calmfors, Lars and John Driffill (1988), “Bargaining Structure, Corporatism and
Macroeconomic Performance,” Economic Policy 6, pp.14-61.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carlos Vegh (1999), “Inflation Stabilization and Balance of Payments
Crises in Developing Countries,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds), Handbook of
Macroeconomics, Amsterdam: North Holland, vol. 1, pp.1531-1614.
Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2007), “A New Measure of Financial Openness,” unpublished
appendix, available at http://web.pdx.edu/~ito/.
Cottarelli, Carlo, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Ivanna Vladkova-Hollar (2005), “Early Birds, Late
Risers and Sleeping Beauties: Bank Credit Growth to the Private Sector in Central and Eastern
Europe and in the Balkans,” Journal of Banking and Finance 29, pp.83-104.
Darvas, Zsolt and Gyorgy Szapary (2008), “Euro Area Enlargement and Euro Adoption
Strategies,” Economic Paper no.304, European Commission, Directorate of Economic and
Financial Affairs (February).
30

Economist Intelligence Unit (2008), Country Data Base, London: EUI.
Econstats (2008), http://www.econstats.com/weo/C152V019.htm.
Egert, Balazs, Peter Backe and Tina Zumer (2006), “Private Sector Credit in Central and Eastern
Europe: New (Over) Shooting Stars?” Working Paper no.852, William Davidson Institute
(November).
Egert, Balazs and Dubravko Mihaljek (2007), “Determinants of House Prices in Central and
Eastern Europe,” Comparative Economic Studies 49, pp.367-388.
Economist Intelligence Unit (2008), EIU country database.
Euromonitor International (2008), GMID database.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2008), Transition Report 2008, London:
EBRD.
European Industrial Relations Observatory (2007), “Industrial Relations in the Public Sector,”
www.eurofound.europa.eu (nd).
Fabrizio, Stefania and Ashoka Mody (2006), “Can Budget Institutions Counteract Political
Indiscipline?” Economic Policy, pp.689-739.
Fagan, Gabriel and Vitor Gaspar (2008), “Adjusting to the Euro,” in Lars Jonung, Christoph
Walkner and Max Watson (eds), Building the Financial Foundations of the Euro: Experiences
and Challenges, Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, pp.56-83.
Gleich, Holger (2003), “Budget Institutions and Fiscal Performance in Central and Eastern
European Economies,” ECB Working Paper no.215 (February).
Hallerberg, Mark and Guntram B. Wolff (2006), “Fiscal Institutions, Fiscal Policy and Sovereign
Risk Premia,” Discussion Paper no. 35/2006, Frankfurt: Deutsche Bundesbank.
Hallerberg, Mark and Juergen von Hagen (2006), “Budget Processes in Poland: Promoting Fiscal
and Economic Stability,” Warsaw: Program Ernst & Young.
Hsiao, Cheng (2003), Analysis of Panel Data, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
International Monetary Fund (2007), “Republic of Poland: Financial Sector Assessment
Program - Technical Note – Credit Growth and Financial Stability,” IMF Country Report 01/103
(March).
International Monetary Fund (2008a), “Republic of Poland: Staff Report for the 2007 Article IV
Consultation,” www.imf.org (19 March).
International Monetary Fund (2008b), International Financial Statistics, Washington, D.C.: IMF.
International Monetary Fund (2008c), Country reports, various countries, www.imf.org.

31

Kiss, Gergely, Marton Nagy and Balazs Vonnak (2006), “Credit Growth in Central and Eastern
Europe: Trend, Cycle or Boom?” unpublished manuscript, Magyar Nemzeti Bank (November).
Kraft, Evans. (2005), “Banking Reform in South-East Europe: Accomplishments and
Challenges,” in Klaus Liebscher, Josef Christl, Peter Mooslechner and Doris RitzbergerGrünwald (eds), European Economic Integration and South-East Europe, Cheltenham: Edward
Elgar, pp. 351-367.
Luca, Alina and Iva Petrova (2007), “What Drives Credit Dollarisation in Transition
Economies?” Journal of Banking and Finance 32/, 858-869.
Martin, Reiner and Ludger Schuknech (2008), “Booms and Busts: Experiences with Internal and
External Adjustment,” in in Lars Jonung, Christoph Walkner and Max Watson (eds), Building
the Financial Foundations of the Euro: Experiences and Challenges, Cheltenham, UK: Edward
Elgar, pp.84-110
Miles, David and Vladimir Pillonca (2008), “Financial Innovation and European Housing and
Mortgage Markets,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24, pp.145-175.
Mondschean, Thomas and Timoth Opiela (1997), “Banking Reform in a Transition Economy:
The Case of Poland,” Economic Perspectives 21/2.
Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2005), “Competitiveness
and Export Performance of the Euro Area,” Occasional Paper no.30, Frankfurt: ECB (June).
National Bank of Poland (1999), Annual Report, www.nbp.pl.
National Bank of Poland (2001), The Polish Banking System in the Nineties, Warsaw: National
Bank of Poland.
National Bank of Poland (various years), Financial Stability Report, www.nbp.pl.
National Bank of Poland (2007), “Information Taken From a Survey Conducted for a Project on
Foreign Currency Credit in CEECs,” Research Institute for European Affairs, Vienna University
of Economics and Bank Austria.
National Bureau of Statistics China (2008), statistical data,
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/statisticaldata/
National Bureau of Statistics Guyana (2008), statistical data, http://www.statisticsguyana.gov.gy.
OECD (2004), “Wage-Setting Institutions and Outcomes,” OECD Employment Outlook, pp.127181.
OeNB (2007), “Data on Credit Development in CEECs by the Austrian National Bank,” Vienna:
OeNB.
Ötker-Robe, Inci, Zbivniew Polański, Barry Topf and David Vávra (2007), “Coping with Capital
Inflows: Experiences of Selected European Countries,” IMF Working Paper no. 190 (July).

32

Reininger, Thomas, Franz Schardax and Martin Summern (2001), “The Financial System in the
Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland after a Decade of Transition,” Discussion Paper 16/01,
Economic Research Centre of the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Rosenberg, Christof (2007), “Euro Adoption: What Have We Learned So Far?” unpublished
manuscript, IMF (June), www.imf.org.
Rybinski, Krzysztof (2007), “The Euro Adoption – Assessing Benefits and Costs,” speech at the
American Chamber of Commerce, Warsaw (17 January), www.bis.org.
Sachs, Jeffrey and David Lipton (1990), “Poland’s Economic Reform,” Foreign Affairs 69/3, pp.
47-66.
Sargent, Thomas (1986), Rational Expectations and Inflation, New York: Harper Collins.
Schadler, Susan, Zuzana Murgasova and Rachel van Elkan (2004), “Credit Booms, Demand
Booms and Euro Adoption,” paper presented to the conference on Challenges to Central Banks
in an Enlarged EMU, Vienna, 20-21 February.
Statistics Singapore (2008), http://www.singstat.gov.sg.
Stockhammer, Engelbert and Ozlem Onaran (2006), “National and Sectoral Factors in Wage
Formation in Central and Eastern Europe,” Working Paper no. 100, Department of Economics,
Vienna University of Economics (December).
Tuma, Zdenek (2004), “Euro Adoption and Financial Stability,” BIS Quarterly Review 8, pp.1-3.
United Nations Statistics Division (2008), Millennium Development Goals Indicators, New
York: United Nations.
Visser, Jelle (2004), “Patterns and Varations in European Industrial Relations,” in European
Commission, Industrial Relations in Europe 2004, Brussels: European Commission, pp.11-58.
WIIW (2008), Statistical Data Base, Vienna: Wiener Institut fuer Internationale
Wirtschaftsvergleiche.
World Bank (2007), “Credit Expansion in Emerging Europe: A Cause for Concern?” World
Bank EU8+2 Regular Economic Report (January).
Ylaoutinen, Sami (2005), “Development and Functioning of Fiscal Framework in the Central and
Eastern European Economies,” unpublished dissertation, University of Jyvaskyla.

33

Table 1. Growth of credit in CEE-11, 2002-2006

Growth of private credit in percent of nom. GDP

Poland
Croatia
Czech
Republic
Hungary
Slovakia
Slovenia
Romania
Latvia
Estonia
Bulgaria
Lithuania

in foreign
currency

Growth of credit to
general government in
percent of nom. GDP

total

to households

to firms

in domestic
currency

0.70
3.34

8.49
12.81

-5.83
3.33

1.42
7.82

-1.18
1.63

7.74
18.11

6.62

20.57

0.07

7.80

-1.93

-29.17

14.34
9.03
13.38
20.35
21.74
24.84
24.09
30.13

24.19
21.60
12.00
55.84
41.24
31.50
39.22
53.36

10.15
3.71
13.93
10.16
11.42
19.77
17.58
21.65

4.97
3.85
-4.56
26.81
8.39
27.82
21.07
27.81

29.99
11.62
41.65
15.15
29.30
23.96
28.01
31.88

21.66
14.36
1.41
na
-9.72
-2.80
40.74
-20.85

Note: Trend growth rate of credit ratios to nominal Gross Domestic Product (GDP); Least square
regressions of the natural logarithm variable series on a time trend are used to obtain the trend growth rate
of the available observations.

34

Table 2. Main Initiatives Affecting the Banking Sector, 1989-2007
1989

Banking Act and Act on the National Bank of Poland
Introduction of two-tier banking system: nine regional banks, private banks admitted

1990

January: Balcerowicz plan for Poland’s transformation to a market economy

1991

Recapitalization of banks to cover losses from currency devaluation (based on Balcerowicz
plan)

1992

Tightening of banking supervision (capital adequacy and loss provisioning standards)
Conditional licensing scheme (foreign bank-financed recapitalization of some small credit
institutions)

1993

Enterprise and Bank Restructuring Program (EBRP): decentralized recapitalization scheme
for regional state owned banks; initiation of hard budget constraints

1994

Act on restructuring of cooperative banks (PKO BP and PEKAO SA) and BGZ (state
agricultural bank)
Bank Guarantee Fund (implementation of a deposit insurance scheme)

1995

Implementation of new accounting principles (in accordance with EU guidelines)

1997/
1998
1999

Reorganization of banking supervision: Independent Commission for Banking Supervision
in charge of identifying tasks and taking decisions; executive power remains with the NBP

2001
2002

Economic slowdown coincides with cost cutting and rationalization measures;
Financial situation of PKO BP and BGZ remains fragile, restructuring measures for both;
KBC assists Kredytbank with capital injection

2004

Accession to European Union, European banking regulations valid

2005

Adoption of risk-focused consolidated supervision

2006

Recommendation S for improvement of banks’ credit exposure

NBP sets priorities within the national program of preparations for membership in
the European Union

Source: Barisitz (2007) and NBP (2001).

35

Table 3. Rental Rates in Poland, 1996-2006

Year
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

Rent of dwelling owned
Rent of communal
by a co-operative
or company dwelling
in zl/1m2
0,67
0,83
0,89
1,05
1,12
1,33
1,35
1,63
1,61
1,98
1,53
1,83
1,38
2,17
1,38
2,28
1,41
2,41
1,44
2,56
1,50
2,75

Source: Personal correspondence with Central Statistical Office of the Government of
Poland

36

Table 4. Determinants of Private Credit Developments in 44 Emerging and Transition Economies, 1996 to 2006
Explanatory variables

Dependent variable: lnpcgdp

Estimation method

(1a) country fixed
effects

(1b) time
random effects

(1c) country
fixed and time
random effects

(2a) country
fixed effects

(2b) time random
effects

(2c) country
fixed and time
random
effects

constant

2.425***

4.380***

2.650***

2.793***

4.280***

3.167**

(6.569)

(28.414)

(7.949)

(7.594)

(27.786)

7.989

-0.102**

-0.294***

-0.141**

-0.110***

-0.299***

-0.16**

(-2.456)

(-6.884)

(-2.489)

(-2.588)

(-7.197)

(-2.476)

0.160***

0.078***

0.139***

0.139**

0.086***

0.109**

(5.244)

(5.268)

(3.019)

(4.524)

(6.572)

(2.071)

-0.075***

-0.302***

-0.053**

-0.080***

-0.301***

-0.074***

(-3.811)

(-13.031)

(-1.997)

(-4.184)

(-13.617)

(-1.982)

0.127***

-0.044**

0.140***

(5.126)

(-2.520)

(5.883)
0.040***

-0.016***

0.036***

(5.710)

(-3.259)

(3.374)

Lnintr
Lnrgdpc
lninfl,
lnindex_finliberalization,
index_finliberalization
dummy_Brazil
dummy_Colombia
dummy_Guyana

-0.353***

0.346***

-0.381***

-0.336***

0.354***

-0.359***

(-8.162)

(5.845)

(-10.631)

(-7.676)

(6.524)

(-8.925)

-0.283***

-0.109***

-0.313***

-0.300***

-0.105***

-0.350***

(-4.312)

(-3.389)

(-5.992)

(-4.320)

(-3.683)

(-5.266)

0.202***

0.570***

0.206***

0.199***

0.592***

0.205***

(9.503)

(14.706)

(9.793)

(9.540)

(17.644)

(9.489)

-0.853***

dummy_Indonesia

-0.886***

(-10.241)

(-11.229)

0.591***

-0.160***

0.563***

0.550***

-0.144***

0.499***

(6.682)

(-3.276)

(5.054)

(5.708)

(-3.063)

(4.179)

2.192***

-0.270*

2.169***

(10.972)

(-1.754)

(9.541)

Adj. r2

0.951

0.347

0.834

0.952

0.347

0.799

F-Value (sign. of r2)

182.105***

29.559***

46.885***

187.650***

33.056***

38.055***

dummy_Suriname
dummy_Ukraine

*Static panel data model. GLS estimates with country-fixed or random effects using EViews 5.1. No. of observations 484. t-statistics in
parantheses, based on heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors (White cross-section s.e. and cov.; d.f. corrected). Asteriks indicate the
significance of the coefficients at the 10% (*), 5%(**) and 1%(***) levels. The Hausman test on fixed effects confirmed the reported
estimation results at the 5% level. The Jarque Bera test confirmed normal distribution of the residuals. Dummy variables control for
structural breaks in the time series of the dependent variable. See the Appendix for definitions and sources of the variables.
Source: See text.

37

Table 5. In-sample Actual and Predicted Values of Private Credit to GDP for Poland, 2006
(in percent)
actual pcgdp (a)

predicted value of pcgdp (b)

absolute deviation (a-b)

1a

33.29

41.22

-7.93

1b

33.29

59.71

-26.42

1c

33.29

41.85

-8.56

2a

33.29

43.27

-9.99

2b

33.29

60.58

-27.29

2c

33.29

43.61

-10.32

Source: See text.

38

Table 6. Linear Extrapolation of Credit/GDP Ratio and Forecast Based on Estimated Relationship
and Linear Extrapolation of Independent Variables (in percent)
extrapolated pcgdp
2010 (a)
58.28

predicted value of pcgdp (b)

absolute deviation (a-b)

48.47

9.80

58.28

83.37

-25.09

58.28

49.88

8.40

58.28

52.21

6.07

58.28

85.20

-26.92

58.28

52.40

5.87

Source: See text.

39

Figure 1: Real Interest Rates around the Time of Euro Adoption
IRELAND
REAL INTEREST RATES (1996-2007)

GREECE
REAL INTEREST RATES (1996-2007)
7.0

6.0

6.0

5.0

5.0

4.0

4.0

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

-1.0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS

SPAIN
REAL INTEREST RATES (1996-2007)

PORTUGAL
REAL INTEREST RATES (1996-2007)
6.0

6.0

5.0

5.0

4.0

4.0

3.0

3.0

2.0

2.0

1.0

1.0
0.0

0.0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001 2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

1996

2007

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS

CYPRUS
REAL INTEREST RATES (1997-2007)

SLOVENIA
REAL INTEREST RATES (2003-2007)
1.6

25.0

1.4

20.0

1.2

15.0
10.0

1.0

5.0
0.8

0.0
0.6

-5.0

0.4

-10.0

0.2

-15.0

0.0

-20.0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS

10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS and Global Financial Database

MALTA
REAL INTEREST RATES (1996-2007)
20.0

POLAND
REAL INTEREST RATES (1999-2007)
6.0

15.0
5.0

10.0
4.0

5.0
3.0

0.0

2.0

-5.0

1.0

-10.0
-15.0

0.0

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS and Global Financial Database

1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
10-year Government Bond yield adjusted by inflation.
Source: IFS and Global Financial Database

40

2007

Figure 2: Selected Macroeconomic Variables
OUTPUT GROWTH RATE
12
10
Percent
8
6
4
2
0
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Post-Euro Adoption

Portugal

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Source: Eurostat

INFLATION
4
3.5

Percent

3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Post-Euro Adoption

Portugal

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Percent change in CPI Index
Source: Eurostat

UNEMPLOYMENT
24
20

Percent

16
12
8
4
0
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Post-Euro Adoption

Portugal

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Source: IFS

41

Figure 3: More Macroeconomic Variables
GROWTH RATE OF EXPORTS
30
26

Percent

22
18
14
10
6
2
-2
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Portugal

Post-Euro Adoption

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Source: Eurostat

REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
125
100
75
50
25
0
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Portugal

Post-Euro Adoption

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
CPI based; base year is 2000
Source: IFS

FISCAL DEFICIT AS A PERCENT OF GDP
4

Percent of GDP

2
0
-2
-4
-6
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Post-Euro Adoption

Portugal

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Data is for net lending (+)/borrowing (-) of General Government
Source: Eurostat

42

Figure 4: Yet More Macroeconomic Variables
NET CAPITAL INFLOWS AS PERCENT OF GDP
10%
8%
6%
4%
2%
0%
-2%
-4%
-6%
-8%
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Portugal

Post-Euro Adoption

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Data is for net flows o financial account.
Source: Eurostat

HOURLY LABOR COSTS
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Portugal

Post-Euro Adoption

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
Euro-based data. No data available for Ireland.
Source: Eurostat

GROWTH IN UNIT LABOR COSTS
2
1

Percent

0
-1
-2
-3
-4
Cyprus

Greece

Ireland

Pre-Euro Adoption

Malta

Poland

Post-Euro Adoption

Portugal

Slovenia

Spain

Period 3

Data is averaged for two years prior to adoption (pre-euro adoption); two years post euro-adoption; and the period after that (period 3).
No data available for Greece before 2001 (its pre-euro adoption period). Data for Portgual are estmated values.
Source: Eurostat

43

Figure 5: Growth of Credit to the Private Sector by Debtor (1996–2007)
70.0
60.0

Percent

50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
-10.0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Credit to households, PL

Credit to f irms, PL

Credit to households, CEE-10

Credit to f irms, CEE-10

2007

Definition: Loans to households include loans to households and non profit institutions serving
households (NPISH); loans to firms include loans to non financial firms and non monetary financial
firms; loans to general government.
Source: OeNB (2007)

44

Figure 6: Share of Nonperforming Loans in Total Loans, Poland and CEE-10,
1996-2006
30
25

Percent

20
15
10
5
0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Poland

2003
CEE-10

Source: EBRD (2008).

45

2004

2005

2006

Figure 7: Growth of Credit to the Private Sector by Currency (1996–2007)
80.0
70.0
60.0

Percent

50.0
40.0
30.0
20.0
10.0
0.0
-10.0
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Credit in Zloty, PL

Credit in f oreign currency, PL

Credit in domestic currency, CEE-10

Credit in f oreign currency, CEE-10

Definition: Private credit in domestic and foreign currency includes credit to households and firms.
Source: OeNB (2007)

46

Figure 8: Nominal Interest Rates on Loans by Currency Denomination (1996–2007)
60.00

50.00

Percent

40.00

30.00

20.00

10.00

0.00
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Domestic currency loans, PL
Domestic currency loans, CEE-10

Foreign currency loans, PL
Foreign currency loans, CEE-6

Definition: CEE-6 include Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovenia.Average interest
rates on loans denominated in (and/or indexed to) foreign and domestic currency. The data do not
distinguish between credit to the private and public sector. Longer time series on interest rates of foreign
currency loans are not available.
Source: OeNB (2007), National Bank of Poland (2008).

47

Figure 9: Nominal Interest Rates on Loans to the Private Sector by Debtor
(1996–2007)
30.0

25.0

Percent

20.0

15.0

10.0

5.0

0.0
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Loans to households, PL
Loans to households, Euro area

Loans to f irms, PL
Loans to f irms, Euro area

Definition: Average annual interest rate on loans.
Source: National Bank of Poland (2008) and Economist Intelligence Unit (2008).

48

Figure 10: Comparative Housing Prices, Poland vs. CEE-10 (1996 – 2007)

260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

A verage CEE-10, excl. BG and RO
Poland

Definition: The index of housing prices is constructed as a weighted average of index of actual rentals for
housing prices, index of imputed rentals for housing prices, index of maintenance and repair of dwellings
prices, index of water and miscellaneous domestic services prices, and index of electricity, gas and other
fuels prices.
Source: Euromonitor International (2008).

49

