                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      NOT-SO-CLASSICAL MEASUREMENT ERRORS:
                         A VALIDATION STUDY OF HOMESCAN

                                            Liran Einav
                                          Ephraim Leibtag
                                            Aviv Nevo

                                       Working Paper 14436
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14436


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We are grateful to participants at the Chicago-Northwestern IO-Marketing conference, the Hoover
Economics Bag Lunch, the NBER Price Dynamics Conference, the NBER Productivity Potpourri,
the Stanford Economics Junior Lunch, and the World Congress on National Accounts for helpful comments.
We thank Andrea Pozzi and Chris Taylor for outstanding research assistance. This research was funded
by a cooperative agreement between the USDA ERS and Northwestern University. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research or the US Department of Agriculture.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Liran Einav, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Not-so-Classical Measurement Errors: A Validation Study of Homescan
Liran Einav, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo
NBER Working Paper No. 14436
October 2008
JEL No. C81,D12

                                              ABSTRACT

We report results from a validation study of Nielsen Homescan data. We use data from a large grocery
chain to match thousands of individual transactions that were recorded by both the retailer (at the store)
and the Nielsen Homescan panelist (at home). First, we report how often shopping trips are not reported,
and how often trip information, product information, price, and quantity are reported with error. We
focus on recording errors in prices, which are more prevalent, and show that they can be classified
to two categories, one due to standard recording errors, while the other due to the way Nielsen constructs
the price data. We then show how the validation data can be used to correct the impact of recording
errors on estimates obtained from Nielsen Homescan data. We use a simple application to illustrate
the impact of recording errors as well as the ability to correct for these errors. The application suggests
that while recording errors are clearly present, and potentially impact results, corrections, like the one
we employ, can be adopted by users of Homescan data to investigate the robustness of their results.


Liran Einav                                          Aviv Nevo
Stanford University                                  Department of Economics
Department of Economics                              Northwestern University
579 Serra Mall                                       2001 Sheridan Road
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                              Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER                                             and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu                                  nevo@northwestern.edu

Ephraim Leibtag
U.S. Department of Agriculture
FRED-ERS-USDA
1800 M Street, NW Rm. N2137
Washingron, DC 20036
eleibtag@ers.usda.gov
1       Introduction
Nielsen Homescan (Homescan) is a rich data set that provides information about household pur-
chasing patterns, allowing researchers, practitioners, and policymakers to study questions that
cannot be addressed using other forms of data.1 For example, Homescan covers purchases at
retailers that traditionally do not cooperate with scanner data collection companies, such as Wal-
Mart and Whole Foods. In addition, due to its national coverage the data provide wide variation
in household location and demographics, compared to other panels in which most households are
from a small number of markets with relatively limited variation in demographics.
    However, questions have been raised regarding the credibility of the data since the data are
self-recorded and the recording process is time consuming. Two concerns are most common. The
…rst is potential sample selection; given the time commitment, households who agree to participate
in the sample might not be representative of the population of interest. Second, households who
agree to participate in the sample might record their purchases incorrectly.
    This paper reports and analyzes a validation study of the Nielsen Homescan data set. Our
primary goal is to examine the second concern. To do so, we use a unique research design which
allows us to use scanner data from a single retailer as a validation data; we construct a data
set that allows us to match records from Homescan with detailed transaction-level data from
the retailer. That is, we are able to observe the same transaction twice. First, we observe the
transaction as it was recorded by the retailer, just before the items left the store. Second, we
observe the transaction as it was recorded by the Homescan panelist, just after the items reached
the house. By comparing the two data sources we can document inaccuracies (or lack thereof) in
Homescan and propose ways to correct for them. In particular, we compare the data sets along
three dimensions. First, we can document if the household did not report a trip to the retailer or
misrecorded the trip information (store and date). Second, within a trip we can document if the
household did not record, or misrecorded, the product (Universal Product Code, henceforth UPC)
information. Third, for a given product, we can document misreporting of the price, quantity,
and deal information.
    Our goal in this paper is threefold. First, we document the accuracy of Homescan data by
describing the magnitude of mistakes, for each of the above potential recording errors. Second,
we investigate whether and how errors are correlated with household or trip characteristics, which
would be suggestive of which type of analysis may be more sensitive to such errors, and how. For
example, we ask whether a correlation between a price “paid”and demographics can be driven by
systematic measurement errors. Third, we show how our validation study can be used to correct
for the reporting errors and provide the su¢ cient information from our study that will allow future
users of Homescan to do so. In light of the growing popularity of Homescan among researchers,
we view this as an important contribution of this paper.
    Before we summarize our …ndings, we should clarify two important issues related to termi-
nology. First, through most of the paper we treat the retailer’s data as the “truth,” allowing us
    1
    Indeed, there has been a recent surge in the use of Homescan in the academic literature. See, among others,
Dube (2004), Aguiar and Hurst (2007), Hausman and Leibtag (2007), Katz (2007), and Broda and Weinstein (2008
and forthcoming).


                                                      1
to attribute any di¤erences between the data sets to “errors” or “mistakes.” Of course, to the
extent that there are recording errors in the retailer’s data, these words should be interpreted
accordingly. We discuss this further in the context of the results. The second terminology issue
is related to what we mean by “errors,” “mistakes,” or “misrecording” in Homescan. As will be
clear, this could be driven by various mechanisms: recording errors by the Homescan panelists
themselves, misunderstanding of the Homescan instructions, or errors that are generated due to
the way Nielsen puts together its data. As we discuss later, this latter case seems most important
for the price variable, but here we simply note that by using the words “errors,” “mistakes,” or
“misrecording” we mean any of these possible mechanisms.
    In Section 2 we describe the study design and the data construction process. In Section 3
we then document the recording errors along the three dimensions previously mentioned. For
approximately twenty percent of trips recorded in the Homescan data we can say with a high
degree of certainty that there is no corresponding transaction in the retailer’s data. This suggests
that either the store or date information is recorded with error. Using the retailer’s loyalty card
information, we …nd that there also seem to be many trips that are found in the retailer’s data
with no parallel in the Homescan data. Therefore, there seems to be evidence that households
do not record all of their trips.2 For the trips we matched, we …nd that roughly twenty percent
of the items are not recorded. For those items recorded, we …nd that quantity is reported fairly
accurately: 94 percent of the quantity information matches in the two data sets, and conditional
on a reported quantity of 1 in the Homescan data, this probability goes up to 99 percent.
    The match for prices is worse. In about half of the cases the two data sets do not agree.
However, the correlation between the Homescan price and the retailer’s price is 0.88, and the
recording error explains roughly 22% of the variation in the reported price. We document two
types of price errors. When the item is not associated with a loyalty card discount, the price
recording errors are similar to classical errors, and are roughly normally distributed around the
true price. In this case the correlation between the two prices is 0.96 and the error explains only
8.5% of the variation in the Homescan price. In contrast, when the item is associated with a loyalty
card discount, prices in Homescan tend to signi…cantly over report the actual price, sometimes by
a large amount. It seems likely that much of this second case is driven by the way Nielsen imputes
prices; when available, Nielsen uses store-level (average) prices instead of the actual price paid by
the household. Thus, the lower accuracy of the price data may be primarily driven by the data
construction process. We note that this type of error might not be present for data from other
retailers that, for example, do not o¤er loyalty card discounts and where all consumers pay the
same price in a given week.
    We also investigate the heterogeneity across households in the quality of their data recording.
We …nd that some households are extremely accurate, while others are much less so. We show
that these latter households are more likely to be larger households in which the head female of
the household is fully employed. We suspect that this points out to the opportunity cost of time
as an important determinant of recording errors in Homescan. Since we …nd that recording errors
   2
    In this latter case, we are more cautious in providing speci…c numbers, as the retailer’s algorithm that matches
trips to households could be prone to errors, and therefore likely to be further from the “truth.”



                                                         2
are not mean zero and are correlated with di¤erent household attributes, using the Homescan data
may result in biased estimates of coe¢ cients of interest, and may lead to inaccurate conclusions.
This motivates us, in Section 4, to investigate how these recording errors may a¤ect results, as
well as to propose ways that allow to correct for it. We illustrate this point in the context of an
example that uses both data sets to study how the price paid vary with demographics; indeed,
we …nd that in some cases the results are quite di¤erent. We also use this example to illustrate
how the validation sample can be used to correct for recording errors. This example is both
simple and a case in which classical measurement error would be inconsequential. Indeed, we
show that results using the true data and the Homescan data could be vastly di¤erent, and that
our correction procedure makes it closer.
    In Section 5 we conclude by emphasizing that our correction method relies on the assumption
that the distribution of the recording errors is the same in our validation study and in the rest of
the Homescan data. Since, as we show, our matched sample does not seem fully representative of
the entire Homescan data, corrections should be done with caution, and are probably best viewed
as robustness checks.
    This paper …ts into a broader literature of validation studies. Responses to surveys and self-
reported data are at the heart of many data sets used by researchers, executives, and policymakers.
For example, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the Current Population Survey (CPS),
and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) are used heavily by economists. One concern with
self-reported data is that the data is recorded with error, and that the error is systematically
related to the characteristics of the respondents or to the variables being recorded. From the
theory side, econometricians have developed models to examine the consequences of measurement
error. To study the magnitude of the measurement error and to document the distribution of the
error, an empirical literature has emerged that compares the self-reported sample to a validation
study.3 This paper adds to this literature by examining a di¤erent data set and using a di¤erent
validation method. While most of the literature has focused on data sets that record labor
market decisions and outcomes, we study a data set, the Nielsen Homescan data, that documents
purchase decisions. We compare the recording errors we document to errors in these commonly
used economic data sets and …nd that errors in Homescan are of the same order of magnitude as
errors in earnings and employment status.


2        Data
2.1        Data sources
2.1.1        Homescan

The Nielsen Homescan data consist of a panel of households who record their grocery purchases.4
The purchases are from a wide variety of store types, including traditional stores, online merchants,
and mail order catalogs. Consumers, who are at least 18 year old and interested in participating,
    3
        Bound at el. (2001) provide a detailed review of this literature.
    4
        See also http://www.nielsen.com/clients/index.html for additional information about the Homescan data.



                                                             3
register online and are asked to supply demographic information. Based on this information,
Nielsen contacts a subset of these consumers. Consumers selected to become panel members are
not paid for participating in the program. However, every week a panel member who scans at
least one purchase receives a set amount of points. The points can be redeemed for merchandise.
Panelists can earn additional points for answering surveys and by participating in sweepstakes
that are open only to panel members.
    Each participating household is provided with a scanner. For each shopping trip the panelist
records the date and the store. They then scan the barcodes of the products they purchased, and
enter the quantity of each item, whether the item was purchased at the regular or promotional
(“deal”) price, and the coupon amount (if used) associated with this purchase.
    Nielsen then matches the barcode, or UPC, with detailed product characteristics. The record-
ing of price is particularly important to understand some of the …ndings below. If the household
purchased products at a store covered in Nielsen’s store-level data (“Scantrack”) –and we think
(but could not verify) that all stores operated by the retailer who provided us with the data are
covered in the store-level data –Nielsen does not require the household to enter the price paid for
each item (as a way to make the scanning process less time-consuming for the household). Instead,
the price is imputed from the store-level data. To construct this price, our understanding is that
Nielsen uses the (quantity weighted) average weekly price paid at the store for the corresponding
item (UPC). If the same item could be transacted at di¤erent prices within the same store during
the same week, this imputation process can introduce errors into the price data. As we will see,
these errors are frequent and sometimes large. A common reason for such price variation across
transactions (of the same item within a store-week) is loyalty card discounts that are only applied
to the subset of consumers who use cards.
    In the analysis below we use data from 2004. We consider only households that are part of
the “static”sample.5 Overall, the data include purchases of almost 250 million di¤erent items by
just under 40,000 households. We will focus on two markets, where the retailer has a signi…cant
presence, that have 1249 households who report over 900,000 items purchased.

2.1.2    The retailer’s data

The second data set comes from a large national grocery chain, which we will refer to as “the
retailer.”This retailer operates hundreds of stores across the country and records all the transac-
tions in all its stores. For each transaction, the data record the exact time of the transaction, the
cashier number, and the loyalty card number, if one was used. The data list the UPCs purchased,
the quantity purchased of each product, the price paid, and the loyalty card discount (if there was
any). The retailer links loyalty cards that belong to members of the same household, primarily by
matching the street addresses and telephone numbers individuals use when applying for a loyalty
card. The retailer then assigns each household a unique identi…cation number. Clearly, this de…-
nition of a household is more prone to errors than is Homescan’s de…nition, in which a household
   5
     This sample considers only households that report purchases in at least 10 months of the year. These households
are generally considered more reliable than those who report for fewer months, and these are the only data available
for research from Nielsen..



                                                         4
is simply associated with the house at which the scanner resides. We return to this later.
     In principle, we could try to match our Homescan data with all the retailer’s data in 2004.
Due to constraints on the size of the data we could obtain from the retailer, however, we had
to limit our analysis to only a subsample of it. We therefore obtained the retailer data in two
steps, as a way to maximize potential matches subject to the size constraint. In the …rst step,
we identi…ed a set of consumers who claimed to go to the a retailer’s store on a particular date.
We then obtained complete transaction level data –including exactly what was bought and how
much was paid –from the retailer for 1,603 distinct store-days. We developed a simple algorithm
to match between the purchases recorded in the Homescan data and one of the many transactions
recorded in the retailer’s data (on that day at that store), and found 1,372 likely matches that
are associated with 293 distinct households.
     In a second step, we asked the retailer to use the loyalty card identi…ed in these 1,372 shopping
trips and to provide us with all the transactions available for the households associated with these
cards (in the retailer’s data during 2004). Figure 1 provides a schematic chart that sketches the
key steps in the data construction process. The full process is described in more detail in the
Appendix.

2.2    Record-matching strategy
Having obtained the retailer’s data, we now describe our strategy for matching records from
Homescan with record in the retailer’s data.6 We start by analyzing possible matches in the data
obtained in the …rst step. Recall that a Homescan record contains all products purchased by
the household on a particular day in a particular store. The retailer’s data contain the products
purchased in each of the (more than 2,500 on average) shopping trips at the same store and
day reported by the household. The goal is to match the Homescan trip to exactly one of the
trips in the retailer’s data, or to determine that none of the trips in the retailer’s data is a good
match. The latter case would be indicative of the household not recording the trip in Homescan
or possibly recording the trip but misrecording the date or the store.
    Since this procedure relies on the coding of the items (UPCs), one may be concerned that
certain items, especially non-packaged items, may have di¤erent codes at the retailer’s stores
and at Homescan. An additional concern is that, as mentioned, the Homescan data we use only
include the food items scanned by the household, while the store data also include non-food items.
To deal with these concerns, we generated the universe of UPCs used by Homescan panelists in
our entire data and, separately, the universe of UPCs that are used by the retailer in our entire
data. We then restricted attention throughout the rest of the analysis to only the intersection
of these two lists of UPCs by eliminating from the analysis all data related to UPCs not in the
intersection. In other words, in the analysis below, if a certain UPC in, say, the retailer’s data
cannot be matched to the Homescan data, it is not because it could not have been matched: there
is at least one Homescan household who transacted and recorded that UPC.
   6
    Earlier we mentioned a simple matching algorithm we used for the data construction. This was only used to
speed up the data requesting process from the retailer, and we do not use its results further. In this section we
describe a more systematic matching strategy that is used for the rest of the paper.



                                                       5
     After reducing the data set as described above, we continue as follows. Our unit of observation
is a reported shopping trip in Homescan. For each such trip, for which we have the retailer’s data
for that store and that day, we count the number of distinct UPCs that overlap between the
Homescan trip and each of the hundreds of trips in the retailer’s data (in the same date and
store). We then keep the two trips (in the retailer’s data) with the largest number of UPC
overlap, and de…ne ratios between the UPC overlap in each trip and the number of distinct UPCs
reported for this trip in Homescan. The …rst, r1, is the ratio of the number of overlapping UPCs
in the retailer trip with the highest overlap to the total number of distinct UPCs reported in the
Homescan trip. The higher this ratio, the higher the fraction of products matched, and the more
likely that this trip is a correct match. The second ratio, r2, is similar, but is computed for the
retailer trip with the second-highest overlap. By construction, r2 will be less than or equal to r1.
A higher r2 makes it more likely that the second trip is also a reasonable match. Since, in reality,
there is, at most, a single trip that should be matched, this statistic tries to guard against a false
positive. Our con…dence in the match between the Homescan record and the …rst trip increases
the higher is r1 and the lower is r2. As will become clear below, in practice it turns out that false
positives resulting from this algorithm do not seem to be a concern once the trip includes a large
number of distinct UPCs.
     Using these two statistics, r1 and r2, and the number of products purchased during a trip (as
reported in Homescan), we separate each trip in the Homescan data into one of three categories:
reliable matches, matches that with high probability do not have a match, and uncertain matches
(i.e., we cannot classify these trips into either of the other groups with a reasonable level of
certainty). The …rst group of transactions will be used to study recording errors in the price and
quantity data. The second group will be used to document unrecorded trips or errors in recording
trip information. We applied di¤erent criteria to de…ne the three groups and veri…ed that all our
…ndings are robust to reasonable modi…cations of these criteria.
     Matching records with the trips reported in the second step of the data construction process
is a di¤erent problem. Recall that here we are not supplied with a list of all trips recorded in the
retailer’s data for the day and store. Instead, we are given a single trip that the retailer believes
represents the household’s purchases on that day. Thus, the matching problem here is not which
trip (out of many) matches the Homescan trip, but rather whether a given trip is a good match
or not. We match the transactions by computing the ratio r1, which is, as before, the number
of distinct UPCs that overlap divided by the number of items in the Homescan data. Using the
statistic r1 and the total number of distinct items purchased we will classify the Homescan trips
into three categories, as we do with the …rst step data. In principle, in this step the thresholds
for r1 used to classify the trips can be di¤erent from the thresholds used in the …rst step. It turns
out, however, that the vast majority of r1’s we compute are either close to one or close to zero,
making the choice of a threshold largely irrelevant. As an additional guard against false positives,
we also report some of the results when eliminating from the data certain households that seem
to be inconsistent in the way they use their loyalty cards.




                                                  6
3       Documenting recording errors
In this section we summarize our main …nding of recording errors in the Homescan data. More
details and further cuts of the data can be found in Einav, Leibtag, and Nevo (2008). We organize
the discussion around the three dimensions of potential errors: trip information, product (UPC)
information, and price/quantity information. As mentioned earlier, for most of what follows we
treat the retailer’s record as the “truth”and ask if, or how well, the Homescan record matches it.
In that sense, Homescan recording “errors”are de…ned as records that do not match the retailer’s
data. However, it could be the case that the retailer’s cashier is the one making the error, rather
than the Homescan panelist. We think that this latter case is less likely, especially for analysis at
the product level and the price and quantity level. At the trip level, when we rely on loyalty card
information, it is not clear that the retailer’s data are necessarily more accurate. For example,
if a household borrows a loyalty card once, then all the shopping trips associated with that card
will be linked to the household’s record. We discuss this further below.

3.1     Trip and product information
We separate trips according to the number of distinct UPCs in the Homescan data. A small trip
is de…ned as one with 4 or fewer (distinct) UPCs, a medium trip has 5-9 UPCs, and a large trip
is a trip with 10 UPCs or more. A potential concern is that we have false positives, i.e., that we
match trips incorrectly. Our preliminary analysis, in Einav, Leibtag and Nevo (2008), found that
for the medium and large trips mis-classi…cation of a match is not a concern.7 The real issue is
whether a match exists at all, which can be diagnosed by focusing on r1.
    The distribution of r1 is displayed in Figure 2. The information in the top panel helps us
address the question of how many of the trips, collected in the …rst step, seem to have misrecorded
store and date information. Focusing on large trips, we …nd that there are 150 trips with r1 less
than 0.2, 175 with r1 less than 0.3, and 180 with r1 less than 0.4 (corresponding to 18.5, 21.6,
and 22.4 percent, respectively). For medium trips the corresponding numbers are 113, 155, and
223 (or 9.5, 13.0, and 18.7 percent). Taken together, these numbers suggest that for about 20
percent of the medium and large trips reported in Homescan we can say with a high degree of
certainty that they do not match any trip in the retailer’s data. Therefore, we conclude that
approximately 20 percent of the trips have misrecorded date or store information.8 The bottom
panel of Figure 2 shows a similar pattern for the second step data, with the distribution of r1
being even more bimodal.9 Here, again, we cannot …nd a match for about 20 percent of the trips
    7
     Recall, when possible, for each record in the Homescan data we compute two ratios in the data from the …rst
step: r1 is the fraction of UPCs matched in the trip with the highest UPC overlap, and r2 is the same ratio for the
trip with the second highest UPC overlap. We found that when we focus on medium and large trips, conditioning
on r2 adds essentially nothing to the classi…cation.
    8
     A natural speculation is that perhaps most of these misrecorded trips simply mis-record the date by a day
(e.g., because they shop at 11:30pm). Using the retailer’s data from the second step we found that while such cases
occur, they do not account for a large fraction of the 20 percent misrecorded trips reported here.
    9
   This is not surprising. A-priori, for good matches, the distribution of r1 should in principle be the same in both
panels. However, when there is no good match, r1 from the …rst step will pick up a best match among hundreds of



                                                         7
reported in Homescan, likely due to misrecorded trip information.10
    The preceding paragraph looked for trips reported in Homescan that cannot be matched in
the retailer’s data. The data from the second step also allow us to look for the opposite case:
trips reported by the retailer’s data that cannot be found in Homescan. Recall that the data
obtained in the second step include all the trips, according to the retailer, associated with certain
households. We …nd that only 40 percent of these trips appear in Homescan, but we suspect that
this number is over estimating the fraction of missed trips, and that at least part of it is driven by
the retailer classifying multiple loyalty cards as belonging to the same household, or by multiple
individuals (of di¤erent households) sharing the same card. To address this concern, we focus
on 273 households that seem to have more reliable loyalty card use.11 On average, across these
households, 53 percent of the trips in the retailer’s data are not reported in Homescan.
    There is heterogeneity across households in their accuracy of reporting. In Figure 3 we plot,
for these 273 households, the ratio of trips reported in Homescan to the number of trips in the
retailer’s data (on the horizontal axis) and the fraction of Homescan trips that are matched well
on their UPCs (on the vertical axis). We consider a match as good when the r1 is greater than
0.7. Given that these are trips of the same household to the same store on the same day then even
trips that do not match well on UPCs are very likely to be the same trips, only with signi…cant
misrecording of items.
    Figure 3 suggests that there are two types of households, as the correlation between the two
ratios is highly positive (0.47). The …rst group includes those in the upper right corner, who
do not miss many trips and also record the trip information fairly accurately. Households in
the second group are those that do poorly on both counts: they fail to report a large fraction of
their trips and even when they do report a trip, they do not record its items accurately.12 Using
this rough classi…cation, we use the metric of Figure 3 to classify households as “good” or “bad”
depending on how far they are from perfection, which is the point (1,1) in the …gure. Table 1 then
summarizes the key characteristics for each group and highlights those demographics that are
signi…cantly di¤erent between the groups. The quality of recording is associated with household
composition, as well as with whether the female at the household is fully employed. The pattern

unmatched trips while r1 from the second step will be computed for a given trip, so should be very close to zero.
  10
    In the bottom panel this could also be due to misuse of loyalty cards (for example, if the household forgot
the card at home and didn’t use it, the trip would be reported in Homescan but will not show up in the second
step retailer’s data.) However, given that the fraction of unmatched trips in the top panel (where misuse of loyalty
cards is not an issue) is very similar, we suspect that much of these unmatched trips are due to misrecorded trip
information.
  11
     For each of the 291 Homescan households for which we obtained data in the second step, we compute the
fraction of their trips that produced a match, where a match is de…ned as a trip, of any size, with r1 greater
than 0.7. A higher fraction implies that this household made fewer errors in recording the store and date. The
distribution of this fraction is bimodal. We de…ne a poor match household as one in which the fraction is less than
0.3. This procedure eliminated 18 households and left us with 273 households, who used the same loyalty cards (or
matched cards, as linked by the retailer) consistently. We then applied a similar procedure to speci…c cards of these
households, which made us drop a small number of cards.
  12
    While smaller trips are more likely to be missing or to be misrecorded, the di¤erence is small so the overall
nature of trips is similar between matched (and well recorded) trips and other trips by the same households.



                                                         8
is likely driven by the opportunity cost of time of carefully recording purchases. This cost is
likely higher for fully employed females and for larger households. In contrast, other demographic
variables, such as income and race, are not systematically correlated with the quality of recording.
     We now turn our attention to mistakes in recording items (UPCs) conditional on a trip being
matched. Since we do not want matching errors to drive our …ndings we focus on reliable matches
only. We use two di¤erent criteria for de…ning a reliable match. First, we look at large trips,
involving 10 or more products in the Homescan data, with r1 greater than 0.7. There are 2,477
such trips. Second, we examine medium size trips, with at least 5 but no more than 9 distinct
UPCs in the Homescan data, and with r1 greater than 0.7. There are 3,168 such trips. We do
not use the remaining, small trips for the rest of the analysis.
     We see that for the typical trip almost all the products (98 percent in both groups) scanned by
the Homescan panelist exist in the retailer’s transaction. Selection into the sample was conditional
on this fraction being at least 70 percent (r1 > 0:7). Nevertheless, we still view this as a remarkably
high number. This may not be surprising, as the products are scanned, so it is, in fact, hard to
imagine how misrecording at this level could take place.
     On the other hand, on average there are about 10 percent (14 percent for medium transaction)
of the items that show up in the actual transaction, but are not recorded by the Homescan panelist.
Recall that we eliminated from the analysis products with UPCs that only show up in one of the
data sets. Thus, these missing items cannot be attributed to categories that the Homescan panelist
was not supposed to scan.
     We qualitatively tried to analyze which items are more likely to be missing in the Homescan
trip, by grouping the missed items into product categories, and investigating whether particular
categories stand out. While there are many items that belong to various categories that are
occasionally missing, two speci…c types of items are common. The …rst group includes consumable
products: small bottles of drinks, snacks, etc. It seems likely that such items are often consumed
on the way home, before the purchase is scanned. The second group includes items that belong to
product categories that include many distinct, yet similar UPCs. Yogurts of di¤erent ‡avors and
baby food of di¤erent ‡avors are typical examples. In such cases, it seems likely that individuals
simply scan one of the ‡avors and enter a large quantity instead of scanning each of the ‡avors
(which has a distinct UPC) separately.13
     In order to check if the mistakes in recording products are systematic, we regress the missed
expenditure on the total trip expenditure and …nd that a larger fraction of the expenditure is
missed on larger trips. On large trips the household is more likely to forget to scan, not go
through the trouble of doing so, or consume items on the way home.
  13
   These will appear as missed products, but in reality might not matter, unless we care about the exact ‡avor
bought. To measure this we examine the total number of items bought in the trip. In this example, the total
quantity would match even if the distinct UPC count does not. This slightly reduces the di¤erences, but not by
much, implying that misrecorded quantity cannot fully explain the di¤erence in the number of products.




                                                      9
3.2   Price and quantity information
We now focus on errors in the price and quantity variables. For this purpose we look at the
products that appeared in both data sets from the reliably matched trips using the two de…nitions
of reliable trips. It turns out, that the statistics we present below hardly vary across the groups,
so match reliability does not seem to be a concern. For the rest of this section we will refer to
the …rst set of matched products, those from trips with at least 10 products and r1 greater than
0.7, as “matched large trips,” and for products matched from medium transactions as “matched
medium trips.” For matched large trips we have 41,158 products purchased, an average of 16.6
products per trip. For matched medium trips we have 21,386 matched items, for an average of
6.8 products per trip (recall that these are trips with 5-9 products).
     We present summary statistics for the key variables …rst and then discuss in more detail
additional patterns. Table 2 presents the fraction of observations of quantity, expenditure, price,
and deal indicator, that match between the reports in the Homescan data and in the retailer’s
data. We present results separately for large and medium trips to illustrate the robustness of the
patterns, but given that the summary statistics are so similar across these two types of trips, we
focus the discussion and the subsequent analysis on large trips alone. For quantity we …nd that
94 percent of the time the two data sources report the same quantity. The total expenditure on
the item is the same in both data sets much less frequently, and only 48% of the times the two
data sets report identical prices. On average, the expenditure reported in Homescan is about 10%
higher than the expenditure recorded by the retailer, although there is wide dispersion around
this average (see Table 2). The pattern for price is similar to that of expenditure. It is slightly
better matched (50% match rate and 7% higher prices in Homescan on average), possibly because
the expenditure variable (price times quantity) is further prone to errors due to (less frequent)
misrecorded quantities. Finally, we examine the deal indicator. In the retailer’s data the deal
variable equals one if the gross and net price di¤er. In the Homescan data this is a self reported
variable. Overall, this indicator matches in 80% of the observations, a worse match than the
quantity data, but better than the price.
     We now explore in more detail the patterns we found for each of the variables. We start
with quantity. The overall match rate is reasonable. However, for 73 percent of the Homescan
data and 76 percent of the retailer’s data (in matched large trips), reported quantities are 1,
so a high number of cases in which the two quantities are the same might not be surprising.
Indeed, conditional on the Homescan data reporting a quantity of 1, the probability of this report
matching the retailer’s data is 0.99, while conditional of the Homescan data reporting a quantity
larger than 1 the probability of a match is only 0.86. So a reported quantity of 1 seems to be
very reliable, while a quantity greater than 1 might be somewhat more prone to mistakes, but
still reasonable.
     Using the data from the matched large trips, conditional on quantities not matching, 82
percent of the time the quantity reported in Homescan is higher. Recording errors seem to be of
various types, including six-packs that are recorded as quantities of 6 (the fraction of mistakes for
reported quantities of 6, 12, 18 and 24 are 0.60, 0.85, 1.00 and 0.78, respectively), typing errors
(e.g., 11 instead of 1), and occasional “double scanning” (quantity of 2 instead of 1). Together,


                                                 10
this suggests that the Homescan data might be problematic for studying the quantity purchased.
It seems to be better suited to measure whether or not a purchase occurred. Overall, the variance
of error in the quantity variable constitutes 48.7% of the variance in the Homescan reported
quantity. The correlation coe¢ cient between the two quantity variables is 0.72.
    While in the case of quantity, recording errors are likely driven by the panelist’s recording error,
the case of price is somewhat di¤erent, given our understanding of how the Homescan prices are
generated. As described in Section 2, if the consumer purchased the product at a store for which
Nielsen has store-level data (and we think that all the stores in our matched data are such), then
the Homescan data reports this price, and not the price reported by the consumer. The store level
price is the average weekly transacted price for a given item. If some of the shoppers in that store
during that week paid the full price and some got a discount then the average will be between
the discounted price and pre-discount price, and the Homescan data will over report or under
report the actual transaction price, depending on whether the panelist used her loyalty card or
not. Analysis of the retailer data suggests that loyalty cards are used in about 75-80 percent of
the transactions, and that about 60 percent of the transacted items are associated with loyalty
card discounts, so errors due to this data construction process could be important. Moreover, it
also suggests that the recording errors in price may be either due to panelist’s recording error
or due to the price imputation, and the statistical properties of these errors are likely di¤erent.
Other retailers might not o¤er loyalty card discounts; thus, the second source of error might not
be present in data from these retailers.
    To examine this issue, we present in Figure 4 the distribution of the logarithm of the ratio
of log price in the Homescan data to the price in the retailer’s data. The overall distribution
is presented for comparison in both panels (dashed grey line). The solid black line in the top
panel presents this distribution for transactions for which the store did not have a loyalty card
discount for that item on that day, while the bottom panel repeats the same exercise for the cases
in which a loyalty card discount was present. The overall pattern largely follows our discussion
above. That is, the solid black line in the top panel is close to a standard “classical” error, with
mean close to zero and most of the mass around zero. In other words, in these cases, even when
the price does not match, the di¤erences are small. In contrast, in the bottom panel there is a
very fat right tail of the distribution, and the average recording error is more than 14%. This is
consistent with the fact that all our data is associated with users of loyalty cards (this is how we
matched them), while the price imputed for them is aggregated over a population of which some
do not use the loyalty card. Therefore, imputed Homescan prices are higher in such cases.
    Overall, the variance of the error in the price variable constitutes 21.8% of the variance in the
Homescan price (8.5% if no loyalty card discount is o¤ered). The correlation coe¢ cients between
the two price variables is 0.88. The correlation increases to 0.96 if we condition on the Homescan
deal indicator equal to 0 (and to 0.96 if we look at observations where no loyalty card discount
was o¤ered), and it decreases to 0.83 if the Homescan deal indicator is equal to 1 (0.84 if a loyalty
card discount was o¤ered). The variance in the error of the expenditure data explains 37.1% of
the variation in the per item expenditure of the Homescan data. The correlation coe¢ cient is
0.79.


                                                  11
    In summary, we …nd that for the matched products, quantity is reported fairly accurately,
although, when quantity reported is higher than 1, the reported data are less accurate and there-
fore the correlation between the two quantity variables is quite low. Prices and expenditures are
reported with less accuracy. We suspect that this is due mostly, but not completely, to the Nielsen
matching procedure that imputes store-level prices when possible. This procedure cannot fully
explain the di¤erence, as we saw by examining the matching quality when the item is not on sale.

Comparison to errors in other data sets It may be useful to compare the magnitude and
frequency of recording errors to those reported in other validation studies. To do so, we use
Bound et al. (2001, Section 6), who summarize the evidence on measurement errors in labor
related data. They report errors in earnings, transfer program income, assets, hours worked,
unemployment status, industry and occupation, education, and health related variables. While
it is hard to compare across contexts and over a large set of variables, our overall impression is
that the magnitude of recording errors we document above for Homescan are on the lower end of
the range of recording errors reported by Bound et al. (2001). For example, Bound and Krueger
(1991) compare the annual earnings reported in the CPS with Social Security administrative
records. They …nd that the variance of the log of the ratio of earnings reported in the two data
sets is 0.114 for men and 0.051 for women. The correlation coe¢ cient between the two variables is
0.884 for men and 0.961 for women. Ashenfelter and Krueger (1994) study the years of schooling
reported by twins: they compare the own report to the report of the twin. They …nd a correlation
coe¢ cient of 0.9. We, on the other hand, …nd that the overall variance in the log of the ratio of
the Homescan and retailer price is 0.139. The variance is as low as 0.046 when the Homescan deal
indicator is equal to zero, and 0.092 if no loyalty card discount is o¤ered. So overall it seems like
the errors we document in Homescan are comparable to what is found in other commonly used
economic data sets.


4     Correcting for recording errors
Up to this point we used the validation study to document recording errors. Here we discuss how
the validation study can be used to control for recording errors, and then illustrate this in the
context of an application.

4.1   Methods
Our discussion follows Chen, Hong, and Tamer (2005), who provide more details and additional
references. The basic idea is to use the validation sample to learn the distribution of the error,
conditional on variables observed in the primary data. One can then use this distribution and
“integrate over” it in the primary data. Of course, a key assumption is that the (conditional)
distribution of the error is the same in both the validation data and in the primary data. This
assumption can be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and we revisit it below in the context of our
application.



                                                 12
   Formally, suppose the model we want to estimate implies a moment condition:
                                        Z
                         E[m(X ; 0 )] = m(x ; 0 )fX (x )dx = 0                                    (1)

where m( ) is an r 1 vector of known functions, X are variables, which might not be fully
observed, and 0 2 B, a compact subset of <q with 1          q   r, is a vector of the true value of
unknown parameters that uniquely sets the moment condition to zero. We observe two data sets.
In the …rst, “primary” data set fXpi : i = 1:::Np g, we do not observe X , rather we only observe
X, which is measured with error of unknown form. In our context, Homescan is the primary
data set. In the second, “validation” data set we observe f(Xvj ; Xvj ) : j = 1:::Nv g, i.e., both
the variable that is measured with error and its true value. The matched Homescan-retailer data
is the validation sample in our case. We denote by fXp , fXp , fXv , and fXv , as the marginal
densities of the latent variable and the mismeasured variable in the primary and validation data
sets. We also denote by fXp jXp and fXv jXv the conditional densities of the latent variable given
the mismeasured variable in the primary and validation data sets, respectively.
    The key assumption is that

                                      fXv jXv =x = fXp jXp =x for all x.                          (2)
That is, that the distribution of the true variables, conditional on the observed variables, is the
same in both the primary and the validation samples. This is not a trivial assumption. For
example, to use our validation sample for the entire Homescan data, it would require that the
recording error is the same for the retailer we observe and for all other retailers. Even though we
assume that fXv jXv =x = fXp jXp =x , we note the marginal density fXv might be di¤erent than fXp
and therefore fXv might be di¤erent than fXp .
    We do not observe X in the primary data set and therefore cannot directly use the moment
condition in equation (1) to estimate . However, we could use the validation sample to estimate
fXv jXv , and the primary data set to estimate fXp . Thus,
                            Z                            Z
                  fXp (x ) = fXp jXp =x (x )fXp (x)dx = fXv jXv =x (x )fXp (x)dx                 (3)

where the second equality uses the key assumption that fXv jXv =x = fXp jXp =x . We can estimate
                           R
this density by fd
                 X (x ) =
                   p
                             fX\           d                 \
                                 jX =x (x )fXp (x)dx where fX jX =x (x ) is the estimate of the
                                  v     v                               v   v

density of Xv conditional on Xv = x, and fd
                                          Xp (x) is the estimated density of Xp in the primary
data. Now, we can use the moment condition to estimate the parameters of interest by
                             Z                            0       Z
              b = arg min        m(x ; )fd
                                         Xp (x )dx
                                                              c
                                                              W       m(x ; )fd
                                                                              Xp (x )dx   ;       (4)

      c is a positive de…nite symmetric weight matrix.
where W
   While intuitive, this estimator involves estimating two distributions, fX\
                                                                            v jXv =x
                                                                                     (x ) and fd
                                                                                               Xp (x),
potentially non-parametrically, and then using them in a non-linear moment condition. Instead,
Chen, Hong, and Tamer (2005) propose to de…ne
                                                    Z
                 g(x; ) E[m(Xp ; )jXp = x] = m(x ; )fXp jXp =x (x )dx :                            (5)


                                                     13
Note, that g( ) is a function of the variable measured with error Xp , that is observed in the
primary data set, rather than with respect to the true (latent) variable Xp . We can now apply
the law of iterated expectations, so that
  Ep [g(X;   0 )]   = Ep [E[m(Xp ;   0 )jXp    = x]] = Ep [E[m(Xp ;     0 )]jXp   = x] = E[0jXp = x] = 0:    (6)
Thus, the original moment condition implies that
                                          Z
                           Ep [g(X; 0 )] = g(x;                0 )fXp (x)dx    = 0;                          (7)

and we can estimate the parameters of interest by
                                     0                10 0                 1
                                         Np                   Np
                                      1  X                 1  X
                        b = arg min @                   c@
                                            gb(Xpi ; )A W        gb(Xpi ; )A                                 (8)
                                      Np                   Np
                                               i=1                        i=1

where W c is a positive de…nite symmetric weight matrix, and gb(Xpi ; ) is a non-parametric estimate
of g(Xpi ; ), estimated using the validation sample. Using the validation sample to estimate
gb(Xpi ; ) yields a consistent estimate because of the key assumption (equation (2)). Chen, Hong
and Tamer (2005) propose using a series (sieve) estimator of g(x; ):
                                         Nv
                                         X
                             gb(x; ) =         m(Xvj ; )pk (Xvj )0 (Pv0 Pv )   1 k
                                                                                p (x);                       (9)
                                         j=1

where {pl (x); l = 1; 2; :::g denotes a sequence of known basis functions, pknv (x) = (p1 (x); :::pk (x))0
and Pv = (pk (Xv1 ):::pk (XvNv ))0 for an integer k that increase with the sample size Nv , such that
k ! 1, and k=Nv ! 0 as Nv ! 1. In words, gb(x; ) is estimated by projecting it onto the basis
functions. In general, the optimization in equation (8) is non-linear, but not more complex than
the optimization implied by using the moment condition given in equation (1).
    In a linear model this simpli…es to a fairly simple procedure. For example, suppose we want
to estimate a regression of price paid p on demographics D, as we do in the next section. In the
primary data (Homescan) we observe p and D, but we are concerned about possible recording
errors in p. In the validation sample, the matched Homescan-retailer data, we observe p, p , and
D, where p is the Homescan-reported price and p is the retailer-reported price. We then …rst use
the validation data to regress the retailer’s price p on p and D, to obtain, for example,
                                          E(p jp; D) = D0 b + b p:                                          (10)
We then use the estimated coe¢ cients, b and b , to construct E(p     \ jp; D) in the Homescan data.
Using Homescan, we then regress this predicted price on D to obtain the error-adjusted estimates.
    In may be instructive to go through the simplest case, where both the prediction and estimating
equations are linear, and the set of covariates D is identical. In this case, the “naive”regression in
Homescan would be to regress p on D, while the corrected regression will be to regress D0 b + b p
on D. If the true coe¢ cient on D is , then the “naive” coe¢ cient will be (roughly)           . That
is, with no measurement errors or with classical measurement error, we would have = 1 and
   = 0, and no bias. However, either 6= 1 (the case where the mean of measurement error is not
zero) or 6= 0 (which would arise if the measurement error is correlated with D) will result in a
bias.

                                                         14
4.2    An illustrative application
In this section we illustrate the method in the context of one particular application. Recently,
researchers have used Homescan to study how the prices paid vary with household demographics
(e.g., Aguiar and Hurst, 2007). We perform a simple version of such a study in order to evaluate
the impact of the recording errors. Our goal is twofold. First, we use this application to demon-
strate how one could use our validation study to correct for recording errors in Homescan, and
hope that future users of Homescan will do so too, at least as a robustness check. Second, the
application provides a more meaningful way to evaluate the importance of recording errors. That
is, while describing the recording errors is potentially interesting, it is not su¢ cient for whether
the recording errors is something one should worry about. In this section we therefore ask if the
recording errors matter for conclusions drawn from the analysis.
     We note that our goal here is not to replicate any particular study, just to demonstrate that the
errors could have important implications for certain bottom lines, and to show how the validation
study can be used to address these errors. We chose this particular application for two reasons.
First, it is important and active line of work, making it more likely that researchers who use
Homescan will perform a similar analysis. Second, it is simple. That is, the key regression here
is linear, and has price (the Homescan variable which is measured with error) on the left hand
side. This makes this analysis robust to classical recording errors, and it is only non-classical
recording errors that would matter. Other settings, in which the model is non-linear or the
variable of interest is on the right hand side will make the analysis more sensitive to errors, and
the correction slightly more complex.
     The regression of interest in this application is

                                                               0
                                             pik =    k   +        Di + "ik                                      (11)

where i is a household, k is a speci…c product (distinct UPC), p is the unit price paid for this
product,14 and Di is a vector of demographic characteristics. The k ’s are a set of UPC …xed
e¤ects, and is a vector of coe¢ cients of interest. The economic question is whether certain
demographic groups pay more or less for the same product, relative to the rest of the population.
Aguiar and Hurst (2007), for example, focus on the price paid over the life cycle and emphasize
their …nding that the elderly pay lower prices for the same item, compared to other age groups.15
One could in principle analyze the corresponding e¤ect of other demographic groups, such as
gender and race.
    We start with Table 3, which presents results from estimating the above regression. An
observation is a product (UPC) in a matched large trip, i.e., in a large trip with r1 greater than
0.7. The regression reported in the …rst column uses as the dependent variable the price, in cents,
as recorded in Homescan, while the regression reported in the second column uses the price in the
retailer’s data. The covariates are identical in both cases. The di¤erent data sets give di¤erent
  14
    The reported results do not account for coupons. Results that use prices net of coupons are qualitatively similar,
and are available from the authors upon request.
  15
    We note that our exact regression speci…cation is similar but not identical to the regression estimated by Aguiar
and Hurst (2007). This does not have any e¤ect on the point we try to make in this paper.


                                                          15
results. Out of the twenty regression coe¢ cients, …ve have di¤erent signs, nine do not agree on
their statistical signi…cance, and the point estimate (when they have the same sign) are o¤ by an
average of more than 40 percent.
    It is interesting to note that in almost all the cases when a coe¢ cient is signi…cant in one
regression but not in the other, the retailer’s data generate the signi…cant estimate, while the
Homescan data do not. In many cases the di¤erence is also economically meaningful. For example,
in the Homescan data the coe¢ cient on race dummy variable is negative and signi…cant, which
implies that non-white consumers pay a lower price. On the other hand, in the retailer’s data
the coe¢ cient is positive but not signi…cant. A researcher using the Homescan data to study
discrimination would probably reach di¤erent conclusions than one using the retailer’s data to
study the same question, using the very same set of shopping trips. Another example is in the
impact of age on price paid. The Homescan data suggest a ‡atter impact of age, especially
for males, than the retailer’s data. Once again researchers using the data to study life cycle
consumption might reach wrong conclusion using the Homescan data.
    As already noted in the previous section, there are two e¤ects that cause the di¤erence in
the results. One is of pure recording errors, while the other arises from the way Nielsen imputes
prices. We follow the same procedure described (see, e.g., Figure 4) to identify cases where one
type of recording error is more likely than the other. We then repeat the same regressions for these
two di¤erent cases, separately. In general, the regression results are quite di¤erent for each of the
regression pairs, but the di¤erences are much more subtle in the case where price imputation is
likely to be an issue (when the item was associated with a loyalty card discount). For example,
in this case the coe¢ cient signs do not agree for eight out of the twenty coe¢ cients, while in the
case in which a loyalty card discount is not available for the item (so price imputation is unlikely
to introduce errors) only two of the point estimates do not agree on their sign (last two columns
of Table 3).
    The channels by which the coe¢ cient are biased is quite di¤erent depending on the nature of
the recording errors. Consider the case where the recording errors are driven by Nielsen’s price
imputation, and focus, for example, on the race dummy variable. In this case, the regression
using the Homescan data tells us that non-white households tend to buy at cheaper stores, i.e.,
stores where the average consumer in the store pays less for the same item. The regression using
the retailer’s data tells us that despite going to cheaper stores non-white panelists do not pay
less on average. In contrast, if none of the prices are imputed and the only di¤erence is due to
recording mistakes made by the panelist then the channel is di¤erent. Once again we use the
race dummy variables as an example. The regression using the Homescan data tells us that non-
white consumers report a lower price. On the other hand, the regression using the retailer’s data
suggests that they do not actually pay less, maybe even slightly more. Together these suggest
that white consumers tend to over report prices relative to non-white consumers, not that they
are likely to pay more.
    In order to further study the e¤ect of recording errors and to illustrate how the validation
study can be used to …x them, Table 4 presents Homescan regressions, where we only focus on the
age e¤ect. That is, we use the regression in equation (11) with only the age variable (of the female


                                                 16
head of the household). Column (1) uses the entire Homescan observations in one market.16 Note
that these are all the observations in the 2004 data, not just the ones we matched. The excluded
category are the elderly, 65 years or older. The results is qualitatively similar to the main …nding
of Aguiar and Hurst (2007): older consumers tend to pay less for the same products.
    Columns (2) and (3) replicate the analysis using the matched sample. Column (2) presents
the results using the retailer data and column (3) uses the matched Homescan transactions for the
larger market. An important observation here is that the results of either column (2) or (3) are
quite di¤erent from the results using the full Homescan sample in column (1). For this selected set
of transactions, the pattern across ages is much smaller, and often reversed (younger individuals
pay less, rather than more, than the elderly). It seems likely that the di¤erent results arise due
to non-random selection into our matched sample. For example, in the larger Homescan sample
the elderly are more likely to use coupons, while in our (matched) sample they are less likely to
use them (not reported).17 For this reason we should probably be careful in drawing conclusions
based on either columns (2) or (3) of Table 4. On the other hand, the di¤erence between the
results in columns (2) and (3) also suggests that we should be careful in drawing conclusion based
on column (1): the results can potentially be driven by recording errors.
    In column (4) we present results that use the validation sample to correct for the recording
error. We follow the procedure described in the previous section. We …rst use the validation
sample to predict the “true” retail price as a function of the demographics (age dummies, in
this case) and the Homescan reported price, and we then use the full sample, impute predicted
prices for each of the observations, and run this predicted price (rather than the reported price)
on age. The resulting coe¢ cients signi…cantly change compared to column (1), and the age
pattern is di¤erent (and economically less important). Loosely, the correction makes the estimated
coe¢ cients somewhere in between the original estimates (column (1)) and the true regression on
the matched sample (column (2)).
    We again note that an important assumption that makes this correction valid is that the
conditional distribution of recording errors is the same in the validation sample and in the overall
Homescan data (in that market). We note that although it seems likely that the matched sample is
non-randomly selected, this by itself does not violate the assumption; the conditional distribution
of the recording errors may be the same even if the unconditional distribution of prices is not.
For this reason, we view this correction as a useful robustness test of existing estimates, rather
than a recipe that should always be followed.
  16
    Our analysis so far used data from two metropolitan areas (see appendix). Here we only use data from the
larger metropolitan area, as a way to minimize confounding the results due to pricing di¤erences between the two
areas. Coincidentally, this is also the metropolitan area covered by the Homescan data used in Dube (2001) and
Aguiar and Hurst (2007).
  17
     It may not be totally surprising that the validation data is not representative of the larger Homescan data. We
select on matched trips, which are associated with more “careful” individuals. The change in the results between
the matched and overall Homescan sample may indicate that this selection is di¤erential across age groups.




                                                        17
5    Concluding comments
In this paper we describe a validation study of the Homescan data. We described the magnitude
of recording errors along several dimensions (trips, items, and price and quantities), and then
demonstrated how the validation study could be used to correct estimates for these recording
errors. We think that our work has two distinct implications. First, it may provide guidance
to Nielsen as to where and how to improve data collection and reporting. Second, it provides
guidance to users of Homescan as to how to correct estimates for possible recording errors. We
discuss each in turn.
    We …nd that prices are the variable most poorly recorded. This is due, at least in part, to
the way Nielsen imputes store-level prices when available. There are several good reasons to
use the store level prices. However, given our …ndings, it seems important to also provide an
indicator that an imputed price is used. Ideally, of course, users of Homescan would know both
the imputed store-level price and the price reported by the household. This information is not
currently collected by Nielsen, but collecting this information, at least on an experimental basis,
would allow for additional analysis of the magnitude of this discrepancy. The one place where the
store level data could be very useful is to help identify purchases on deal. A deal can be de…ned
as any situation in which the price reported by the consumer is less than the store non-deal price
reported by the store.
    Nielsen could also improve the quality of the data by requiring the panelists to send in their
receipts. The reported data could then be compared to these receipts (we are aware of at least
one other consumer panel level data that uses this procedure). Random sampling of the receipts
will both make the panelists more careful, and would also allow for quality control. As we
…nd that certain households are more mistake-prone along all the dimensions we analyze, such
random sampling may be used to design better sampling weights, or even to drop out of the
sample “negligent”panelists. The …nal analysis of the data can be improved, and bias potentially
removed, by constructing a reliability index for the observations and weighting them accordingly.
Given the current data available in Homescan, such an index might be hard to construct. But
future data collection can be done with this goal in mind.
    To users of the Homescan data (in its current form), our work provides a way to correct
for measurement errors. In particular, we discussed how one would adjust parameter estimates
to account for recording errors, and demonstrated how this works in one simple application. A
su¢ cient statistic to almost any such adjustment is knowledge (through the validation study) of
the distribution of the error conditional on variables observed in the primary data. To facilitate
such corrections, we posted this distribution on our web pages, and we hope that researchers using
Homescan will use this distribution and one of the methods that correct for measurement errors
as a way to run plausible robustness checks of their results. As we emphasize throughout, when
one makes these corrections, the maintained assumption is that this conditional distribution of
the measurement error is the same in the validation sample and the primary data. While we think
that this is often a plausible assumption, researchers who use our posted distribution to adjust
their estimates should evaluate the plausibility of this assumption in their particular context.



                                                18
References
Aguiar, Mark, and Erik Hurst (2007), “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
Review 97(5): 1533-1559.
     Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan B. Krueger (1994), “Estimates of the Economic Returns to
Schooling from a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review 84(5): 1157-1173.
     Bound, John, Charles C. Brown, and Nancy Mathiowetz (2001), “Measurement Error in Sur-
vey Data,” in Edward E. Learner and James J. Heckman (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics:
3705-3843, New York: North Holland Publishing.
     Bound, John, and Alan B. Krueger (1991), “The Extent of Measurement Error in Longitudinal
Earnings Data: Do Two Wrongs Make a Right?,” Journal of Labor Economics 9(1): 1-24.
     Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (forthcoming), “Product Creation and Destruction:
Evidence and Price Implications,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
     Broda, Christian, and David E. Weinstein (2008), “Understanding International Price Di¤er-
ences Using Barcode Data,” NBER Working Paper No. 14017.
     Chen, Xiaohong, Han Hong, and Elie Tamer (2005), “Measurement Error Models with Aux-
iliary Data,” Review of Economic Studies 72(2): 343-366.
     Dube, Jean-Pierre (2004), “Multiple Discreteness and Product Di¤erentiation: Demand for
Carbonated Soft Drinks,” Marketing Science 23(1): 66-81.
     Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo (2008), “On The Accuracy of Nielsen Homescan
Data,” manuscript, ERS/USDA.
     Hausman, Jerry, and Ephraim Leibtag (2007), “Consumer bene…ts from increased competition
in shopping outlets: Measuring the e¤ect of Wal-Mart,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22(7):
1157-1177.
     Katz, Michael (2007), “Estimating Supermarket Choice using Moment Inequalities,” Ph.D.
Dissertation, Harvard University.


Appendix: Detailed description of the data construction
As mentioned in the text and sketched in Figure 1, our data construction process involved two
distinct steps. Below we describe each step in turn. We then …nish by summarizing the resultant
data set from the retailer we work with.

First step

In the …rst step our objective was to maximize the number of matched trips given size limitations.
These size limitations arise because, without additional information, we needed to have a complete
trip record from a particular store on a particular date for each potential matched trip. The size
of the data …le containing this information is about 3 megabytes, and due to constraints imposed
by the retailer, we had to limit this step to roughly …fteen hundred store-day transaction-level
records.




                                               19
    We therefore proceeded as follows. First, we restricted the data set to two metropolitan areas,
in which the retailer has high market share. This left us with 265 di¤erent retailer stores (147
in one area, and 118 in the other). The focus on two areas helped in obtaining more data, given
the way the retailer organizes its data. Using areas with high market share of the retailer was
also useful, as it could raise the probability that a single store-day record would help to match
more than a single shopping trip. This would happen if two households in the Homescan panel
visited the same store on the same day, which is more likely when the market share of the retailer
is high. Since we identify the store by the zip code of its location, we also restricted attention
to retailer stores that are the only retailer stores in the same zip code. This eliminated 76 stores
(29 percent), and left us with 189 stores (101 in one area, 88 in the other). We then searched the
Homescan data for shopping trips at these stores, with the additional conditions that: (i) the trip
includes purchase of at least 5 distinct UPCs (to make a match easier); (ii) the trip occurred after
February 15, 2004 (to guarantee that the retailer, who deletes transaction-level data older than
two years, still has these data); and (iii) the household shops at the retailer stores (according to
Homescan) more than 20 percent and less than 80 percent of its trips. These trips were made by
342 distinct households in the Homescan data. For 240 of these households, we randomly selected
a single trip for each of them. For the remaining 102 households, which included households with
at least 10, and not more than 20, reported trips in Homescan data, we selected all their trips.
We then requested from the retailer the full transaction records for the store-days that matched
these 1,779 trips. Since 74 of these trips were to the same store on the same date, we expected to
get 1,705 store-day transaction-level records.
    We eventually got 1,603 of these 1,705 requested store-days (1,247 in the …rst area, 356 in the
other), which account for 4,080,770 shopping trips. They include 122 distinct stores (74 in the …rst
area, and 48 in the other). These 1,603 store-days are associated with 1,675 trips from the sample
of 1,779 shopping trips described above. However, as already mentioned, since the retailer enjoys
high market share in both areas, it is not surprising that the 1,603 store-day transaction-level
data records we obtained are associated with additional 904 trips in Homescan. Given the way we
constructed the sample, however, many of these additional trips include a small number of items,
or households that rarely shop at the retailer’s stores.

Second step

After obtaining the data from the …rst step, we developed a simple algorithm to …nd likely matches
between trips in the Homescan data with trips in the retailer’s data. These likely matches were
only used to speed up the data construction process (as described in the text, the data analysis in
the paper uses a more systematic matching procedure.) The algorithm used the …rst …ve UPCs in
the Homescan trip, and declared a match if at least three of these …ve were found in a given trip in
the retailer’s data. We used this algorithm with the data we obtained in the …rst step and found
1,372 likely matches that, according to Homescan, are associated with 293 distinct households.
Of these households, 166 were associated with more than one likely match, and 105 with four or
more.
    We then asked the retailer to use the loyalty card used in these 1,372 shopping trips and to


                                                20
provide us with all the transactions available for the households associated with these cards (in
the retailer’s data during the year 2004). Only two of the requested trips were not associated with
loyalty cards. For the rest, we obtained all the transactions associated with the same loyalty card,
and additional transactions that are associated with loyalty cards used by the same household,
as classi…ed by the retailer. Since associating multiple cards with the same household may not
be perfect, in the analysis we experimented with both the card-level and the household-level
matching.
    In this step we obtained a total of 40,036 shopping trips from the retailer. These 40,036
trips are associated with 384 distinct stores (139 in the …rst area, 109 in the second, and 136
in other areas), with 682 distinct loyalty cards (472 in the …rst area, 203 in the second, and
7 in other areas), and with 529 distinct households, according to the retailer’s de…nition (380
in the …rst area, 140 in the other). Finally, the 40,036 trips are associated with 34,316 unique
store-date-loyalty card combinations, 33,744 unique store-data-household combinations (using the
retailer’s de…nition of a household), and 27,746 unique store-date-household combinations, using
the Homescan de…nition. Of these trips, 3,884 (9.7 percent) occurred in a store-day already
appearing in the data we obtained earlier, and therefore are one of the 4,080,770 trips obtained
in the …rst step. Recall that the algorithm we used to request these data was geared to …nd likely
matches, and therefore may have also found wrong matches. This is one reason that the number of
households we intended to match (291, the original 293 minus two that had no associated loyalty
cards) is less than the number of households associated with these trips. A second reason may be
multiple cards used by the same household that are not linked to each other by the retailer.

Summary

To summarize, we have two di¤erent types of data from the retailer. The …rst data set includes full
transaction record of 1,603 distinct store-days. In these data trips are not associated with a loyalty
card. The second data set includes 40,036 trips, which are associated with particular loyalty cards
and households. 3,884 of these trips overlap and appear in both data sets. The …rst data set is
designed to match multiple transactions of 102 households in the Homescan data, and isolated
transactions of other households. The second data set is designed to match all transactions of
almost 300 households.




                                                 21
                               Figure 1: Schematic sketch of the data construction process

                In Homescan: Identify a subset of trips to the Retailer's stores (see
                                                                                            Raw Data Sources
                appendix for criterion for choosing the trips)
"First step"




                From these trips, construct the set of Store-Days over which these
                trips took place. A Store-Day combination is a specific store and a         Homescan Data
                specific date.



                For each Store-Day in the set, request from the Retailer the entire
                record of its transactions in that store during that day



                For each Homescan trip in the initial set, search within the
                corresponding Store-Day in the Retailer's data, and try to find a           Retailer's Data
                plausible matched transaction (see appendix)
"Second step"




                For the set of plausible matches found, extract a set of unique
                Household id's (using the corresponding loyalty cards used, as well as
                the Retailer's data base which attempts to link multiple cards of the
                same household)



                For the set of Household id's, request from the Retailer the entire set
                of trips (during 2004) that are associated with loyalty cards that belong
                to these households




                                                                             22
                                                    Figure 2: The bimodal distribution of r1

                                                                   In the data from the "First Step"

                              0.90
                                                 Small trips
                              0.80

                              0.70               Medium trips

                              0.60               Large trips
                  Frequency




                              0.50

                              0.40

                              0.30

                              0.20

                              0.10

                              0.00
                                     [0.0,0.1)



                                                      [0.1,0.2)



                                                                   [0.2,0.3)



                                                                               [0.3,0.4)



                                                                                           [0.4,0.5)



                                                                                                            [0.5,0.6)



                                                                                                                        [0.6,0.7)



                                                                                                                                    [0.7,0.8)



                                                                                                                                                [0.8,0.9)



                                                                                                                                                              [0.9,1.0]
                                                                                                       r1


                                                                  In the data from the "Second Step"

                              0.90

                              0.80               Small trips

                              0.70               Medium trips

                              0.60               Large trips
                  Frequency




                              0.50

                              0.40

                              0.30

                              0.20

                              0.10

                              0.00
                                     [0.0,0.1)



                                                      [0.1,0.2)



                                                                   [0.2,0.3)



                                                                               [0.3,0.4)



                                                                                           [0.4,0.5)



                                                                                                            [0.5,0.6)



                                                                                                                        [0.6,0.7)



                                                                                                                                    [0.7,0.8)



                                                                                                                                                [0.8,0.9)



                                                                                                                                                              [0.9,1.0]




                                                                                                       r1



UPC counts (which are used to classify trips as small, medium, or large) are based on the number of distinct UPCs
in a trip as reported in the Homescan data. Each histogram plots the distribution of the                                                                    r1 statistic. In the “…rst
step,” this is the transaction with the highest UPC overlap in the same store and day. In the “second step,” this is
the speci…c transaction in the same store and day by the matched household. Both histograms show a very clear
bimodal pattern, where  r1 is either very close to one or very close to zero, and especially so for large trips. This
makes it clear why the results remain essentially unchanged when we change the cuto¤ value of r1 above which we
de…ne a match to be successful (throughout the paper we report results that use 0.7 for this cuto¤ value).




                                                                                           23
                                                                   Figure 3: Household heterogeneity


                                                    1

                                                   0.9
   Ratio of matched trips to Homescan trip count




                                                   0.8

                                                   0.7

                                                   0.6

                                                   0.5

                                                   0.4

                                                   0.3

                                                   0.2

                                                   0.1

                                                    0
                                                         0   0.2     0.4         0.6         0.8        1         1.2     1.4   1.6
                                                                    Ratio of Homescan trip count to Retailer trip count


A data point in this histogram is a household whose transactions match consistently (see text for exact de…nition).
There are 273 such households. The horizontal axis reports the ratio between the number of reported Homescan
trips and the number of reported Retailer trips (based on the retailer’s loyalty card use). Ratios below one suggest
unreported trips (in Homescan). Ratios above one suggest trips to the Retailer’s store without using the loyalty
card (or using a card that the retailer did not link to the household). The vertical axis reports the fraction of
Homescan trip for which we could match a signi…cant number of the UPCs (at least 0.7). That is, a “prefect”
household is one that each of whose trips as reported in Homescan is also found in the retailer data, each of whose
trips as reported by the retailer is found in Homescan, and in all trips a high fraction of UPCs is matched. The
…gure shows a clear distinction between two types of household. Those with both ratios close to 1 report most of
their trips, and report the UPCs in each trip relatively well. In contrast, those households that are close to the
origin are households that don’t report a large fraction of their trips, and don’t report (or report incorrectly) many
of the UPCs in those trips they do report. The dashed half circle is the cut point we use to de…ne households as
“good” or “bad” for the statistics reported in Table 1.




                                                                                  24
                                       Figure 4: Two sources of price recording errors

                              6
                                          All large trips

                                          Items without card member
                              5           discount


                              4
                    Density




                              3


                              2


                              1


                              0
                                  -1   -0.8     -0.6        -0.4   -0.2        0   0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                                       log(Homescan price) - log(Retailer price)

                              6
                                          All large trips

                                          Items with card member
                              5
                                          discount


                              4
                    Density




                              3


                              2


                              1


                              0
                                  -1   -0.8     -0.6        -0.4   -0.2        0   0.2    0.4      0.6   0.8   1
                                                       log(Homescan price) - log(Retailer price)




This …gure presents kernel densities of the log price di¤erence between Homescan and the Retailer. The gray
dashed line is common to both panels and uses all matched large trips, which parallels the corresponding row in
the left panel of Table 2. The black solid line in each panel uses a subset of these data. The bottom panel uses the
observations for which the item was not associated with any store discount at the time of purchase (about 34% of
the cases), while the top panel uses the observations for which the item was associated with a card member store
discount at the time of purchase (about 54% of the cases). In 12% of the cases we could not determine whether the
item was associated with a discount (8% of the cases did not have a matched item in the store level data and in 4%
of the cases it was di¢ cult to determine whether a discount was available to all customers). Summary statistics for
the solid lines in the top (bottom) panel are: mean -0.040 (0.143), standard deviation 0.305 (0.391) and 5%-95%
range -0.288 to 0 (-0.434 to 0.693).




                                                                          25
                         Table 1: Comparison of “good” and “bad” households

                                            "Good" Households           "Bad" Households              p-value
Number of Households                                  144                      129
Household size                                        1.96                     2.50                    0.000
HH income ($000)                                     48.89                    53.82                    0.182
No female head of Household                           0.16                     0.05                    0.005
Age female                                           47.90                    51.63                    0.135
No male head of Household                             0.28                     0.21                    0.191
Age male                                             41.08                    44.90                    0.232
Number of kids                                       0.13                     0.22                     0.029
Number of Little kids                                0.02                     0.05                     0.143
Male employed                                        0.47                     0.49                     0.704
Male fully employed                                  0.42                     0.45                     0.585
Female employed                                      0.42                     0.50                     0.189
Female fully employed                                0.26                     0.38                     0.040
Male education (category)                            3.04                     3.30                     0.302
Female education (category)                          3.46                     3.92                     0.017
Married (or widower)                                 0.58                     0.78                     0.000
Non-white                                            0.10                     0.13                     0.481
"15K" Homescan Household                             0.07                     0.08                     0.799



This table compares demographics of “good” and “bad” households, as de…ned by their recording behavior (see
Figure 3). The p-value reports a test of whether the means are equal in both columns. The highlighted demographics
are those for which this test can be rejected (using a 5% con…dence level).




                                                        26
                                    Table 2: Summary match statistics

                                         Matched Large Trips                       Matched Medium Trips
                                Mean        Std.       5%        95%       Mean       Std.      5%        95%
Quantity
 Homescan                        1.44       1.16        1         3         1.51      1.36       1         4
 Retailer                        1.35       0.87        1         3         1.38      0.99       1         3
 Fraction Same                  0.938                                      0.924
Expenditure
 Homescan                        3.14      2.44       0.69       7.38       3.23      2.74     0.69       7.58
 Retailer                        2.76      2.03       0.65       6.00       2.82      2.15     0.66       6.29
 Fraction Same                  0.479                                      0.486
 Log(Homescan/Retailer)          0.10      0.41       -0.38      0.69      0.10       0.44     -0.42      0.70
Price
 Homescan                        2.44      1.63       0.50       4.99       2.44      1.67     0.50       4.99
 Retailer                        2.25      1.53       0.50       4.89       2.27      1.55     0.50       4.99
 Fraction Same                  0.503                                      0.512
 Log(Homescan/Retailer)          0.07      0.37       -0.37      0.61      0.05       0.39     -0.42      0.60
Deal Indicator
 Homescan                       0.520                                      0.534
 Retailer                       0.554                                      0.549
 Fraction Same                  0.795                                      0.820
Number of Obs. (UPCs)           41,158                                    21,386
Distinct Shopping Trips         2,477                                     3,168
Distinct Households              263                                       318




Large and Medium trips are de…ned using the count of distinct UPCs as reported Homescan (Medium: 5-9, Large:
10+). An observations in this table is a distinct item (UPC) in a given trip.




                                                        27
                                     Table 3: Comparison of simple price regressions

Sample                                       All matched items                    Items with card member discount         Items w/o card member discount
Dependet variables (in cents)        Homescan price         Retailer price        Homescan price         Retailer price   Homescan price         Retailer price

Household size                           -1.321                    -3.110             -1.195                   -3.231         -0.525                   -1.226
                                         (0.585)                   (0.558)            (0.874)                   (0.756)       (0.910)                   (0.599)
Household income ($000)                  0.014                     0.094              -0.006                    0.077         0.002                     0.044
                                         (0.016)                   (0.015)            (0.024)                   (0.021)       (0.023)                   (0.015)
No female head of Household             -41.118                -32.854               -43.188                   -38.610       -36.211                   -28.823
                                         (9.433)                   (8.987)            (14.805)                 (12.812)       (13.938)                  (9.177)
Age female                               -1.247                    -1.713             -1.172                   -1.794         -0.972                   -1.059
                                         (0.361)                   (0.344)            (0.569)                   (0.493)       (0.531)                   (0.350)
Age female squared                       0.010                     0.020              0.008                     0.020         0.009                     0.011
                                         (0.003)                   (0.003)            (0.005)                   (0.005)       (0.005)                   (0.003)
No male head of Household                11.512                -33.063                30.465                   -5.164         17.157                   -3.175
                                         (9.730)                   (9.270)            (15.157)                 (13.117)       (14.169)                  (9.328)
Age male                                 -0.395                    -1.342             0.092                    -0.158         -0.032                   -0.204
                                         (0.382)                   (0.364)            (0.597)                   (0.517)       (0.545)                   (0.359)
Age male squared                         0.005                     0.012              0.001                     0.001         0.001                     0.001
                                         (0.004)                   (0.004)            (0.006)                   (0.005)       (0.005)                   (0.003)
Number of kids                           3.423                     1.835              4.898                     3.325         -0.633                   -0.847
                                         (1.409)                   (1.343)            (2.097)                   (1.815)       (2.164)                   (1.425)
Number of Little kids                    -0.808                    3.609              -0.119                    5.046         3.423                     2.112
                                         (2.060)                   (1.962)            (3.130)                   (2.709)       (3.172)                   (2.089)
Male employed                            -0.585                -11.024                4.459                    -6.299         -5.284                   -2.155
                                         (2.180)                   (2.077)            (3.157)                   (2.732)       (3.822)                   (2.517)
Male fully employed                      5.478                     17.662             2.856                    13.405         10.251                    4.042
                                         (2.078)                   (1.980)            (3.026)                   (2.619)        (3.70)                   (2.436)
Female employed                          5.256                     1.014              6.485                     1.257         0.588                    -0.921
                                         (1.228)                   (1.170)            (1.895)                   (1.640)       (1.779)                   (1.172)
Female fully employed                    -4.082                    -3.285             -4.228                   -2.490         -4.088                   -2.149
                                         (1.213)                   (1.155)            (1.881)                   (1.628)       (1.733)                   (1.141)
Male education (category)                1.194                     -1.318             1.558                    -1.444         1.978                     0.088
                                         (0.443)                   (0.422)            (0.686)                   (0.593)       (0.636)                   (0.419)
Female education (category)              -1.335                    1.249              -1.520                    0.749         -2.404                   -0.498
                                         (0.487)                   (0.464)            (0.763)                   (0.660)       (0.688)                   (0.453)
Married (or widower)                     4.787                     1.896              3.830                    -0.361         5.236                     1.558
                                         (1.210)                   (1.153)            (1.874)                   (1.621)       (1.723)                   (1.134)
Non-white                                -3.627                    1.303              -8.499                   -0.916         3.146                     0.836
                                         (1.540)                   (1.468)            (2.382)                   (2.062)       (2.238)                   (1.473)
Hispanic                                 -3.453                    -2.990             -4.949                   -2.198         1.887                     1.314
                                         (1.841)                   (1.754)            (2.743)                   (2.374)       (2.868)                   (1.888)
"15K" Homescan Household                 -1.142                    -2.475             -0.031                   -1.083         -5.500                   -3.328
                                         (1.377)                   (1.312)            (2.046)                   (1.771)       (2.144)                   (1.412)
Constant                                286.150                295.098               274.680                   254.138       268.066                   287.018
                                         (10.447)                  (9.954)            (16.182)                 (14.004)       (15.268)                 (10.052)

R-squared                                0.912                     0.910              0.896                     0.896         0.966                     0.986
UPC fixed effects (number of UPCs)                  yes (10,470)                                 yes (6,793)                             yes (5,764)
Number of observations                                41,158                                       22,291                                  13,818




The table reports price regressions. Each column reports a di¤erent regression, with standard errors in parentheses.
The …rst two regressions use all the matched items in the matched large trips, with the …rst regression using the
Homescan price as the dependent variable and the second regression the Retailer price as the dependent variable.
A perfect data should have resulted in identical prices and therefore in identical estimated coe¢ cients. Classical
measurement errors would have also led to the same estimated coe¢ cients. The two other pairs of regressions
repeat the same exercise for items that were sold on card member discount and those who were not (at the time of
purchase). All regressions use UPC …xed e¤ects.




                                                                             28
                                  Table 4: Correcting for recording errors

Dependet variable                 Homescan price   Retailer price             Homescan price Homescan price
Corrected                          Not corrected        NA                     Not corrected   Corrected
(Sample)                                (all)    (matched items)              (matched items)    (all)
                                          (1)                    (2)                  (3)                    (4)

Constant                              282.089                  237.215             249.356                 274.398
                                        (0.487)                 (1.108)             (1.026)                 (0.592)
Female age 29 or younger               21.887                  -2.665               7.127                   7.436
                                        (1.668)                 (2.818)             (2.612)                 (2.031)
Female age 30-34                       14.095                  -4.332               6.024                   1.767
                                        (1.215)                 (2.211)             (2.049)                 (1.479)
Female age 35-39                       12.617                  -9.762               0.728                  -3.625
                                        (0.927)                 (2.619)             (2.427)                 (1.128)
Female age 40-44                       10.956                  -13.430              -2.800                 -6.309
                                        (0.802)                 (1.596)             (1.479)                 (0.977)
Female age 45-49                        5.913                  -10.483              0.705                  -2.586
                                        (0.713)                 (1.552)             (1.438)                 (0.868)
Female age 50-54                       15.873                  -10.805              -0.700                 -3.545
                                        (0.766)                 (1.686)             (1.563)                 (0.933)
Female age 55-64                       12.123                  -6.731               -1.588                  0.996
                                        (0.669)                 (1.425)             (1.320)                 (0.815)
Female age 65 or older                            ------------------ Omitted category ------------------
Number of obs.                        790,526                  27,511              27,516                  790,526



The table illustrates how one could correct for the recording errors. All columns present price regressions, with
standard errors in parentheses, similar to those presented in Table 3. Here we focus on a single market (the larger
market of the two from which we have data for) and on a single demographic (the age of the female head of the
household; the small number of households with no female head are omitted). Column (1) reports regressions for
the entire Homescan transactions in this market, columns (2) and (3) report the results for the matched transactions
using the retailer and Homescan price, respectively, and column (4) is where we use the correction method (see text
for details) to correct for the recording errors. All regressions use UPC …xed e¤ects.




                                                          29
