                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




REAL EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS AND THE RELATIVE PRICE OF NON-TRADED
                            GOODS

                                          Caroline M. Betts
                                          Timothy J. Kehoe

                                        Working Paper 14437
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14437


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




A very preliminary version of this paper was circulated in November 2001. The authors gratefully
acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Foundation. We would like to thank David
Backus, Rudolfs Bems, Paul Bergin, Mario Crucini, Mick Devereux, Charles Engel, Gonzalo Fernández
de Córdoba, Kristian Hartelius, Patrick Kehoe, Beverly Lapham, Chris Telmer, and seminar participants
at the 2001 Canadian Macro Study Group Meetings, Claremont Mckenna College, FRB Minneapolis,
FRB New York, FRB Philadelphia, NYU, Stanford, UC-Davis, UCLA, the University of Kansas,
USC, the 2001 Annual Meeting of the Society for Economic Dynamics, the 2003 Workshop of the
Jornadas Béticas de Macroeconomía Dinámica, the 2006 Summer Meetings of the Econometric Society,
and the 2006 Latin American Econometric Society Meetings for very helpful comments and suggestions.
We also thank John Dalton, Jim MacGee, Ananth Ramanarayanan, Kim Ruhl, and Kevin Wiseman
for extraordinary research assistance and Guihong Chen for help with the Chinese data. All of the
data used in this paper are available at http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Caroline M. Betts and Timothy J. Kehoe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Real Exchange Rate Movements and the Relative Price of Non-traded Goods
Caroline M. Betts and Timothy J. Kehoe
NBER Working Paper No. 14437
October 2008
JEL No. F31,F41

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the quarterly bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded to traded goods
for 1225 country pairs over 1980-2005. We show that the two variables are positively correlated,
but that movements in the relative price measure are smaller than those in the real exchange rate. The
relation between the two variables is stronger when there is an intense trade relationship between two
countries and when the variance of the real exchange rate between them is small. The relation does
not change for rich/poor country bilateral pairs or for high inflation/low inflation country pairs. We
identify an anomaly: The relation between the real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded
goods for US/EU bilateral trade partners is unusually weak.


Caroline M. Betts
University of Southern California
Department of Economics
3620 S. South Vermont Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0253
cbetts@usc.edu

Timothy J. Kehoe
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and NBER
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tkehoe@umn.edu
1. Introduction

In a very influential paper, Engel (1999) shows that almost all of the variance in the bilateral real
exchange rates between the United States and a number of OECD, especially European Union
(EU), countries is attributable to fluctuations in the real exchange rates of traded goods, and
almost none is attributable to fluctuations in the relative prices of non-traded to traded goods.
This evidence stands in stark contrast to the implications of traditional real exchange rate theory.
In that theory, whose origin dates to the work of Cassel (1918) and Pigou (1923), all movements
in the bilateral real exchange rate between two countries are due to fluctuations in the bilateral
relative price of non-traded to traded goods.
       In light of Engel’s evidence, many international business cycle researchers have
abandoned the traditional view of real exchange rate movements. New Open Economy
Macroeconomics (NOEM) favors models in which international markets for traded goods are,
first, segmented, so that deviations from the law of one price for traded goods can arise, and,
second, subject to nominal price rigidities, which sustain those deviations. These two features of
NOEM models mean that purely monetary shocks to the nominal exchange rate cause persistent
fluctuations in the relative common currency price of traded goods, and these fluctuations alone
drive aggregate real exchange rate movements (see, for example, Betts and Devereux 2000).
There is no role whatsoever for fluctuations in the relative price of non-traded to traded goods in
real exchange rate determination. Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (2002), for example, cite
Engel’s evidence as the motivation for ignoring the distinction between traded and non-traded
goods in their work.
       In this paper, we extend Engel’s analysis to a large set of bilateral real exchange rates.
Based on our results, we argue that the abandonment of traditional real exchange rate theory —
or at least a modified version of it — in the analysis of international business cycle fluctuations
has been premature. Specifically, we find that the measured relation between the bilateral real
exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded to traded goods is strong on average. In
contrast to the traditional theory, and in accordance with Engel’s results, we do find significant
bilateral deviations from the law of one price for baskets of goods that are traded, and that these
deviations play a large role in real exchange rate fluctuations. To the extent that these deviations
in the relative prices of traded goods are systematically smaller than are those in aggregate price
levels, however, the relative prices of non-traded to traded goods also play a significant role. We

                                                  1
argue that traditional real exchange rate theory should be modified, but not abandoned, in
international macro models.
        We analyze the statistical relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and the
relative price of non-traded to traded goods for a diverse set of 50 countries, and all possible
1225 ( = 50 × 49 / 2 ) pairs of countries, in quarterly data over the period 1980 through 2005. We
examine three key dimensions of this relation. First, we quantify the similarity of directional
movements in the two variables by the sample correlation between them; second, we quantify the
similarity of the magnitude of fluctuations in the two variables by the ratio of their standard
deviations; and third, we compute a variance decomposition of the real exchange rate, given by
the fraction of the variance of the real exchange rate accounted for by movements in the relative
price of non-traded to traded goods. We compute our three summary statistics for deviations
from mean in levels, in yearly differences, and in four-year differences for each pair of measured
bilateral real exchange rates and relative prices of non-traded goods.
        We find three key results. First, in the full sample of 1225 bilateral pairs, we find that the
measured relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded to
traded goods is strong on average. The trade weighted average correlation between the two
variables is positive, between 0.50 and 0.65, depending on whether we analyze deviations in
levels or differences, and, although the volatility of the relative price of non-traded goods is only
50 to 60 percent that of the real exchange rate, fluctuations in the relative price of non-traded
goods account for as much as one-third of the variance of bilateral real exchange rates. Second,
we find that the relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-
traded goods is much stronger, according to all three of our statistics, for pairs of countries that
enjoy an intensive trade relationship and for pairs of countries that have a relatively stable real
exchange rate. Third, we find that for US/EU trade partners, which trade relatively little
compared to the size of the economies involved, the relation between the real exchange rate and
the relative price of goods is dramatically weaker than it is for any other classification of trade
partners or trade blocs in our data. This is true despite the fact that the subset of all 49 US
bilateral real exchange rates and relative prices exhibit just as strong a statistical relation as we
observe in the full sample. The overall strength of the statistical relation between the bilateral
real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded goods does not, therefore, depend
systematically on whether or not the United States is one of the countries in the trade pair being

                                                   2
studied; but, conditional on the United States being one of the countries in the trade pair, it does
depend systematically on whether an EU country, or a non-EU country, is paired with the United
States.
          Interestingly, we find little evidence that the presence of high income/low income
bilateral trade pairs in our sample biases our results in favor of a larger role for the relative price
of non-traded goods in real exchange rate fluctuations. Similarly, we find little evidence that the
presence of high inflation/low inflation bilateral trade pairs in our sample raises the size of the
measured relation between the real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods.
          These results suggest that one cannot draw general conclusions about the role for bilateral
real exchange rates of changes in the relative price of non-traded goods based solely on US/EU
exchange rate data. As demonstrated convincingly by Engel (1999), and reflected in our own
results, the movements in these particular bilateral real exchange rates are completely dominated
by deviations from the law of one price for traded goods. Evidently, however, this result does
not generalize to bilateral real exchange rates for other country pairs. For example, when we
analyze our data in four-year differences, only 7 percent of the variance of bilateral US/EU real
exchange rates is accounted for by the relative price of non-traded goods. The relative price of
non-traded goods accounts for 29 percent of the variance of US/non-EU real exchange rates,
however, and 39 percent of the variance of the United States’ real exchange rates with its two
North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) partners, Canada and Mexico. Because our results
show that high trade intensity is associated with a much stronger relation between the bilateral
real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods, the exceptionally weak measured
relation between US/EU bilateral real exchange rates and the relative price of non-traded goods
might be accounted for simply by the relatively small fraction of US trade accounted for by
US/EU bilateral trade: US/EU trade accounts for only 21.0 percent of all US trade on average
over 1980–2005, compared to 28.6 percent that is accounted for by US/NAFTA trade, for
example, even though the EU has a GDP more than six times larger than that of Canada and
Mexico. Using multivariate regressions on our whole sample, however, we show that this is not
the case: When we regress the statistics that measure the strength of the relation between the
bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods on a number of variables,
the EU/NAFTA dummy variables consistently have coefficients that are negative and significant



                                                   3
— both in economic and in statistical terms — even when we control for the intensity of trade
relationships and for the volatility of bilateral real exchange rates.
        Similar results to those found here are documented for a much smaller sample of
countries by Betts and Kehoe (2006), who examine the relation between the bilateral real
exchange rate and the associated bilateral relative price of non-traded to traded goods for the
United States with five of her largest trade partners — Canada, Germany, Japan, Korea, and
Mexico — over the period 1980 through 2004. There, we show that the strongest measured
relations between the two variables are associated with the two largest trade relationships —
those between the United States and her two NAFTA partners, Canada and Mexico. Much
weaker measured relations are associated with the trade relationships of the United States with
the remaining three countries, and especially with Germany — the country in the sample with the
smallest ratio of trade to GDP with the United States. Here, we demonstrate that the suggestion
of this earlier finding — that the strength of the relation between the bilateral real exchange rate
and the bilateral relative price of non-traded goods is greater the more important the trade
relationship between two countries — is robust in a much larger and more diverse sample of
countries. This result can be interpreted as saying that the more traded is an aggregate basket of
goods between two countries, the smaller will be observed law of one price deviations for that
basket because of arbitrage. Our results are also related, if tangentially, to those of Crucini,
Telmer and Zachariadis (2005) who show, in a large disaggregated data set of bilateral relative
prices among EU countries, the more traded is a particular good, the smaller is its cross-country
price dispersion. Betts and Kehoe (2001) find a similar result for more aggregative, sectoral
Mexico-US price data: the more traded is the gross output of a major sector, the smaller is its
bilateral relative price deviation.
        We view our results as empirical regularities that models of exchange rate determination
should try to capture. Most of the differences that we find across subsets of countries are
statistically significant. This is only to be expected given the very large number of country pairs
that we have in our data. It is interesting, therefore, to note that dividing our sample of country
pairs along high inflation/low inflation lines or high income/low income lines often fails to
produce statistically significant differences in the relations between the bilateral real exchange
rate and the relative price of non-traded goods. We should be careful about inferring causation
from our results, however. All of our criteria for sorting country pairs into subsets can be viewed

                                                   4
as endogenous from the point of view of an economic model. This is perhaps most obvious in
sorting trading pairs according to the variability of their bilateral real exchange rates, but it is
true even in the case of sorting by trading blocs: We can view a country as choosing to form a
trading bloc with other countries with which it has intense trading relationships and for which
there is a large amount of arbitrage in the prices of traded goods.
        Our findings suggest that neither the extreme approach to bilateral real exchange rate
determination of the traditional theory nor that of the NOEM literature is appropriate. The
traditional theory works best for pairs of countries that trade a lot with each other, and who share
a relatively stable real exchange rate. The NOEM approach applies best to pairs of countries that
trade little and share a relatively volatile real exchange rate. The role for real exchange rate
fluctuations that is played by the relative price of non-traded goods depends crucially on how
much trade two countries conduct with each other in the aggregate basket of goods, and this
implies that a modified version of the traditional theory is appropriate: an approach in which
goods — or aggregates of goods — can differ by the degree of their tradability between two
countries. We explore such a modeling approach in Betts and Kehoe (2001) and find that it can
account for several of the key empirical facts documented here. Drozd and Nosal (2008) explore
a different approach to account for our results.

2. Methodology

2.1. Framework

The bilateral real exchange rate between two countries X and Y at date t is

                                                       Pt Y
                                        RERt = NERt         .                                   (1)
                                                       Pt X

Here, NERt is the nominal exchange rate of country X , or the number of units of X money per

units of Y money, and Pt i is a price index for country i at t , i = X , Y , which measures the units

of country i currency required to buy one unit of country i goods at t .
        Traditional real exchange rate theory assumes that traded goods are subject to arbitrage
that eliminates international common-currency price differentials. Since the price indexes used
to construct measured real exchange rates are functions of both traded and non-traded goods’
prices, there is a natural decomposition of the real exchange rate in equation (1), which has been
                                                   5
analyzed by Engel (1999) and Betts and Kehoe (2006). We denote by Pt T ,i a price index for

traded goods in country i :

                                     ⎛      PT ,Y ⎞ ⎛ PY PT , X ⎞
                              RERt = ⎜ NERt tT , X ⎟ ⎜ t X t T ,Y ⎟ .                                                         (2)
                                     ⎝     Pt ⎠ ⎝ Pt Pt ⎠

The first term denotes the bilateral real exchange rate of traded goods, which we denote by
RERtT . It measures deviations from the law of one price for traded goods, and will also capture

the effect for RERtT of any differences in the compositions of the baskets of traded goods across
the two countries. The second term in (2) is a ratio of internal relative prices, which we denote
as RERtN . We can write

                                            Pt T , X                        PtT ,Y
                         RERt N =                                                                                             (3)
                                    P X ( Pt T , X , Pt N , X )      PY ( Pt T ,Y , Pt N ,Y )

where Pt N ,i is a price index for non-traded goods in country i , and we have made explicit the

dependence of Pt i on the indexes of both traded goods and non-traded goods, Pt T ,i and Pt N ,i . It is
this expression that we refer to as the bilateral relative price of non-traded to traded goods, or,
more simply, as the relative price of non-traded goods.
        The functional form of RERtN depends on how the aggregate price indexes are

constructed in each country. In the case where Pt i = ( Pt T ,i )                       (P )
                                                                                   γi           N ,i 1−γ i
                                                                                            t                , for example,

                                                        1−γ y                   1−γ x
                                     ⎛ P N ,Y ⎞                     ⎛ Pt N , X ⎞
                              RERt = ⎜ t T ,Y ⎟
                                    N
                                                                    ⎜ T ,X ⎟            .                                     (4)
                                     ⎝ Pt ⎠                         ⎝ Pt ⎠

In general, however, to decompose the real exchange rate into the two components RERtT and

RERtN , all we need are data on traded goods price indexes, and aggregate price indexes.

        In what follows, we use equation (3), rather than equation (4), to calculate RERtN and so
circumvent the need to assume a functional form for aggregate price measures, or to explicitly
measure the prices of non-traded goods. We now rewrite (1) as

                                     RERt = RERtT × RERtN ,                                                                   (5)


                                                                6
which, in (natural) logarithms, is

                                          rert = rertT + rert N .                                      (6)

Figure 1 graphs rert and rertT for the bilateral pair Chile-United States.

        According to the traditional theory, rertT should be unrelated to the real exchange rate,

and all real exchange rate fluctuations should be accounted for by rert N . By contrast, NOEM

assumes that rert N accounts for almost none of the fluctuations in the real exchange rate and can
be ignored. The remainder of this paper empirically assesses the relative merits of these two
approaches to real exchange rate determination by measuring the strength of the statistical
relation between bilateral real exchange rates, rert , and the bilateral relative price of non-traded

goods, rert N .


2.2. Summary statistics

To assess the strength of the relation between the bilateral real exchange rate rert and the

associated relative price of non-traded to traded goods, rert N , we use three summary statistics:
the sample correlation coefficient between them, the ratio of the sample standard deviation of
rert N to the sample standard deviation of rert , and a sample decomposition of the variance of

rert in terms of the fraction accounted for by rert N .

        We denote by var ( rer ) the sample variance of rert ,


                                                       ∑ ( rer − rer )
                                               1              T1              2
                             var(rer ) =                                          ,                    (7)
                                            T1 − T0           t =T0       t




and by cov ( rer , rer N ) the sample covariance between rert and rert N ,


                  cov(rer , rer N ) =
                                           1
                                        T1 − T0
                                                  ∑ ( rer − rer ) ( rer
                                                      T1
                                                      t =T0           t       t
                                                                                  N
                                                                                      − rer
                                                                                              N
                                                                                                  ).   (8)


In general in our data, T0 = 1980 :1 and T0 = 2005 : 4 , so that we have 104 observations and

T1 − T0 = 103 . The three summary statistics that we construct using these sample moments are


                                                               7
1. The sample correlation,

                                                         cov(rer , rer N )
                              corr(rer , rer N ) =                              .                    (9)
                                                     (var(rer ) var(rer N ))1/2

2. The ratio of sample standard deviations,
                                                                      1/2
                                      std( rer N ) ⎛ var(rer N ) ⎞
                                                  =⎜             ⎟ .                                (10)
                                       std( rer ) ⎝ var(rer ) ⎠


3. The variance decomposition in which the covariance between the two components of the real
    exchange rate, rertT and rert N , is allocated to fluctuations in rert N in proportion to the
    relative size of its variance,

                                                       var(rer N )
                              vdec(rer , rer ) =
                                              N
                                                                           .                        (11)
                                                 var(rer N ) + var(rer T )

We also compute, but do not report results here, an alternative variance decomposition statistic in
which half of the covariance is allocated to fluctuations in rert N ,

                                                  var(rer N ) + cov( rer N , rer T )
                          vdec(rer , rer N ) =                                       .              (12)
                                                             var(rer )

(Recall that var ( rer ) = var ( rer N ) + var ( rer T ) + 2 cov ( rer N , rer T ) .)    The results using this

statistic are similar, but not identical, to those using statistic 3, and, for the sake of brevity, we
omit them. For the Chile-US real exchange rate depicted in figure 1, for example, the variance
decomposition (11) is 0.4896, while the alternative variance decomposition (12) is 0.4920.
Notice that, rounding to two decimal places, both statistics are 0.49.
        We compute these three statistics for the log levels of the real exchange rate and its
components, and for four-quarter (hence “year”) log differences and sixteen-quarter (hence
“four-year”) log differences, we compute the correlation and the ratio of standard deviations as
described above. For the Chile-US real exchange rate, the correlation is 0.94 in levels, 0.76 in
yearly differences, and 0.92 in four-year differences, and the ratio of standard deviations is 0.53
in levels, 0.52 in yearly differences, and 0.50 in four-year differences. When dealing with the


                                                            8
data in log differences, however, we modify the variance decomposition statistic to make our
results comparable to those obtained by Rogers and Jenkins (1995) and Engel (1999):

3'. The mean squared error is the uncentered sample second moment; for the m th difference in
    rert , for example, it is

                                          1
                                                 ∑           ( rert − rert −m ) .
                                                   T1                          2
                       mse(rer ) =                                                      (13)
                                     T1 − T0 − m   t =T0 + m



   The decomposition is

                                                      mse(rer N )
                        msedec(rer , rer N ) =                             .            (14)
                                                 mse(rer N ) + mse(rer T )


       To the extent to which there is a common trend in rert and rert N , the mean square error

decomposition assigns a larger role to rert N than does the variance decomposition. For the
sample of bilateral exchange rates that we consider here, however, such trends in the data are
small compared to the other fluctuations, and our results do not depend much on our choice of
decomposition statistic. For the Chile-US real exchange rate, for example,
vdec(rer , rer N ) = 0.36 while msedec(rer , rer N ) = 0.37 in yearly differences and

vdec(rer , rer N ) = 0.43 while msedec(rer , rer N ) = 0.46 in four-year differences.

3. Data

In this paper, we dramatically expand the scope of the empirical investigation into the relation
between bilateral real exchange rates and the relative price of non-traded goods across countries
in Betts and Kehoe (2006). We ask whether the tentative result that we obtain there for a small
sample of bilateral pairs — that a modified version of the traditional real exchange rate theory
works much better for pairs of countries which trade a lot with each other while the real
exchange rate theory of NOEM works best for pairs of countries which do not — is robust in a
much larger sample.
       For the most part, the analysis of this paper is conducted for 50 countries, all the
countries for which we have been able to collect quarterly real exchange rate and price data over
the period 1980 through 2005, or a substantial sub-period thereof. The list of these 50 countries


                                                       9
is presented in table 1, along with the percentage of world trade accounted for by each country
on average over our sample period. In our data appendix, we describe the sources of our data in
detail, and specific availability problems. These 50 countries account for 83.5 percent of all
world trade on average over 1980–2005, and the 1225 bilateral trade relationships among them
accounts for 71.0 percent. By far the largest trading country left out of the main part of our
analysis is China (P.R.C.), which on average accounts for 2.7 percent of world trade; other
countries left out include the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, and most
of the countries in Africa. We do have shorter time series of annual data for China, however,
which we analyze separately in section 8 below. When we add China to our data set, we have 51
countries that account for 86.2 percent of all world trade on average over 1980–2005, with the
1275 bilateral trade relationships among them accounting for 75.9 percent.
       Our choice of price series reflects a desire to examine as large a sample of countries as
possible, subject to the constraint that price measures are conceptually acceptable. For an
aggregate price index, P i , for each country i , we use consumer price indexes (CPIs). These are
the (expenditure weighted) consumer prices for a basket of all goods and services consumed by a
country. They are readily available for all of the countries in our sample at the quarterly
frequency. They include the prices of many traded goods, including imported goods, and many
domestic goods and services that are not traded. While they do not measure directly the price of
a country’s output, as do the gross output deflators used by Betts and Kehoe (2006), they do so
indirectly by measuring the purchasing power of that output over the consumption basket.
       In measuring the prices of traded goods, we must be more careful. On conceptual
grounds alone, we prefer to use sectoral gross output deflators, on the basis of arguments
presented in Betts and Kehoe (2006). These deflators measure the value of output at the
production site, and are therefore exclusive of the prices of any non-traded marketing and other
final consumption services that are included in CPI component data, or in disaggregated
consumption expenditure data. In addition, by looking at sectoral detail on how much trade
actually occurs in sectoral outputs, we can back up our choices of traded good sectors with data.
We prefer to use sectoral gross output, rather than sectoral value added (gross domestic product
— GDP) deflators, because value added deflators do not measure the price of sectoral outputs
because they fail to reflect the value of intermediate goods. Furthermore, Betts and Kehoe
(2006) show that the behavior of the measures of rert and rert N constructed using GDP deflators

                                                10
differs substantially from that of the corresponding measures constructed using gross output
deflators. Unfortunately, however, sectoral gross output data are readily available only for a
small subset of countries and usually only at the annual frequency.
        Our next conceptually preferred, and most broadly available, measure of a traded goods
price index for a country is its producer price index (PPI) for all goods. While there are
inevitably some producer goods that are not traded, PPI data are measured at the production site
and hence exclude marketing and other non-traded consumer services. In addition, the prices of
the items in the producer basket of goods are final output prices at the production site; in other
words, they represent an improvement over value added data. Furthermore, PPI data are
available for our entire set of 50 countries at the quarterly frequency. Finally, Betts and Kehoe
(2006) show that the correlation between measures of rer N that are based on sectoral gross

output deflators and measures of rer N that are based on PPIs is large and positive. While using
PPI data has the benefits that we discuss, it also has costs, as discussed by Engel (1999). The
fact that we did not uncover any systematic bias in using PPIs, as compared to sectoral gross
output deflators in the small sample of bilateral country pairs in Betts and Kehoe (2006), does
not conclusively rule out there being such a bias. Given the available data, we cannot determine
if there is such a bias, however, because the CPI and PPI data that we have is all that are
available for our large sample of bilateral pairs.
        For the analysis in this paper, we neither detrend nor de-seasonalize the data. Betts and
Kehoe (2006) conduct the same analysis as we do here for both detrended and non-detrended
data. We find that detrending actually biases the results in favor of a stronger relation between
rert N and rert , quantitatively, while the general tenor of the results is unchanged. More
importantly, we do not have an economic model of how trends and seasonal factors in prices and
exchange rates are determined, nor of how they should impact the statistics we present here. We
examine the data in quarterly levels, in four-quarter differences, and in sixteen-quarter
differences, and we find that our results and conclusions are at least qualitatively, and sometimes
quantitatively, invariant to the choice of frequency.

4. Empirical analysis

We first restrict ourselves to analyzing the subset of our data that is all 49 possible bilateral real
exchange rates versus the United States. Table 2 presents the trade weighted means of our three
                                                     11
statistics: the correlation, the relative standard deviation, and the variance decomposition statistic
when the data are measured in levels or the mean squared error decomposition statistic when the
data are measured in one-year or four-year differences.
       To compute the trade weighted means, we weight each statistic for a particular US trade
partner by the sample period average percentage of total US merchandise trade with the countries
in our sample accounted for by the United States’ bilateral trade with that particular partner. The
trade weight for the statistic of country j , j = 1,… , 49 , with respect to the United States is


                             1          ⎛     exportsUS , j ,t + exports j ,US ,t   ⎞
                               ∑
                                 2005
                weight j =              ⎜ 49                                        ⎟,    (15)
                             26 t =1980 ⎜ ∑ exportsUS ,i ,t + ∑ 49 exportsi.US ,t   ⎟
                                        ⎝ i =1                      i =1            ⎠

where exports X ,Y ,t is measured as free on board (f.o.b.) merchandise exports from country X to

country Y at year t , measured in year t US dollars. The weight for Chile, for example, is
0.0043 because Chile accounts for 0.43 percent of the United States’ trade with the 49 trade
partners on average over 1980–2005. Trade between the United States and the total sample of 49
trade partners accounts for 87.2 percent of total US trade on average.
       For all US bilateral real exchange rates, as shown in the first column of numbers in table
2, we find a trade weighted average correlation between rert and rert N of 0.60 in levels, 0.60 in
yearly differences, and 0.73 in four-year differences. These results are similar to those in Betts
and Kehoe (2006) for a small sample of US bilateral trade partners. The high correlation between
rert and rert N suggests the presence of real shocks that drive both the relative internal price of

goods and the real exchange rate. The magnitude of fluctuations in rert N is less than one-half

that of the real exchange rate, however, and rert N accounts for between one-fifth and one-third of
all bilateral US real exchange rate fluctuations.
       In the first column of numbers of table 3, we show the same set of statistics for the 1225
bilateral real exchange rates in our data set. To compute trade-weighted averages of our
statistics, for each bilateral pair in the sample, we compute total trade between the two countries
at each year t , and divide this by the value of total trade between all 50 countries at that date.
Total bilateral trade between any two countries, X and Y , is measured as the f.o.b. merchandise
exports from X to Y plus (f.o.b.) exports from Y to X . The trade weight applied to the
statistics that we compute for country X and country Y is, therefore,

                                                     12
                                                   ⎛ exports                              ⎞
                                      1                       X ,Y ,t + exportsY , X ,t
                                         ∑         ⎜                                      ⎟.
                                           2005
                      weight X ,Y =                                                                     (16)
                                      26   t =1980
                                                   ⎜ ∑ ∑ 49 exportsi , j ,t
                                                         50
                                                                                          ⎟
                                                   ⎝     i =1      j =1                   ⎠

        We find a trade weighted average correlation between rert and rert N of 0.52 in levels,

0.51 in yearly differences, and 0.64 in four-year differences. The full sample correlation of rert

and rert N is somewhat smaller than we observe when we focus exclusively on the 49 bilateral

US exchange rates, but the relative magnitude of fluctuations in rert N                        is larger, at least 50

percent, and in the full sample rert N accounts for between one-fifth and one-third of all bilateral
real exchange rate fluctuations in the full sample as it does in the US bilateral exchange rate data.
        The frequency distributions of our statistics in the whole sample are illustrated in figures
2 through 4. In these figures, we do not put any trade weights on bilateral pairs. Figure 2 plots
the frequency distributions of corr ( rer , rer N ) ; figure 3 plots the frequency distributions of

std ( rer N ) / std ( rer ) ; and figure 4 plots the frequency distribution of vdec ( rer , rer N ) for the

data measured in levels and msedec ( rer , rer N ) for the data measured in one-year differences

and in four-year differences. The value of 0.1033 for four-year differences in 0.9 to 1.0 in figure
2, for example, means that 114 of the 1225 bilateral pairs ( 114 /1225 = 0.1033 ) have values of
corr ( rer , rer N ) between 0.9 and 1.0.

        Figure 2 shows that the sample distribution of corr ( rer , rer N ) for the data in levels is

skewed towards high numbers, those in excess of 0.7. In contrast, the distributions of the
correlation statistic for the data in differences are more concentrated around lower values, those
in the range of 0.3–0.7. Interestingly, however, there are far fewer cases of negative correlations
between rer and rer N for the data in differences than there are for the data in levels. Figure 3

shows that the distribution of std ( rer N ) / std ( rer ) is clustered in the 0.3–0.7 range for the data in

levels. For the data in differences, std ( rer N ) / std ( rer ) is more tightly clustered in the 0.2–0.5

range. Notice that this statistic tends to be smaller for one-year differences than it is for four-
year differences. Figure 4 shows that the distribution of vdec ( rer , rer N ) for the data in levels is

fairly uniform, although the largest cluster of values falls in the 0.1–0.4 range. The distribution
                                                           13
of msedec ( rer , rer N ) for the data in differences is more tightly clustered, but in the same range.

For the data both in levels and in differences there is a significant fraction of bilateral pairs —
between one-sixth and one-third, depending on the frequency of the data — for which the
decomposition statistic is in the range 0.0–0.1.
        We can conclude that, in a large set of bilateral pairs of countries, the real exchange rate
shares similar directional movements with its non-traded goods component, and its fluctuations
have a not too dissimilar magnitude measured by its standard deviation — about 1.5 to 2.0 times
that of the non-traded goods component. Furthermore, fluctuations in the non-traded goods
component of the real exchange rate account for roughly one-third of all fluctuations in the real
exchange rate, leaving two-thirds of these fluctuations to be explained by the international
relative price of traded goods.

5. Income levels and inflation rates

Are our results systematically biased by any particular features of our data? Two ideas prevalent
in the literature on real exchange rates inform our choice of variables to examine.
        First, it is widely believed that the behavior of bilateral real exchange rates is more
strongly driven by the relative price of non-traded goods for pairs of countries whose income
levels differ widely. Specifically, the relative price of non-traded goods is believed to play a
more important role for real exchange rate fluctuations in trade relationships between rich
countries and poor countries — such as the trade relationship between Mexico and the United
States — than it is for real exchange rate fluctuations in trade relationships among rich countries,
especially between the United States and Western Europe, the trade data most frequently
examined by international business cycle analysts. This raises the question of whether the
inclusion in our sample of both rich and poor countries is biasing our results in favor of a role in
real exchange rate determination for non-traded goods prices.
        Second, it is often argued that in high inflation countries, if the bilateral real exchange
rate with a low or stable inflation country fluctuates, it is attributable to changes in the relative
price of non-traded to traded goods across the two countries. The argument is that, in high
inflation countries, there is little nominal rigidity that could contribute to deviations from the law
of one price among traded goods in the face of rapid nominal exchange rate depreciation;
nominal prices change as rapidly as the nominal exchange rate does. Hence, there is a very

                                                   14
limited role for rertT and a potentially larger relative role for rert N in accounting for real
exchange rate fluctuations in high inflation/low inflation country trade. This raises the question
of whether, by including high inflation countries in our sample, we have biased our results in
favor of finding a relatively high value of vdec ( rer , rer N ) and msedec ( rer , rer N ) .

        In the second and third columns of numbers in table 2, and in the second through fourth
columns of numbers in table 3, we show that the inclusion of rich country/poor country trade
pairs in our sample does not systematically bias upwards the measured relation between the
relative price of non-traded goods and the real exchange rate. In this analysis, we classify a
country as “high income” if its GDP per capita exceeds 10,000 USD in the year 2005 (taken
from the World Bank’s World Development Report), and we classify a country as “low income”
otherwise. Chile, for example, is a low income country, with a GDP per capita of 7,300 USD in
2005, while the United States is a high income country, with a GDP per capita of 41,900 USD.
        In table 2, the second and third columns of numbers show that whether the United States
trades with a rich or with a poor country does not have large or systematic effects on the values
of the correlation statistic. The correlation between the real exchange rate and relative price of
non-traded goods is somewhat higher for US trade relationships with poor countries when we
measure the data in quarterly levels, but actually lower for US trade relationships with poor
countries when we consider the data in yearly differences, or in four-year differences. There is a
systematic difference both in the relative standard deviation statistic, however, and in the
variance decomposition statistic, depending on whether the United States trades with rich
countries or poor countries. Both the relative standard deviation of the non-traded goods
component of the real exchange rate, and the fraction of real exchange rate variance it accounts
for, are in fact lower when we analyze the data for US trade relationships with poor countries
than for US trade relationships with other rich countries. This is true whether we consider the
data in quarterly levels, in yearly differences, or in four-year differences. The non-traded goods
component of the real exchange rate systematically accounts for less, not more, of the total
variance of the real exchange rate, for rich/poor country trade pairs than it does for rich/rich
country trade pairs.
        In table 4, where we examine the data for all bilateral country pairs classified by the
relative incomes of trade pairs, we see exactly the same pattern of results. While there is no


                                                    15
systematic impact for the measured correlation of rert and rert N of the relative incomes of two

countries, both the relative standard deviation of rert N and the fraction of variance of the real

exchange rate accounted for by fluctuations in rert N are systematically lower for rich/poor
country pairs than the statistics for rich/rich country pairs and for poor/poor country pairs. That
is, the inclusion of rich/poor country trade pairs in our sample actually tends to reduce, rather
than increase, the role for the non-traded goods component in accounting for the variance of
bilateral real exchange rate variance.
       The fourth and fifth columns of table 2 show that the presence of relatively high inflation
rate trade partners of the US in the sample biases our results in favor of a larger role for
fluctuations in the relative price of non-traded goods. Here we define a “high inflation” country
as one that has an annual geometric average CPI inflation rate over our sample period that is
greater than or equal to 10 percent, and a “low inflation” country otherwise. The 49 bilateral
trade partners of the United States are cut into two groups on the basis of this criterion. Chile,
for example, is a high inflation country because it has an annual geometric average CPI inflation
rate of 12.4 percent over 1980–2005, while the United States itself, with an average annual
inflation rate of 3.6 percent, is a low inflation country. The fourth and fifth columns of numbers
show that whether the United States trades with a high inflation or with a low inflation country
does not have large or systematic effects on the value of the correlation statistic. The correlation
between the real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded goods is somewhat higher for US
trade relationships with high inflation countries when we measure the data in quarterly levels,
but actually lower for US trade relationships with high inflation countries when we consider the
data in differences. There is a systematic difference in both the relative standard deviation
statistic and in the variance decomposition statistic, however, depending on whether we analyze
US trade relationships with high inflation or with low inflation countries. Both the relative
standard deviation of the non-traded goods component of the real exchange rate and the fraction
of real exchange rate variance it accounts for are lower when we analyze the data for US trade
relationships with high inflation countries than for US trade relationships with other low inflation
countries. This is true whether we consider the data in levels or in differences. In particular, the
non-traded goods component of the real exchange rate systematically accounts for less, not more,




                                                 16
of the total variance of the real exchange rate for low inflation/high inflation country trade pairs,
than it does for low inflation/low inflation country trade pairs.
        The second through fourth columns of table 4 cut the sample of all possible bilateral pairs
according to whether a particular pair of countries exhibits high/high, high/low, or low/low
inflation rates over our sample, using the 10 percent average CPI inflation rate criterion. These
results show that the value of the correlation statistic for high inflation/low inflation pairs lies
between that for high inflation/high inflation country pairs and that for low inflation/low
inflation country pairs, while both the relative standard deviation and the variance decomposition
statistics are lowest, not highest, for the high inflation/low inflation pairs of countries.
        In short, the inclusion of high inflation country/low inflation country trade pairs in our
sample serves to reduce, rather than increase, the average percentage of bilateral real exchange
rate variance accounted for by fluctuations in the relative price of goods. It does not
systematically bias upwards the role of the non-traded goods component in accounting for real
exchange rate fluctuations.

6. Trade intensity

How does the strength of the trade relationship between two countries affect the strength of the
relation between the relative price of non-traded goods and the bilateral real exchange rate?
        The sixth and seventh columns of numbers in table 2 show how the degree of trade
intensity between the United States and its trade partners influences our results. We define the
trade intensity of country X with respect to the United States as

                                1          ⎛     exports X ,US ,t + exportsUS , X ,t           ⎞
                                  ∑
                                    2005
             tradeint X ,US =              ⎜                                                   ⎟,   (17)
                                26 t =1980 ⎜ ∑
                                           ⎝ world exports X ,i ,t + ∑ world exportsi , X ,t
                                                                                               ⎟
                                                                                               ⎠

the average fraction of the merchandise trade of country X that is trade with the United States.
A bilateral trade relationship with the United States is defined as “high intensity” if tradeint X ,US

is greater than or equal to 15 percent and “low intensity” otherwise. Chile, for example, has a
high intensity trade relationship with the United States, because trade with the United States
accounts for 20.5 percent of Chile’s total trade over 1980–2005 on average.
        Table 2 shows that the relation between the real exchange rate and its non-traded goods
component is substantially stronger when trade intensity is high than when trade intensity is low.

                                                         17
This is true when the data are measured in levels, in yearly differences, and in four-year
differences. The differences are large and striking for all three statistics. The statistical relation
between the US bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods is much
stronger when US trade is very important for a trade partner.
       Turning to the whole sample, we now write the definition of trade intensity between any
two countries, X and Y , as

                               ⎡1           ⎛      exports X ,Y ,t + exportsY , X ,t           ⎞⎤
                               ⎢ ∑ 2005 ⎜                                                      ⎟, ⎥
                               ⎢ 26 t =1980 ⎜ ∑
                                            ⎝ world exports X ,i ,t + ∑ world exportsi , X ,t ⎠ ⎥
                                                                                               ⎟⎥
         tradeint X ,Y   = max ⎢                                                                    .   (18)
                               ⎢            ⎛      exports X ,Y ,t + exportsY , X ,t          ⎞ ⎥
                                 1
                               ⎢ ∑                                                            ⎟ ⎥
                                    2005
                                            ⎜
                               ⎢ 26 t =1980 ⎜ ∑     exports          + ∑ world exports        ⎟ ⎥
                               ⎣            ⎝ world         Y ,i , t                  i ,Y ,t ⎠ ⎦



In this, we are implicitly assuming that trade intensity need only be high for one of the two
countries in any bilateral trade relationship for the same strong relation between the relative price
of goods and the real exchange rate to be observed. The Chile-US relationship is a high intensity
relationship, even though Chile accounts for only 0.4 percent of US trade, because the United
States accounts for 20.5 percent of Chilean trade.
       The data in the second and third columns of numbers in table 5 confirm the results found
in table 2 for US pairs. When we consider all possible bilateral country pairs, and sort them by
the average sample value of tradeint X ,Y into high trade intensity (where tradeint X ,Y is greater

than or equal to 15 percent) and low trade intensity groups, we find that high trade intensity is
associated with a substantially closer relation of rer and rer N in general and a much larger role
for fluctuations in rer N in real exchange rate fluctuations. This result is invariant to whether the
data are measured in levels, yearly differences, or four-year differences.

7. Real exchange rate variability

In this section, we ask whether the variability of the bilateral real exchange rate between two
countries, as measured by the standard deviation of that real exchange rate, influences the
strength of the statistical relation between the relative price of goods and the real exchange rate.
To address this question, we classify all bilateral real exchange rates according to whether they
have “high” rert variability, where std ( rer ) is greater than or equal to 15 percent, and “low”


                                                          18
rert variability otherwise. The Chile-US real exchange rate has high variability because

std ( rer ) = 0.240 , that is, 24.0 percent.

        Our results for US bilateral real exchange rates, and for the full sample of all possible
bilateral real exchange rates, are found in the last two columns of numbers in tables 2 and 5,
respectively.
        The answer to our question is that low variability bilateral real exchange rates are much
more strongly associated with the relative price of non-traded goods than are high variability real
exchange rates. Whether we analyze the data in levels, in yearly differences, or in four-year
differences, all three statistics are much larger for bilateral US trade pairs that experience low
variability in their bilateral real exchange rates, as shown in table 2. This result is broadly
reflected in the full sample statistics, which are shown in table 5. Here, although the correlation
statistics are higher for pairs of countries with high variability bilateral real exchange rates, both
the relative standard deviation of rert N and the portion of real exchange rate variance accounted

for by rert N are larger for low variability real exchange rate pairs.
        Our results so far suggest that the relation between the real exchange rate and the relative
price of non-traded goods for Chile-US is strong, not because Chile is poor and the United
States rich nor because Chile has experienced high inflation and the United States has not, but
because Chile and the United States have an intense trade relationship. Furthermore, the relation
is strong in spite of the fact that the Chile-US real exchange rate is highly variable.

8. China

We have excluded China from our main analysis because we have only annual data on the CPI
and PPI. In addition, the Chinese CPI data — and hence the analysis of this section — are
available only for the period 1985 through 2005. In table 6, we present the results that we obtain
from an analysis of the available Chinese data.
        The price and exchange rate data for China’s 50 trade partners in our sample that are used
in this analysis are measured at the annual frequency. We compute trade weighted statistics as
usual, applying the trade weight to statistics for country X with respect to China as in equation
(16). The total bilateral trade between China and all 50 countries in our sample, measured in the
denominator of this trade weight, accounts for 89.4 percent of total Chinese trade.


                                                  19
       The first column of table 6 shows that there is a strong measured relation between the
bilateral real exchange rate and the bilateral relative price of non-traded goods when the data are
measured in levels or in four-year differences. The bilateral real exchange rate and relative price
of non-traded goods are highly positively correlated, with a correlation coefficient of roughly
0.8, and non-traded goods prices account for almost 50 percent of all real exchange rate
fluctuations. The relation is, anomalously, much weaker when the data are measured in annual
differences, however. Nonetheless, no matter how we measure the data, the relation between
bilateral China real exchange rates and bilateral China non-traded goods prices is much stronger
when we analyze the data for trade partners with whom China shares a high trade intensity
relationship, and when we analyze the data for trade partners with whom China shares a low
variability real exchange rate.
       The table also shows that there is no systematic bias in favor of a strong relation between
bilateral China real exchange rates and non-traded goods prices arising from the presence of high
inflation trade partners in the sample. Oddly — in light of our other results — there does seem
to be some evidence that the inclusion of high income trade partners may somewhat raise the
measured size of this relation, at least when the data are measured in levels and four-year
differences. This second anomaly of the Chinese data warrants further investigation.
       We have also recalculated the statistics for all 1275 ( = 51× 50 / 2 ) bilateral trade
relationships using annual data and including China, but do not report the results here. These
results change very little from those in tables 3, 4, and 5 because, as Betts and Kehoe (2006)
show, using annual, rather than quarterly, data has very little effect on our statistics. Including
China tends to increase the statistics a little because China’s bilateral real exchange rate has a
stronger relation with the relative price of non-traded goods than the average in our sample. To
come up with a close approximation of the results for all 1275 bilateral real exchange rates, we
can average the results from table 6 with those from tables 3, 4, and 5, using the fact that China’s
trade with the other 50 countries in our sample accounts for 4.9 percent of world trade on
average. To approximate corr( rer , rer N ) in levels for all 1275 bilateral trade relationships, for
example, we calculate

                                     ⎛ 4.9 ⎞         ⎛ 71.0 ⎞
                              0.54 = ⎜      ⎟ 0.79 + ⎜      ⎟ 0.52 .                       (19)
                                     ⎝ 75.9 ⎠        ⎝ 75.9 ⎠


                                                   20
The actual statistic is, in fact, 0.54. We need to keep in mind that China is a low income, low
inflation country. Rather than averaging the results of table 6 with those of tables 3, 4, and 5,
however, the interested reader can simply download our data from
http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe and calculate the statistics directly.

9. Trade blocs

The results in the preceding sections show that there is a much larger measured relation between
bilateral real exchange rates and the relative price of non-traded goods for pairs of countries that
enjoy a large trade relationship than for pairs of countries that do not. In tables 7 and 8, we re-
cut our sample of countries according to whether or not they are members of the two largest
trade blocs in the world — the EU and NAFTA — and explore the implications of country
membership of these blocs for real exchange rate behavior.
       In table 7, we explore in more detail the relation between the bilateral real exchange rate
and the relative price of non-traded goods for US bilateral trade relationships. We cut the sample
of 49 bilateral trade partnerships with the United States that we first studied in table 2 according
to whether a trade partner is a member of the EU or not, a member of NAFTA or not, or is
neither a member of EU or NAFTA, which we refer to as “other.” The final two rows of table 7
show that bilateral trade between the United States and the fourteen of the EU15 countries in our
sample accounts for 21.0 percent of all US trade on average over the sample period. (The
missing country is Portugal, for which we do not have quarterly PPI data.) This contrasts with
66.2 percent of US trade that is accounted for by bilateral trade with the non-EU countries in our
sample, and 28.6 percent of US trade that is accounted for by bilateral trade with her two
NAFTA partners, Canada and Mexico.
       The numbers in table 7 are the weighted averages of the statistics for each grouping of
countries vis-à-vis the United States, where the statistic of each country is weighted by its
average sample share of all US trade in our sample. The measured relation between the bilateral
real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods is, as we would expect, noticeably
stronger for US/NAFTA countries than it is for US/non-NAFTA countries, as shown by a
comparison of the numbers in the fourth and fifth columns of the table. It is much weaker for
US/EU country pairs, however, than it is for any other bilateral US/trade pairing group: US/non-
EU pairs, US/NAFTA pairs, US/non-NAFTA pairs, and for US/other pairs.


                                                 21
       The table shows that — as we would anticipate — there is a strong relation between the
bilateral US real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded goods for the NAFTA trade
partners compared to that for non-NAFTA trade partners. It also shows that the measured
relation for the NAFTA trade partners is not very different from that for all non-EU countries.
By far the most striking set of numbers in the table are those in the second column of data; the
numbers that describe the statistical relation between the US bilateral real exchange rate and the
relative price of non-traded goods with respect to EU countries are extraordinarily small.
       In table 8, we explore this feature of our data a little more, examining the relation
between the real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods for all possible
bilateral pairings of our 50 countries, where countries are grouped according to their EU or
NAFTA membership status. Here, “within” trade bloc real exchange rate movements — those
between the NAFTA/NAFTA and EU/EU pairs of countries — are most strongly associated with
movements in the relative price of non-traded goods according to our statistical criteria. Again,
however, the most striking are in the third column, which shows that there is an extraordinarily
weak measured relation between the real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded goods for
EU/NAFTA trade partners compared to any other set of bilateral trade relationships.

10. Economic and statistical significance

How significant are our results about the differences in the relations of real exchange rates and
the relative price of nontraded goods prices? In this section, we provide some measures of the
economic and the statistical significance.
       Table 9 shows the results of Student’s T tests on the differences in weighted means. For
the weighted means in every column of tables 1–8, except for the first column, we test the
hypothesis that the statistics for the bilateral pairs in that sub-sample are drawn from a
distribution with the same weighted mean as the statistics for the rest of the sample. For
example, for the corr(rer , rer N ) in levels for the column low/low in table 3, we are testing the

hypothesis that the corr(rer , rer N ) statistics for the 231 low/low bilateral pairs, whose weighted
mean is 0.63, are drawn from the same normal distribution as the statistics for the 994 bilateral
pairs in the rest of the sample, whose weighted means is 0.51. In fact, a T test shows that we
cannot reject this hypothesis at a 0.05 significance level. Notice, however, that most of the
weighted means in tables 3, 4, 5, and 8, which report results for the entire sample, are statistically

                                                 22
significantly different from the corresponding weighted mean for the rest of the sample. The
major exceptions are the low/low income bilateral pairs in table 3, the high/high inflation
bilateral pairs in table 4, and the subsets of bilateral pairs involving other countries, the countries
in the intersection of non-EU and non-NAFTA. For the bilateral exchange rates for the United
States in tables 2 and 7 and for China in table 6, fewer of the cuts into sub-samples produce
statistically significant differences because there are so fewer observations. Notice, however,
that the division of bilateral country pairs into partners with intense trade relationships and those
without and into partners with a low variability of the real exchange rate and those with a high
variability produces statistically significant differences. Furthermore, the bilateral exchange
rates between the United States and its NAFTA partners are statistically significantly different
from bilateral exchange rates with EU countries.
       We have consistently followed a tradition in the literature on real exchange rates in
weighting statistics by trade weights. How different would our conclusions be if we did not use
trade weights? Table 10 shows that the unweighted means of our statistics would change, but
not by so much as to change our conclusions. In particular, we would still conclude that country
pairs with intense trade relationships have bilateral real exchange rates that have stronger
relations with the relative prices of non-traded goods than do country pairs with intense trade
relationships, at least in terms of the relative standard deviation statistics and the variance and
mean squared error decomposition statistics. So do country pairs with a low variability of their
bilateral real exchange rate. Furthermore, the EU/NAFTA bilateral real exchange rates have
relationships with the relative prices of non-traded goods that are statistically significantly
weaker than those of the other bilateral real exchange rates in our sample.
       For the T tests summarized in table 9, we have treated each of our nine statistics
independently. It is probably preferable to view each of the three statistics for levels as the
means of a three-dimensional vector that characterizes each bilateral real exchange rate in levels.
We could do the same for the three statistics for yearly differences and for the three statistics for
four-year differences. We could even view all nine statistics as the means of a nine-dimensional
vector that characterizes each bilateral real exchange rate. Hotelling’s (1947) generalized T2 test
— sometimes referred to as Hotelling’s multinomial difference of means test — allows us to test
whether subsets of vector-valued random variables come from the same population. (See, for
example, Rencher 2002, page 118, for a textbook exposition.) For all bilateral pairs, the only

                                                  23
subsets of three statistics that do not differ significantly from the others are the low/low income
pairs in levels, yearly differences, and four-year differences, the high/high inflation pairs in
levels, yearly differences, and four-year differences, and the EU/other bilateral pairs in levels.
The only subsets of all nine statistics that do not differ significantly from the others are the
low/low income pairs and the high/high inflation pairs. We can often reject the hypothesis that
vectors of random variables are drawn from the same population with extraordinarily high
confidence. The probability that the vectors of nine statistics for the 49 bilateral pairs with
intense trade relationships are drawn from the same population as the 1176 bilateral pairs without
intense trade relationships, for example, is 2.4×10-66.
         To quantify the economic significance of our findings, it is useful to run regressions that
allow us to control for a number of factors at the same time. Each row in table 11 reports the
results of a regression of the statistic in the first column on the variables in the other columns,
where all observations are weighted by the trade shares (16). The numbers in parentheses are
standard errors, and asterisks indicate coefficients that are significantly different from 0 at the
0.05 confidence level according to a T test. In these regressions, sum income is the sum of the
logs of income per capita for each bilateral pair in 2005, which, for Chile-US, is 19.538
( = log 7300 + log 41900 ); diff income is the absolute value of the differences in the logs of

income per capita, which, for Chile-US, is 1.748 ( = log 7300 − log 41900 ); sum inflation is the

sum of the logs of the annual inflation factor for each country over 1980–2005, the log
approximation to the sum of annual inflation rates, which, for Chile-US, is 0.152
( = log1.124 + log1.036 ); diff inflation is the absolute difference in inflation rates, which, for

Chile-US, is 0.081 ( = log1.124 − log1.036 ); std (rer ) is the standard deviation of the bilateral

real exchange rate in levels, which, for Chile-US, is 0.240; and the remaining variables are
dummy variables for trade bloc membership, and, for Chile-US, NAFTA/other is 1 and the others
are 0. Notice that since other/other is the excluded dummy variable, the coefficients of the other
dummy variables need to be interpreted in relation to it. The coefficient of −0.208 in the
msedec(rer , rer N ) row of the EU/NAFTA column, for example, means that, everything else
being equal, having a bilateral pair made up of a member of NAFTA and a member of the EU,
rather than both being members of neither, is associated with a mean squared error that is 0.208
lower.

                                                  24
        As we interpret the results of the regressions in table 10, we keep in mind two things:
First, as we have explained, every regressor can be interpreted as an endogenous variable in the
context of a sensible economic model, which implies that we cannot make statements about
causation. Second, the low values of the R2 coefficients imply that, although the regressions
produce many statistically significant coefficients, they do not provide for uniformly accurate
decompositions of the variation in the statistics. Nonetheless, many of the results are
economically, as well as statistically, significant. Notice that all of the coefficients of the trade
intensity variable are statistically significant except that in the regression of corr(rer , rer N ) in
yearly levels. To understand the economic significance of the coefficient value 0.407 in the
regression of msedec(rer , rer N ) in four-year differences, we can increase trade intensity from
0.073, the level for Germany-US to, 0.205, the level of Chile-US, and calculate that we would
expect the msedec(rer , rer N ) statistic to increase by 0.054 ( = (0.205 − 0.073) × 0.407 ).
Increasing it from 0.073 to 0.754, the level for Canada-US, should increase this fraction by
0.277. Notice that coefficients of std(rer ) , although all significant, vary in sign. When we
control for other factors, we find that volatile real exchange rates tend to be associated with high
correlation statistics at all three frequencies, but with low relative standard deviations and
variance decompositions. Increasing std(rer ) from 0.111, the level for Canada-US to 0.166, the

level for Germany-US, we would expect msedec(rer , rer N ) in four-year differences to decrease
by 0.061. Increasing it from 0.111 to 0.463, the level for Peru-US, we would expect this statistic
to decrease by 0.391. Notice that the differences in the dummy variables for EU/NAFTA and
NAFTA/NAFTA are large in many of the regressions. The one for msedec(rer , rer N ) in four-
year differences is not one of them, however, and we expect a NAFTA/NAFTA pair like
Canada-US to have a higher msedec(rer , rer N ) than Germany-US from this difference for only
0.049 ( = −0.159 − 0.208 ). Nonetheless, we have succeeded in accounting for most of the
difference between Canada-US and Germany-US for msedec(rer , rer N ) in four-year differences.
Adding the difference because of trade intensity, 0.277, to the difference because of real
exchange rate volatility, 0.061, to the difference because of trade bloc affiliations, 0.049, we
obtain a difference of 0.386. In fact, msedec(rer , rer N ) in four-year differences for Canada-US
is 0.499 and that for Germany-US is 0.046, which differ by 0.454. Given the low R2


                                                   25
coefficients, we could find other examples where the regressions do not account as well for
differences across bilateral pairs, but this particular example is an important one. The low
msedec(rer , rer N ) statistic for bilateral pairs like Germany-US has led many economists to
totally abandon any sort of theory that distinguishes between traded and non-traded goods in
modeling real exchange rate fluctuations. The high msedec(rer , rer N ) statistic for bilateral pairs
like Canada-US prompts us to try to modify, rather than reject, the traditional theory.
Furthermore, we would consider a model to be successful if it could generate the same sorts of
co-movements in the real exchange rate and the relative price of nontraded goods that we have
identified in this paper.

11. Conclusion

We have documented that there is a strong and robust statistical relation between the real
exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded to traded goods. Specifically, we find in a
large sample of 50 countries and 1225 associated bilateral real exchange rates over the sample
period 1980 through 2005:

Fact 1. Directional movements of the relative price of non-traded goods and the real exchange
rate tend to be similar, as measured by the simple correlation between the two variables, which is
about one-half in levels and yearly differences, and two-thirds in four-year differences.

Fact 2. The volatility of the relative price of non-traded goods, as measured by its relative
standard deviation, is about two-thirds that of the real exchange rate in levels and one-half in
yearly differences and four-year differences.

Fact 3. The relative price of non-traded goods accounts for about one-third of real exchange rate
variance in levels, one-fifth in yearly differences, and one-quarter in four-year differences.

        The strength of the relation between real exchange rates and the relative price of non-
traded goods is not biased upwards by the presence of rich/poor country pairs in our sample nor
by the presence of high inflation/low inflation country pairs. Furthermore, the strength of the
statistical relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded goods
does not depend in any systematic way on whether or not the United States is one of the
countries in the trade pair being studied.
                                                 26
         Nonetheless, we identify two features of the data that do systematically and significantly
increase the strength of the statistical relation between the relative price of non-traded goods and
the real exchange rate in our large sample of countries.

Fact 4. The relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and relative price of non-traded
goods is stronger when the intensity of the trade relationship between two countries is high.

Fact 5. The relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded
goods is stronger, as measured by the relative standard deviation and variance decomposition,
when the variability of the bilateral real exchange rate between two countries is low. The
correlation between the real exchange rate and the relative price of non-traded goods is lower,
however, when the variability of the real exchange rate is low.

         In addition, we find the following anomaly.

Anomaly. The statistical relation between the bilateral real exchange rate and the relative price of
non-traded goods for US/EU country pairs, and for EU/NAFTA country pairs, is extraordinarily
weak compared to the same relation measured between the countries in any other two trade
blocs.

We leave to future research a more thorough investigation of this anomaly, and the development
of models that can account for the regularities that we have documented.
         Another topic worth investigating is the effect of different exchange rate regimes on the
relationship between the real exchange rate and the relative price of non-trade goods. (See, for
example, Mendoza 2000.) Using our data set, we could divide our data for different bilateral
pairs into different sub-periods according to the prevailing exchange rate regimes. Of course, as
Reinhard and Rogoff (2004) argue, the exact classification of an exchange rate regime is no easy
matter. This too we leave to future research.




                                                 27
Data Appendix

The data on the consumer price index (CPI), producer price index (PPI), and nominal exchange
rates are taken from the International Monetary Fund’s November 2007 International Financial
Statistics CD-ROM. We use OECD PPI series from their Main Economic Indicators database
instead of the IFS data for all available countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Spain, Switzerland, and the United States. We also use OECD data for Netherlands
CPI because the IFS data have a jump upwards between 1980Q4 and 1981Q1 followed by
smooth data and then a jump downwards between 1984Q1 and 1984Q2, and we use OECD data
for Germany CPI because they span both sides of reunification. In the cases of El Salvador,
Greece, Jordan, and Turkey, either wholesale price indexes are the only series available or they
offer greater coverage from the IFS CD-ROM. For Greece and Turkey, we splice their PPI
series onto their WPI series for 2005Q1–Q4 because the WPI series ends in 2004. The
maximum coverage of the data series is 1980Q1–2005Q4, though some series are shorter. All
series are contiguous, except those of Jordan, Turkey, and Trinidad and Tobago. These missing
values are interpolated, except for Greece, for which annual data are constructed by averaging
quarterly data. In the case of Trinidad and Tobago, the available PPI data for 2000Q2–Q3
appear to be errors and are treated like missing data. All missing data are listed in table 12.

The data on bilateral and total trade volumes are taken from the International Monetary Fund’s
November 2007 Direction of Trade Statistics CD-ROM. To compute yearly bilateral trade
between two countries, the sum of exports from the home country and exports from the partner
country are divided by the sum of total exports from the home country to the world and total
exports from the world to the home country. These yearly values are averaged over 1980–2005.
All export data are taken free-on-board (f.o.b.). The Direction of Trade Statistics does not have
data for Belgium and Luxembourg separately 1980–1996. Nor does it have export data for South
Africa 1980–1997. For these three countries, and for all bilateral trade relationships involving
them, the weights (15) and (16) and the trade intensity statistics (17) and (18) use average
fractions of trade over the available years. We assume that the trade shares for these three
countries are the same in the years for which we do not have data as they are on average in the
years for which we have data.

Chinese annual CPI and PPI data are taken from the 2001 and 2006 China Statistical Yearbook
and have been downloaded from the web site of the National Bureau of Statistics of China,
http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/statisticaldata/yearlydata.

GDP and population data are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

All the data and more precise documentation can be found at http://www.econ.umn.edu/~tkehoe.




                                               28
References

Betts, C. M. and M. B. Devereux (2000), “Exchange Rate Dynamics in a Model of Pricing-to-
Market,” Journal of International Economics, 50, 215–44.

Betts, C. M. and T. J. Kehoe (2001), “Tradability of Goods and Real Exchange Rate
Fluctuations,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and USC.

Betts, C. M. and T. J. Kehoe (2006), “U.S. Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Measures of the
Relative Price of Goods,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 1297–326.

Cassel, G. (1918), “Abnormal Deviations in International Exchanges,” Economic Journal, 28,
413–15.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2002), “Can Sticky Price Models Generate
Volatile and Persistent Real Exchange Rates?” Review of Economic Studies, 69, 533–63.

Crucini, M. J., C. I. Telmer, and M. Zachariadis (2005), “Understanding European Real
Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review, 95, 724–38.

Drozd, L. A. and J. B. Nosal (2008), “Trade Intensity and the Real Exchange Rate Volatility,”
University of Wisconsin and Columbia University.

Engel, C. (1999), “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political
Economy, 107, 507–38.

Hotelling, H. (1947), “Multivariate Quality Control,” in C. Eisenhart, M. W. Hastay, and W. A.
Wallis, editors, Techniques of Statistical Analysis, McGraw-Hill, 111–84.

Mendoza, E. G. (2000), “On the Instability of Variance Decompositions of the Real Exchange
Rate across Exchange Rate Regimes: Evidence from Mexico and the United States,” NBER
Working Paper 7768.

Pigou, A. (1923), “The Foreign Exchanges,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 37, 52–74.

Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff (2004), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 1–48.

Rencher, A. C. (2002), Methods of Multivariate Analysis, second edition, Wiley.

Rogers, J. H. and M. Jenkins (1995), “Haircuts or Hysteresis? Sources of Movements in Real
Exchange Rates,” Journal of International Economics, 38, 339–60.




                                              29
                                                      Table 1
                                       COUNTRIES IN THE SAMPLE
                                 Average percent world trade 1980–2005
       Argentina               0.36    Hong Kong (P.R.C.)           2.52   Peru                     0.12
       Australia               1.12    India                        0.66   Philippines              0.43
       Austria                 1.14    Indonesia                    0.75   Saudi Arabia             1.31
       Belgium                 2.75    Ireland                      0.73   South Africa             1.73
       Brazil                  0.94    Israel                       0.41   Singapore                0.47
       Canada                  3.67    Italy                        4.19   Spain                    1.88
       Chile                   0.25    Japan                        6.87   Sri Lanka                0.08
       Colombia                0.20    Jordan                       0.08   Sweden                   1.37
       Costa Rica              0.07    Korea                        1.95   Switzerland              1.68
       Cyprus                  0.06    Luxembourg                   0.17   Thailand                 0.80
       Denmark                 0.83    Malaysia                     1.04   Trinidad and Tobago      0.07
       Egypt                   0.26    Mexico                       1.49   Turkey                   0.54
       El Salvador             0.04    Netherlands                  3.84   United Kingdom           5.19
       Finland                 0.67    New Zealand                  0.25   United States           13.60
       France                  5.64    Norway                       0.79   Uruguay                  0.05
       Germany                 9.24    Pakistan                     0.20   Venezuela                0.42
       Greece                  0.39    Panama                       0.15   Total                   83.47


                                                      Table 2
                               US BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                           Means weighted by trade
                                       income level          inflation        trade intensity       std(rer)
                         all          high      low       high       low      high      low      high      low
levels
corr(rer, rerN)          0.60          0.58     0.69         0.63     0.59      0.72     0.34     0.58     0.63
std(rerN)/std(rer)       0.46          0.48     0.41         0.41     0.47      0.52     0.33     0.32     0.64
vdec(rer, rerN)          0.30          0.31     0.24         0.22     0.31      0.37     0.12     0.15     0.48
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)          0.60          0.61     0.56         0.57     0.60      0.68     0.42     0.56     0.64
std(rerN)/std(rer)       0.41          0.41     0.39         0.37     0.42      0.47     0.27     0.27     0.58
msedec(rer, rerN)        0.20          0.21     0.17         0.17     0.21      0.26     0.08     0.10     0.34
16-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)          0.73          0.75     0.66         0.71     0.74      0.82     0.55     0.70     0.78
std(rerN)/std(rer)       0.39          0.39     0.39         0.37     0.39      0.45     0.26     0.26     0.55
msedec(rer, rerN)        0.24          0.24     0.22         0.22     0.24      0.31     0.09     0.11     0.40
countries                  49            27       22           17       32        20       29       34       15
percent US trade         87.2          68.3     18.9         16.0     71.2      59.9     27.3     48.5     38.7



                                                        30
                            Table 3
                  INCOME LEVELS
        ALL BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                    Means weighted by trade
                                       high/     high/    low/
                            all        high       low      low
levels
corr(rer, rerN)              0.52        0.46      0.72     0.63
std(rerN)/std(rer)           0.64        0.67      0.49     0.55
vdec(rer, rerN)              0.33        0.33      0.32     0.33
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)              0.51        0.50      0.57     0.61
std(rerN)/std(rer)           0.50        0.53      0.39     0.43
msedec(rer, rerN)            0.22        0.22      0.18     0.22
16-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)             0.64         0.63      0.66     0.71
std(rerN)/std(rer)          0.51         0.54      0.41     0.45
msedec(rer, rerN)           0.28         0.28      0.26     0.30
bilateral pairs             1225          378       616      231
percent of world trade       71.0        56.0      14.0       1.0


                            Table 4
                 INFLATION LEVELS
        ALL BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                    Means weighted by trade
                                       high/     high/    low/
                            all        high       low      low
levels
corr(rer, rerN)              0.52        0.66      0.66     0.49
std(rerN)/std(rer)           0.64        0.54      0.48     0.67
vdec(rer, rerN)              0.33        0.32      0.28     0.34
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)              0.51        0.66      0.58     0.50
std(rerN)/std(rer)           0.50        0.41      0.36     0.53
msedec(rer, rerN)            0.22        0.23      0.17     0.22
16-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)             0.64         0.78      0.69     0.63
std(rerN)/std(rer)          0.51         0.42      0.38     0.53
msedec(rer, rerN)           0.28         0.28      0.24     0.28
bilateral pairs             1225          136       561      528
percent of world trade       71.0          0.6     10.5     59.8



                                  31
                                                      Table 5
              TRADE INTENSITY AND REAL EXCHANGE RATE VARIABILITY
                      ALL BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                          Means weighted by trade
                                                          trade intensity      std(rer)
                                                  all      high low          high    low
                      levels
                      corr(rer, rerN)             0.52        0.57   0.47     0.63     0.44
                      std(rerN)/std(rer)          0.64        0.71   0.57     0.42     0.79
                      vdec(rer, rerN)             0.33        0.37   0.29     0.24     0.39
                      4-quarter differences
                      corr(rer, rerN)             0.51        0.57   0.47     0.58     0.47
                      std(rerN)/std(rer)          0.50        0.64   0.38     0.32     0.63
                      msedec(rer, rerN)           0.22        0.28   0.16     0.13     0.27
                      16-quarter differences
                      corr(rer, rerN)           0.64          0.69   0.60     0.69     0.60
                      std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.51          0.61    0.43    0.33     0.64
                      msedec(rer, rerN)         0.28          0.33   0.23     0.18     0.34
                      bilateral pairs           1225            49   1176      918      307
                      percent world trade        71.0         32.0   38.9     29.6     41.4


                                                      Table 6
                           CHINA BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                          Means weighted by trade
                                               Annual data
                                   income level             inflation        trade intensity      std(rer)
                          all     high      low          high       low       high     low     high      low
levels
corr(rer, rerN)           0.79     0.80        0.71       0.79       0.79      0.84     0.74    0.78     0.81
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.65     0.67        0.48       0.54       0.66      0.81     0.48    0.45     0.88
vdec(rer, rerN)           0.46     0.47        0.34       0.41       0.46      0.59     0.32    0.30     0.64
1-year lags
corr(rer, rerN)           0.38     0.37        0.46       0.57       0.37      0.44     0.30    0.42     0.32
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.38     0.38        0.35       0.36       0.38      0.44     0.31    0.27     0.49
msedec(rer, rerN)         0.16     0.16        0.15       0.17       0.16      0.21     0.11    0.09     0.24
4-year lags
corr(rer, rerN)           0.86     0.87        0.76       0.86       0.86      0.92     0.79    0.84     0.88
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.56     0.57        0.44       0.48       0.56      0.63     0.48    0.41     0.73
msedec(rer, rerN)         0.48     0.49        0.33       0.39       0.48      0.60     0.35    0.29     0.69
countries                   50       28          22         17         33         2       48      40       10
percent China trade       89.4     82.3         7.1        3.9       85.5      47.0     42.4    47.2     42.2



                                                         32
                                                Table 7
                                    TRADE BLOCS
                         US BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                       Means weighted by trade

                           all            EU             non-EU      NAFTA        non-NAFTA       other
levels
corr(rer, rerN)                 0.60         0.27           0.71          0.81            0.52       0.63
std(rerN)/std(rer)              0.46         0.32           0.51          0.55            0.42       0.48
vdec(rer, rerN)                 0.30         0.10           0.36          0.49            0.20       0.26
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)                 0.60         0.41           0.66          0.69            0.55       0.63
std(rerN)/std(rer)              0.41         0.22           0.47          0.50            0.37       0.45
msedec(rer, rerN)               0.20         0.05           0.25          0.33            0.14       0.19
16-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)                 0.73         0.57           0.79          0.80            0.70       0.78
std(rerN)/std(rer)              0.39         0.22           0.44          0.49            0.34       0.41
msedec(rer, rerN)               0.24         0.07           0.29          0.39            0.17       0.22
countries                         49           14             35             2              47         33
percent US trade                87.2         21.0           66.2          28.6            58.6       37.6



                                                Table 8
                                    TRADE BLOCS
                         ALL BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                       Means weighted by trade
                                       EU/       EU/           EU/        NAFTA/        NAFTA/    other/
                          all          EU       NAFTA         other       NAFTA          other    other
levels
corr(rer, rerN)            0.52          0.35        0.30          0.54          0.81      0.63      0.67
std(rerN)/std(rer)         0.64          0.88        0.33          0.59          0.54      0.49      0.57
vdec(rer, rerN)            0.33          0.35        0.11          0.32          0.48      0.27      0.38
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)            0.51          0.43        0.41          0.44          0.69      0.63      0.60
std(rerN)/std(rer)         0.50          0.71        0.22          0.37          0.50      0.44      0.42
msedec(rer, rerN)          0.22          0.27        0.06          0.15          0.33      0.19      0.21
16-quarter
differences
corr(rer, rerN)            0.64          0.57        0.55          0.56          0.80      0.78      0.69
std(rerN)/std(rer)         0.51          0.72        0.24          0.43          0.49      0.41      0.44
msedec(rer, rerN)          0.28          0.33        0.08          0.23          0.38      0.23      0.31
bilateral pairs            1225            91          42           462             3        99       528
percent world trade         71.0         23.1         6.6          12.3           7.9      11.3       9.8

                                                    33
                                                  Table 9
                               DIFFERENCES IN MEANS: T TESTS
                          Means that are different at 0.05 significance level
                      income level: none
Table 2               inflation: none
US bilateral RERs     trade intensity: all
                      std(rer): all expect for corr levels, corr 4-qtr diffs, corr 16-qtr diffs
Table 3               high/high: all except vardec levels, corr 16-qtr diffs
Income levels:        high/low: all except vardec levels, corr 16-qtr diffs
all bilateral RERs    low/low: none except msedec 4-qtr diffs, sdratio 16-qtr diffs, msedec 16-qtr diffs
Table 4               high/high: none except corr 4-qtr diffs, corr 16-qtr diffs
Inflation levels:     high/low: all
all bilateral RERs    low/low: all
Table 5
Trade intensity &     trade intensity: all
RER variability:      std(rer): all
all bilateral RERs
                      income: none except corr levels, corr 16-qtr diffs
Table 6
                      inflation: none
China bilateral
                      trade intensity: all
RERs
                      std(rer): all except corr levels, corr 16-qtr diffs
Table 7               EU: all
Trade blocs:          NAFTA: all
US bilateral RERs     other: none
                      EU/EU: all
Table 8               EU/NAFTA: all
Trading blocs:        EU/other: all except corr levels, sdratio levels, vardec levels
all bilateral RERs    NAFTA/NAFTA: all except sdratio 4-qtr diffs, sdratio 16-qtr diffs
                      NAFTA/other: all
                      other/other: all except msedec 4-qtr diffs
                      trade intensity: all except corr levels, corr 4-qtr diffs, corr 16-qtr diffs
                      std(rer): all except vardec levels
                      EU/EU: all except corr 4-qtr diffs, corr 16-qtr diffs
Table 10
                      EU/NAFTA: all except corr levels, corr 4-qtr diffs, corr 16-qtr diffs
All bilateral RERs:
                      EU/other: all
unweighted means
                      NAFTA/NAFTA: none
                      NAFTA/other: none except vardec levels
                      other/other: all




                                                     34
                                                               Table 10
                                           ALL BILATERAL REAL EXCHANGE RATES
                                                        Unweighted means
                                  trade intensity        std(rer)                             trading blocs
                                                                           EU/      EU/      EU/     NAFTA/   NAFTA/    other/
                         all      high       low      high       low       EU      NAFTA    other    NAFTA     other    other
levels
corr(rer, rerN)           0.59      0.56       0.60     0.66        0.39    0.52     0.50     0.56     0.74      0.60      0.65
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.59      0.87       0.58     0.53        0.77    0.85     0.34     0.54     0.42      0.53      0.63
vdec(rer, rerN)           0.35      0.40       0.35     0.34        0.36    0.41     0.14     0.30     0.30      0.30      0.40
4-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)           0.51      0.52       0.51     0.55        0.39    0.47     0.51     0.49     0.59      0.54      0.53
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.43      0.72       0.42     0.38        0.58    0.70     0.24     0.37     0.40      0.46      0.45
msedec(rer, rerN)         0.20      0.27       0.20     0.18        0.24    0.28     0.07     0.16     0.22      0.20      0.23
16-quarter differences
corr(rer, rerN)           0.59      0.62      0.59      0.62        0.48    0.60     0.57     0.56     0.65      0.63      0.60
std(rerN)/std(rer)        0.46      0.70      0.45      0.42        0.60    0.70     0.26     0.40     0.39      0.47      0.49
msedec(rer, rerN)         0.28      0.35      0.28      0.27        0.31    0.36     0.09     0.23     0.24      0.27      0.33
bilateral pairs           1225        49      1176       918         307      91       42      462        3        99       528
percent world trade        71.0     32.0       38.9     29.6        41.4    23.1      6.6     12.3      7.9      11.3       9.8




                                                                 35
                                                                         Table 11
                                                        TRADE WEIGHTED REGRESSIONS
                                                               Standard errors in parentheses
                       sum        diff   sum        diff     trade                  EU/     EU/      EU/    NAFTA/ NAFTA/
                     income     income inflation inflation intensity std(rer)       EU     NAFTA    other   NAFTA other constant         R2
levels
                       –0.004     –0.011    –0.200     0.044      0.314* 1.617* –0.099*     –0.268* –0.024     0.091 –0.013      0.382   0.292
corr(rer, rerN)
                      (0.018)    (0.021)   (0.131)   (0.151)     (0.117) (0.165) (0.037)     (0.044) (0.037) (0.080) (0.037)   (0.380)
                       –0.019     0.064*     0.066    0.392*      0.821* –2.813* –0.001     –0.236* –0.0414 –0.714* –0.197*     1.336*   0.363
std(rerN)/std(rer)
                      (0.020)    (0.023)   (0.142)   (0.163)     (0.127) (0.179) (0.040)     (0.047) (0.040) (0.087) (0.040)   (0.412)
                       –0.015      0.011    –0.048    0.202*      0.230* –0.878* –0.121*    –0.264* –0.074* –0.088 –0.144*      0.821*   0.242
vdec(rer, rerN)
                      (0.011)    (0.013)   (0.080)   (0.092)     (0.071) (0.101) (0.022)     (0.027)  (0.022 (0.049) (0.022)   (0.232)
4-quarter lags
                       0.001 –0.070*        –0.116     0.035       0.003 1.520* –0.029      –0.173* –0.098* 0.181* 0.058*        0.352   0.419
corr(rer, rerN)
                      (0.009 (0.011)       (0.067)   (0.077)     (0.060) (0.085) (0.019)     (0.022) (0.019 (0.041) (0.019)    (0.195)
                      –0.011 0.099*          0.072     0.100      1.016* –2.631*   0.012    –0.169* –0.084* –0.712* –0.096*     0.951*   0.313
std(rerN)/std(rer)
                      (0.021 (0.024)       (0.148)   (0.170)     (0.132) (0.186) (0.041)     (0.049) (0.041 (0.090) (0.041)    (0.428)
                      –0.008 0.021*          0.035     0.058      0.235* –0.965* –0.048*    –0.155* –0.081* –0.088* –0.050*     0.519*   0.354
msedec(rer, rerN)
                      (0.008 (0.009)       (0.054)   (0.062)     (0.048) (0.068) (0.015)     (0.018) (0.015 (0.033) (0.015)    (0.157)
16-quarter lags
                      –0.007 –0.092* –0.173*          0.246*      0.218* 1.358* –0.018      –0.129* –0.071*   0.041 0.080*      0.616*   0.333
corr(rer, rerN)
                      (0.011 (0.013) (0.076)         (0.088)     (0.068) (0.096) (0.021)     (0.026) (0.021 (0.047) (0.021)    (0.221)
                      –0.011 0.098*    0.104           0.060      0.406* –2.524*   0.033    –0.198* –0.080* –0.351* –0.097*     1.014*   0.301
std(rerN)/std(rer)
                      (0.019 (0.023) (0.139)         (0.159)     (0.123) (0.175) (0.039)     (0.046) (0.039 (0.085) (0.039)    (0.402)
                      –0.016 0.026* –0.034            0.229*      0.297* –1.111* –0.076*    –0.208* –0.090* –0.159* –0.110*     0.778*   0.314
msedec(rer, rerN)
                      (0.009 (0.011) (0.067)         (0.077)     (0.060) (0.085) (0.019)     (0.022) (0.019 (0.041) (0.019)    (0.195)




                                                                            36
                                            Table 12
                               MISSING VALUES IN THE DATA
                               Quarterly Missing Values             Annual Missing Values
Argentina             PPI: 1980Q1–1993Q4                       PPI: 1980–1992
China (P.R.C.)                                                 CPI: 1980–1984
Hong Kong (P.R.C.)    PPI: 1980Q1–1992Q4, CPI: 1980Q1–1989Q4   PPI: 1980–1989, CPI: 1980
Greece                                                         PPI: 1981–1982
Italy                 PPI: 1980Q1–1980Q4                       PPI: 1980
Jordan                PPI: 1986Q1–1986Q3
Malaysia              PPI: 1980Q1–1983Q4                       PPI: 1980–1983
Mexico                PPI: 1980Q1–1980Q4                       PPI: 1980
Philippines           PPI: 1980Q1–1992Q4                       PPI: 1980–1992
Saudi Arabia          PPI: 1980Q1–1985Q1                       PPI: 1980–1984
Trinidad and Tobago   PPI: 2000Q2–2000Q3
Turkey                PPI: 1980Q1–1984Q3, 1985Q4               PPI: 1980




                                               37
                                                                Figure 1.

                                       Chile-United States real exchange rate

                0.40

                                                                                                          rer
                0.20



                0.00
                                                     rerN
log(RER)




            -0.20



            -0.40



            -0.60



            -0.80
                1980                     1985               1990                  1995                2000                   2005

                                                                Figure 2.

                                                               Correlations

                0.25
                              levels
                              4-quarter differences
                0.20          16-quarter differences
    frequency




                0.15



                0.10



                0.05



                0.00
                          0


                                   1


                                            2


                                                      3


                                                               4


                                                                         5


                                                                                    6


                                                                                             7


                                                                                                      8


                                                                                                                9


                                                                                                                         0
                       0.


                                0.


                                         0.


                                                   0.


                                                            0.


                                                                      0.


                                                                                 0.


                                                                                          0.


                                                                                                   0.


                                                                                                             0.


                                                                                                                      1.
                   to


                              to


                                        to


                                                to


                                                          to


                                                                   to


                                                                             to


                                                                                        to


                                                                                                 to


                                                                                                           to


                                                                                                                    to
                  .0


                            0


                                     1


                                               2


                                                        3


                                                                  4


                                                                             5


                                                                                      6


                                                                                               7


                                                                                                        8


                                                                                                                  9
                -1


                          0.


                                   0.


                                             0.


                                                      0.


                                                                0.


                                                                           0.


                                                                                    0.


                                                                                             0.


                                                                                                      0.


                                                                                                                0.




                                                                      38
                                                                         Figure 3.

                                                      Relative standard deviations

            0.30
                                                                                                              levels
            0.25                                                                                              4-quarter differences
                                                                                                              16-quarter differences

            0.20
frequency




            0.15


            0.10


            0.05


            0.00




                                                                                                                                                 0
                     2

                            3

                                      4

                                               5

                                                        6

                                                                7

                                                                           8

                                                                                  9

                                                                                            0

                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                                                        5

                                                                                                                                               6.
                   0.

                          0.

                                    0.

                                             0.

                                                      0.

                                                              0.

                                                                         0.

                                                                                0.

                                                                                          1.

                                                                                                   1.

                                                                                                            1.

                                                                                                                    1.

                                                                                                                             1.

                                                                                                                                      1.
                                                                                                                                            to
               to

                         to

                                to

                                          to

                                                   to

                                                            to

                                                                    to

                                                                               to

                                                                                      to

                                                                                                to

                                                                                                         to

                                                                                                                  to

                                                                                                                          to

                                                                                                                                   to

                                                                                                                                           5
              1

                      2

                                3

                                         4

                                                 5

                                                          6

                                                                   7

                                                                            8

                                                                                      9

                                                                                             0

                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                                 4

                                                                                                                                        1.
            0.

                    0.

                              0.

                                       0.

                                               0.

                                                        0.

                                                                 0.

                                                                          0.

                                                                                    0.

                                                                                           1.

                                                                                                     1.

                                                                                                              1.

                                                                                                                       1.

                                                                                                                               1.
                                                                         Figure 4.

                                Variance / mean squared error decompositions

            0.35
                                                                                                              levels
            0.30                                                                                              4-quarter differences
                                                                                                              16-quarter differences
            0.25
frequency




            0.20


            0.15


            0.10


            0.05


            0.00
                      1


                                   2


                                                  3


                                                               4


                                                                            5


                                                                                         6


                                                                                                        7


                                                                                                                     8


                                                                                                                                  9


                                                                                                                                               0
                   0.


                                0.


                                               0.


                                                            0.


                                                                         0.


                                                                                      0.


                                                                                                     0.


                                                                                                                  0.


                                                                                                                               0.


                                                                                                                                            1.
               to


                              to


                                          to


                                                        to


                                                                       to


                                                                                    to


                                                                                                 to


                                                                                                              to


                                                                                                                             to


                                                                                                                                         to
               0


                            1


                                         2


                                                        3


                                                                     4


                                                                                  5


                                                                                               6


                                                                                                              7


                                                                                                                           8


                                                                                                                                        9
             0.


                          0.


                                       0.


                                                      0.


                                                                   0.


                                                                                0.


                                                                                             0.


                                                                                                            0.


                                                                                                                         0.


                                                                                                                                      0.




                                                                                39
