                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     TIMING AND QUANTITY OF CONSUMER PURCHASES AND THE CONSUMER
                              PRICE INDEX

                                            Rachel Griffith
                                           Ephraim Leibtag
                                           Andrew Leicester
                                             Aviv Nevo

                                         Working Paper 14433
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14433


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




Financial support for Griffith and Leicester from the ESRC through the ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic
Analysis of Public Policy at IFS (CPP) is gratefully acknowledged. Griffith and Leicester, University
College London and Institute for Fiscal Studies, Leibtag, US Department of Agriculture Economic
Research Service, Nevo, Northwestern University and National Bureau of Economic Research. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research or the US Department of Agriculture.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Rachel Griffith, Ephraim Leibtag, Andrew Leicester, and Aviv Nevo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Timing and Quantity of Consumer Purchases and the Consumer Price Index
Rachel Griffith, Ephraim Leibtag, Andrew Leicester, and Aviv Nevo
NBER Working Paper No. 14433
October 2008
JEL No. D12,E31,L11,L16

                                            ABSTRACT

A common approach to measuring price changes is to look at the change of the expenditure needed
to purchase a fixed basket of goods. It is well-known that this approach suffers from problems and
creates several biases in the measurement of price changes faced by consumers. Substitution and outlet
bias, two commonly studied concerns, are both driven by consumer choices of what and where to buy.
However, consumers also make other choices, including how much and when to buy. We discuss the
implications of consumers' timing and quantity decisions have on standard practices of computing
of computing a price index.

We use household-level data on quantities purchased and prices paid to construct a measure of the
savings made by consumers' optimizing behaviour in the purchase of food. In particular, we compare
the prices actually paid by the consumers to various alternatives that do not allow for substitution.
Our analysis suggests that the average consumer makes significant, and comparable in magnitude,
savings from the four dimensions of choice that we study. Furthermore, our data suggests significant
heterogeneity in consumer behavior, and that this behavior is correlated with demographics. Our findings
suggest that ignoring timing and quantity decisions, when computing a price index, can generate biases
on the order of magnitude of substitution and outlet biases.


Rachel Griffith                                    Andrew Leicester
IFS                                                Institute for Fiscal Studies
7 Ridgmont Street                                  7 Ridgmount Steet
London WC1E 7AE                                    London WC1E 7AE, UK
UK                                                 andrew_l@ifs.org.uk
rgriffith@ifs.org.uk
                                                   Aviv Nevo
Ephraim Leibtag                                    Department of Economics
U.S. Department of Agriculture                      Northwestern University
FRED-ERS-USDA                                      2001 Sheridan Road
1800 M Street, NW Rm. N2137                        Evanston, IL 60208-2600
Washingron, DC 20036                               and NBER
eleibtag@ers.usda.gov                              nevo@northwestern.edu
1 Introduction

One of the major challenges faced by applied economists is the measurement of price changes.

The middle part of 2008 saw significant increases in the prices of food, vehicle fuel and

household energy, for example. How do we measure how much prices have increased?

           In practice, the most common approach to measuring prices changes is to look at the

changes of the expenditure needed to purchase a fixed basket of goods. This approach dates back

at least to the early nineteenth century (Diewert, 1993), and has a large number of variations. It is

well-known that this approach suffers from problems and creates several biases in the

measurement of price changes faced by consumers.2 Common concerns include substitution bias,

outlet bias, quality change, treatment of new products, and heterogeneity across consumers.

           Substitution and outlet bias, two commonly studied concerns, are both driven by

consumer choices of what and where to buy. However, consumers also make other choices,

including how much and when to buy. Many products are sold at non-linear prices: the price per

unit, say an ounce, is typically lower for larger pack sizes. Thus, a consumer has a choice of not

just what product to buy and where to buy it, but also what size to buy (and what price to pay).

Similarly, many products have temporary price reductions – sales – that allow the consumer to

purchase more today and potentially stockpile for future consumption. Both these dimensions of

choice have been mentioned as potential sources of bias in price indices (e.g., Feenstra and

Shapiro, 2003; Triplett, 2003; and references therein), but are discussed less often than the first

two biases.




2
    See for example, Boskin et al (1998), Deaton (1998), Diewert (1998).
                                                                                               2
           The standard approach to price measurement does not properly account for the fact that

consumers do not face a single price, but rather face a distribution of prices (Baye, 1985;

Reinsdorf, 1994). The variation in prices can be across goods, stores, size and over time.

Different consumers will react to this variation differently, depending on their preferences and

costs. For example, some consumers might have lower travel costs and therefore be more likely

to shop at a range of different stores. Other consumers might have lower storage and transport

costs and will therefore take greater advantage of quantity discounts and temporary price

reductions. Accurate description of price changes has to move beyond the “average” consumer,

and explore heterogeneity across consumers (Pollak, 1998).

           If the relative price of different goods remains fairly constant, there is probably little

variation in inflation across households and so distributional issues are not so important. In

periods of high inflation, and in particular when inflation is driven by only certain commodities,

heterogeneity across households is likely to be more important. For example, Deaton and

Muellbauer (1980, Table 7.1) report that during 1975-76, when inflation in the UK was 15

percent, the rate for the poor was two points higher than for the rich.3

           In this paper we contribute to the literature on the empirical relevance of these issues. We

use household-level data on quantities purchased and prices paid to construct a measure of the

savings made by consumers’ optimizing behaviour in the purchase of food. We examine the

savings made by consumers timing their purchases to buy on sale, buying larger package sizes,

buying generic brands or switching between alternative outlets. Furthermore, we document how




3
    Crawford (1996) and Crawford and Smith (2002) report similar more recent results.
                                                                                                 3
this behaviour, and the implied savings, varies by demographics including income, family size,

and employment status.

       We observe data, collected by a marketing firm, on all food purchases brought into the

home for a large, nationally representative, sample of UK households in 2006. Compared to

previous studies, our data is more comprehensive – not limited to a subsample of goods – and

more detailed regarding the brand, package size, location, whether on sale and time of purchase.

For each purchase we know exactly what was bought (as measured by the bar code), the price

paid and quantity purchased, the purchase date and the store it was purchased in. We also observe

household demographics.

       Using these data, we are able to compare the prices actually paid by the consumers in the

sample to various alternatives. For example, to measure the savings from the timing of purchases

we can compare the actual expenditure to the expenditure of a consumer who purchases the same

bundle (in terms of products and outlets), but did not buy when the item was on sale. We show

how the savings vary with income, age and employment status, as well as other demographics.

       Our analysis suggests that the average consumer makes significant, and comparable in

magnitude, savings from the four dimensions of choice that we study. This demonstrates, on a

larger scale, the savings associated with consumer behaviour, found by previous work (e.g.,

Hendel and Nevo, 2006a, for saving from timing purchases, and Hausman and Leibtag, 2007, for

saving from the availability of Wal-Mart). Furthermore, our data suggests significant

heterogeneity in consumer behaviour. For example, some households buy a significant fraction of

their food on sale, others rarely do. This behaviour is correlated with demographics.

    In the next section we describe the data that we use and present some preliminary descriptive

statistics. In section 3 we consider the potential and actual savings that households make by
                                                                                            4
buying on sale, larger pack sizes, generic brands and in specific stores. In section 4 we compare

the levels of savings and a final section makes some concluding remarks.


2 Data

The data come from the TNS Homescan panel (www.tnsofres.com), a representative consumer

panel of around 25,000 households resident in Great Britain. Households are recruited from those

who had previously responded to a large paper-based consumer survey. Respondents that match

the demographic characteristics required for a new household are sent a postal invitation to

participate. Participants are rewarded with points redeemable for a range of products and services

(though limited to items that should not directly affect grocery consumption patterns).

Participating households are issued an electronic hand held scanner in their homes and asked to

scan the barcodes of all grocery purchases (foodstuffs, alcohol, bathroom products, medicines,

pet food etc.) that come into the house.

       Information on purchases is downloaded once a week by TNS. In addition, households

mail till receipts to TNS. These are used to collect prices and verify the information entered by

the households. Information on loose weight items such as vegetables and fruit is collected by

households scanning barcodes in a book and keying in the weight data. Purchases from all store

types (supermarkets, corner stores, online, local speciality shops etc.) are covered by the survey.

For larger stores, the exact store of purchase is recorded; for smaller stores only the store type is

known. The data includes information on the characteristics of the product including price, brand,

pack size, whether the item was bought on promotion and a number of characteristics of the

product. Demographic information about the household is collected by an annually-updated

telephone survey.


                                                                                               5
       Our focus in this paper is on four particular types of behaviour - sales, size, generic and

outlet. How do we measure each of these?

       TNS gathers information on price reductions and promotions from a variety of sources,

including the receipts sent in by households, fieldwork, and directly from the stores. Promotions

typically take two forms: price promotions (50% off, £1 off) and quantity promotions (buy one

get one free, 50% extra volume).

       Package size is reported directly in the data on product characteristics. In order to

compare across a wide range of food types we look at how price varies across the quintiles of the

package size distribution within each food category.

       Generic (store) brands are also recorded directly as part of the product characteristic

information. The detail allows us to distinguish “economy” versions of generic items from

“regular” generics and “luxury” generics. We discuss this more in the next section.

       Information on stores is collected via the households, who scan a barcode representing

each store fasica prior to entering the details of each shopping trip. Households report to TNS the

specific store when they sign up (and for most large shopping trips) and this is matched against

the fascia barcode scanned for each trip. For corner and local stores, the specific shop location is

typically not recorded.

       For the analysis below, we use data for the calendar year 2006. We observe expenditure

for 23,877 households on purchases in 189 categories, effectively covering all food and beverage

purchases. These households make a total of 5.6 million separate shopping trips. On average a

single shopping trip involves the purchase of 4.2 items and £6.08 in expenditure. The average




                                                                                              6
duration between shopping trips (excluding multiple trips within the same day) is 4 days (with a

median of 3 days).

        The demographic characteristics that we focus on include family composition, how often

the household shops by car, what the most common mode of transport is for shopping and

household income. The distribution of these is shown in the following tables.

Table 1: Distribution of household income
                                                                                             Share of non-
     Household income                    Observations             Share of sample
                                                                                             missing sample
                   £0 - £9,999                2,052                      8.6%                    13.4%
            £10,000 - £19,999                 4,344                     18.2%                    28.5%
            £20,000 - £29,999                 3,545                     14.9%                    23.2%
            £30,000 - £39,999                 2,309                     9.7%                     15.1%
            £40,000 - £49,999                 1,434                     6.0%                      9.4%
            £50,000 - £59,999                  787                      3.3%                      5.2%
            £60,000 - £69,999                  340                      1.4%                      2.2%
                     £70,000 +                 448                      1.9%                      2.9%
            Missing / unknown                 8,618                     36.1%                       –
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample

        Income information began to be collected by the market research firm in 2006 and in our

data around one-third of households have not had their incomes recorded. For other households,

incomes are recorded gross at a household level in one of eight bands. The distribution of income

in these data are similar to those found in other UK surveys, for example, UK Expenditure and

Food Survey (EFS), although overall average income is slightly lower.4

        Household type is defined using information on each of the household members, and here

we also see similar to patterns to EFS data for the percentage of households with at least one




4
 The TNS data includes demographic weights which correct for potential biases in recruiting and retaining some
household types. We do not use these weights in this analysis, but control for observed demographic characteristics
when looking at the savings from different channels in the next sections.
                                                                                                             7
child, although the market research data does seem to contains somewhat fewer households

headed by a pensioner and fewer single adult households.

Table 2: Distribution of household type
                 Household type                      Observations   Share of sample
                        Single pensioner                1,940            8.1%
                       Pensioner couple                 2,246            9.4%
                             Single adult               2,209            9.3%
                 Couple without children                2,835           11.9%
               Other childless household                5,778           24.2%
                             Lone parent                1,008            4.2%
                   Couple with children                 4,516           18.9%
           Other household with children                3,345           14.0%
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample

Table 3: Frequency of shopping by car
                     Frequency                       Observations   Share of sample
                   5 or more times / week                495             2.1%
                        3 – 5 times / week              3,309           13.9%
                        1 – 2 times / week             14,495           60.7%
                    At least once a month               1,897            7.9%
                   Less than once a month               1,541            6.5%
                                     Never              2,140            9.0%
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample


These figures match very closely to other survey data on how people travel for shopping. Data

from the 2002/3 National Travel Survey (Department for Transport, 2005) showed that around

79% of households usually did their main food shopping by car or taxi, 12% on foot and 10% by

other means, remarkably similar to the figures from the 2006 TNS sample shown above.



Table 4: Most commonly used method of transport for shopping
                      Transport                      Observations   Share of sample
                               Car or taxi             19,056           79.8%
                          Public transport              1,307            5.5%
                                     Foot               2,964           12.4%
                                    Other                550             2.3%
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample



                                                                                        8
      Unsurprisingly, the car is overwhelmingly the most popular form of shopping transport with

eight in ten households using it as their main mode of transport for shopping. This is roughly the

same proportion of households that record using their car to go shopping at least once a week.


3 Household savings

In this section we quantify the savings that households can and do make by purchasing on sale,

buying in bulk (at a lower per unit price), buying generic brands and choosing outlets. We

document the relative importance of these various dimensions, which may suggest where future

work on price indices should focus efforts. One measure of the importance of the different

dimensions is the amount saved by households from each dimension, ignoring the costs they may

incur. For example, how much more would consumers have paid had they not purchased on sale,

ignoring the costs of carrying inventory from one period to the next? Another important

dimension is the degree of heterogeneity across households in any particular behaviour. We

discuss the potential biases that may arise in a price index due to consumer behaviour.


3.1    Sales and Stockpiling

Many grocery items exhibit price variation over time. If we focus on a narrowly defined product

(a particular brand and size sold at a particular store), much of the price variation over time is due

to temporary price reductions. It has been documented that for many products consumers respond

to this price pattern by stockpiling for future consumption (see Hendel and Nevo 2006a, Boizot et

al (2001) and references therein).

        When buying on sale a consumer faces a tradeoff between paying a lower price today for

a product that will be consumed in the future, and incurring a storage cost until the product is

consumed. The benefits from buying on sale depend on future consumption needs and on future

                                                                                                9
prices. Different consumers will make different choices, and a given consumer will make

different choices for different goods.

        In the following subsections we present evidence on heterogeneity across consumers in

the propensity to purchase on sale. We then provide measures of the savings consumers obtain

and use these to motivate the importance of controlling for this dimension of consumer choice.

Finally, we discuss the implications for measurement of price changes.


3.1.1   How much do households buy on sale?

The average UK household spends around 29.5% of their total annual expenditure on items that

are “on sale.” As expected, there is considerable variation across households (see Figure 1), with

the household at the 10th percentile purchasing 17.7% and the 90th percentile purchasing 42.0%.

Figure 1: Share of household expenditure on sale




Note: Histogram of the share of total observed household expenditure in 2006 that was purchased on sale; sample
includes 23,877 households.

                                                                                                       10
        Some of the variation across households is explained by observed demographics. In

particular, when we regress the share of expenditure on sales on family type we see that retired

households tend to buy less on sale (single pensioners buy 3.2% less on sale than single young

households, while pensioner couples buy 2.9% less on sale than young childless couples, and

over 5% less than couples with children). Families with children tend to buy more on sale than

childless families and households with fewer adults.

        Households that shop by car buy approximately 2% more of their food on sale than

households that shop by public transport or on foot, or that shop less frequently by car. This is

consistent with pensioners buying less on sale since they are less likely to shop by car.

        The fraction of buying on sale is related to income in a non-monotonic way: the lower

income households buy the least on sale and the middle income households buy the most. This is

perhaps expected – low income households do not have the flexibility, in terms of storage,

transport or liquidity, to take advantage of sales. On the other hand, the highest income

households have a lower marginal utility of income and a higher value of time, and so do not find

it worthwhile to take advantage of sales.

        Overall, however, observed demographics explain less than 10% of the variation in the

propensity to purchase on sale.


3.1.2   How much do consumers save by buying on sale?

We now turn to the question of how much consumers save by buying on sale. We examine

savings made on all food products. As described in Section 2 there are 189 different food

categories (e.g. bacon, eggs etc). Within each group there are many separate products (bar codes).



                                                                                            11
       We want to compute a single saving figure for each household, which we do in two steps.

First, we estimate the saving made by purchasing a specific product on sale using the following

regression model:

        ln piht = β j sit + η i + t jt + r jr + eiht                                 (1)


where i indexes bar codes, j food categories, h households, t time and r region; p is unit price, s is

a dummy variable indicating that the product was purchased on sale, η i captures barcode specific

characteristics (allowing us to control for differences in product characteristics) and e is an

idiosyncratic error. As the subscripts make clear, we estimate the regression separately for each

food category. The propensity to have sales and the discount level differ significantly across

categories: some product groups have deep discounts while others barely any discounts.

Allowing the coefficients to vary by category captures this heterogeneity. This procedure yields

189 beta coefficients, all of which are negative (sale prices are lower) and all but three are

statistically significant at the 5% level (and all but five at the 1% level). Using the estimated

coefficients we can compute the discount when buying in sale. This discount varies across food

categories from 14% for the 10th percentile to 29% for the 90th percentile, with an average and

median of 22%. The categories with low discounts are fruit fillings (2%), lard (4%) and sugar

(10%), while examples of the categories with high discounts are savoury snacks (32%), breakfast

cereal (31%) and baked beans (31%).

       To compute a household-level savings measure we weight the category-level savings

using household specific expenditure weights reflecting the share of purchases of each product

category that are purchased on sale and the share of that product category in each households’

budget. That is we calculate a household’s total savings as:


                                                                                               12
                                        (
        SaveSaleh = ∑ whj 1 − exp ( β j )
                            jt
                                                       )                                  (2)


where whj is the expenditure of household h on items in product category j that were purchased

on sale as a share of total expenditure across all categories:


                ∑ ( sale
                it ,i∈ j
                                 iht   = 1) expenditureiht
        whj =                                                                      (3)
                           ∑ expenditure
                           it
                                                 iht




This measure varies between 0 and 1 as long as all the betas are negative. It captures the fraction

of expenditure the household is saving by purchasing on sale. Figure 2 shows the distribution of

savings made by each household by purchasing on sales, SaveSaleh. Note that the variation across

households in the savings measure stems from two sources. As we saw in Figure 1, households

vary in the fraction they purchase on sale. Furthermore, households vary in their expenditures on

different categories, and the discounts offered by sales differ by categories. Our measure captures

both these sources of heterogeneity.




                                                                                            13
Figure 2: Savings made by each household from buying on sale




Note: Histogram of the savings each household made by purchasing on sale in 2006 as defined by equation (2);
sample includes 23,877 households.

        Households save between 0 and 21% of their annual expenditures, with a mean of 6.5%.

This translates into a savings of up to £794 a year, with an average saving of £96 per year.

        The amount saved through buying on sale varies by observed demographics in a very

similar way to the variation in the proportion of expenditure bought on sale. Most notably,

households where the head of household is retired and poorer households save substantially less

by purchasing on sale then other households. One notable difference between the share purchased

on sale and the extent of savings is that wealthier households appear to purchase more on sale

(then poorer households), but do not seem to save much by doing so. However, as was the case

with the fraction of purchases on sale, the observed demographics explained relatively little of the

variation in the savings measure.




                                                                                                     14
3.1.3   How well does a standard price index capture sales?

The sales behaviour documented in the previous subsections has several implications for the

standard measurement of price indices. First, given the way statistical agencies collect data there

is an issue about whether they correctly sample sales. Statistical agencies may over- or under-

sample items on sale given the products included in the basket of goods relative to the sample of

all products purchased by consumers. We provide evidence that this might be the case. Second,

even if the correct products are chosen, and hence the true prices observed, there is an issue

regarding what is the correct price index formula. We demonstrate the issue in the context of a

simple example. Finally, there is a question of whether the difference between the ideal measure

and the index actually computed varies across time and households.

        As the previous figures show, sales are a significant factor in the expenditure of most

households. In order to examine how the data collected by statistical agencies captures sales we

looked at prices of the most commonly purchased (“most popular”) items within each food

category, which we took to be an approximation of the set of prices most likely to be sampled by

price collectors 5 . We find that the most popular products are more often on sale than the

“average” product (see Table 5). This may be because the more popular products are typically

branded items which go on sale more often, or perhaps because promoted items tend to be

purchased more often. This suggests that the ONS data could misrepresent the distribution of

prices paid by consumers.




5
 We aim to mimic the guidelines given by the UK Office of National Statistics to price enumerators, defining the
most popular item as that most frequently purchased within a product group-store combination. The ONS samples
food prices from the 6 largest national chain stores: Tesco, Sainsbury, Asda, Somerfield, Morrissons and Marks and
Spencer. We consider the population of all other chain and local shops as a seventh “store”.
                                                                                                          15
Table 5: Frequency of promotion in 2006 TNS data, all and most popular items
                               Share of expenditure (%)                   Share of purchases (%)
                               All items    Most popular                 All items    Most popular
        No promotion            70.35            64.14                    71.94           67.61
      Price promotion           12.70            14.18                    13.37           14.78
    Quantity promotion          16.96            21.70                    14.69           17.62
Notes: Most popular items are those most frequently purchased in each of seven stores within each of the 189 food
categories in the TNS data.
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample.


          Putting aside the measurement issue – even if prices are collected in such a way as to

accurately capture sale prices – there is an issue of how to compute a correct index in the

presence of stockpiling. Consumer stockpiling implies a separation between a purchase-based

price index and a consumption-based price index. Standard price indices are purchase-based,

some explicitly so, but a utility based cost-of-living index should account for the ability to store

the product 6. To illustrate the difference consider the following example. Suppose a consumer

consumes two products, A and B, at equal quantities. Product A always costs $2, while product B

is normally priced at $2, but goes on sale for one period and is sold at a price of $1. Normally, the

consumer purchases one unit of each product each period and consumes both products in that

period.

          Suppose the consumer has a storage cost of $0.25 per unit per period. During the sale of

product B the consumer purchases 4 units and consumes one unit each week over the next few

weeks. We assume there are no consumption effects: the consumer does not increase

consumption in response to the sale price. For the calculation that follows we ignore the discount

factor. The consumer saves on each of the units he purchases: for the last unit the consumer pays

$1.00 and stores it for 3 periods at a cost of $0.75, for a total saving of $0.25 relative to buying


6
 In what follows we assume that the goal is to compute a utility based cost-of-living index. Many statistical agencies
explicitly state that their price index is not a cost of living index. However, we follow the standard view that sees a
cost-of living index as a way to reason about issues involving the consumer price index.
                                                                                                               16
the product at the regular $2 price. The consumer, however, will not save from buying additional

units because of the storage costs. If the consumer bought a fifth unit on sale the storage costs for

4 periods will exactly equal the savings (and we assume that in this case the consumer will not

store the product).

       Suppose we want to compute a cost-of-living index for this consumer. We set the base as

the prices during non sale periods, so when consuming 1 unit of each product the base is $4. The

true consumer’s price index for the period of the sale and the following weeks is

(2.00+1.00)/4.00=0.75, (2.00+1.25)/4.00 = 0.8125, (2.00+1.50)/4.00 = 0.875, (2.00+1.75)/4.00 =

0.9375, and 1.00 for every following week. The observed prices of product A are 2.00 at each

period and observed purchases are 1 unit each period. The prices of product B are 2.00, 1.00, and

2.00 for every following period, while the purchasing patterns are 1 unit, 4 units, 0, 0, 0 and 1

unit for every following week. Consumption is constant every week. A standard price index will

capture some price reduction in the week of the sale. The exact reduction in the price index

depends on the quantity weight used to compute the index. For example, a fixed weight price

index, with equal weights, will yield 0.75, for the week of the sale, and 1 for every following

week. However, a standard index will not capture the effective drop in the price index in the

weeks following the sale, and the problem cannot be “fixed” by adjusting the weights. The

problem is that the price the consumer faces is a shadow price. Note, that aggregation across

weeks, to construct a monthly price, will also not solve the problem, even if the timing is

captured exactly right. In this case, the aggregation will overestimate the benefits from

purchasing on sale since it will ignore the storage cost.

       This simple example illustrates the issues with a standard price index. A more realistic

model would allow for consumption effects and uncertainty regarding future prices (see Hendel

                                                                                              17
and Nevo, 2006b, for such a model). Such a model allows us to compute the unobserved shadow

prices faced by the consumer in each period, but is very computationally intense and cannot be

estimated on a large scale. Developing more tractable alternatives is a current area of research.


3.2   Bulk Discounting and Choice of Package Size

Many grocery items are sold at non-linear prices. Larger package sizes are sold at higher prices

but at lower per unit price. For example, Hendel and Nevo (2006a) report that the regular, non-

sale, price of a 24-pack of soft drinks cans cost 2.7 times more than a 6-pack. This implies a

discount of over 30 percent in the per period unit price.

         A typical treatment of non-linear prices in the price index is to focus on unit values. This

corrects for the difference in the actual price between sizes, as opposed to the difference in the

size per unit. However, it does not account for the tradeoffs consumers are making (Triplett,

2003).

         The tradeoffs facing the consumers are similar to those we discussed in the case of sales.

Consider a consumer deciding between purchasing a smaller unit and a larger one at a lower per

unit price. Unless she can consume the additional quantity before her next store visit the

consumer has to weigh the benefits of the lower price with the costs of storing the product longer

and the deprecation in the quality of the product. Different consumers will make different choices

depending on their marginal utility from income, the cost of storage and transport of the product,

and their future consumption needs. A given consumer will make different choices for different

products, depending on storage costs, durability, expected consumption and the price schedule.




                                                                                              18
3.2.1   How much do households buy in bulk?

As described in section 2 we use quintiles in package size within each food category to measure

the extent of bulk discounting. The average household spends 15.8% of their total annual

expenditure on the largest package sizes, and 21.2%, 21.3%, 26.8% and 14.9%, on the other sizes

from largest to smallest, respectively. There is considerable variation across households in these

fractions. For ease of exposition we focus on the two largest quintiles as “bulk” sizes and

compare the savings made from purchasing in those quintiles to purchases made in the second

largest size group. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the proportion of total household

expenditure that was spent of the largest two size quintiles.

        Households purchase along the entire range of between 0 to nearly 100% of their

groceries in large package sizes, spending on average 37% of their budget in these size groups.

Unsurprisingly single person households purchase less in bulk than multi person households.

Single pensioners make even less use of bulk discounts, spending on average 2.2% less on large

pack sizes than single younger households. Households that shop by car buy in bulk more often

and the middle income categories make greater use of bulk discounts. Overall, purchasing

behaviour of larger package sizes is similar to purchasing on sale, and in fact the two shares are

positively correlated at the household level, with a correlation coefficient of 0.23.




                                                                                           19
Figure 3: Share of household expenditure on items in largest size quintiles




Note: Histogram of the household expenditure shares within the largest 2 size quintiles in 2006. Sample includes
23,877 households.


3.2.2    How much do consumers save by buying in bulk?

In order to compute how much consumers save by buying in bulk we first estimate a series of

regressions:

                                   5
         ln piht = β js sale it + ∑ β jp qip + η k + t jt + r jr + eiht                            (4)
                                  p=2




where price is unit price, qip = 1 if the pack size of product i is in the pth quartile of all products

in product group j, and zero other wise, and where k indexes brand7. As in the case of sales, we

estimate this regression separately for each product category in order to account for the difference




7
 Unlike in the sales case, we cannot use product fixed effects as clearly an individual barcode will always be within
a given size quintile. For some product groups, “brand” does not exist as a product characteristic – in these cases we
use store fixed effects. There are a few product groups for which there is insufficient size variation to generate
quintiles in the size distribution; we ignore these groups in the analysis of this section.
                                                                                                              20
in the degree of non-linear pricing across categories. The average savings are substantial for the

larger package sizes. Across all product groups, the average saving on the unit price from buying

in the largest size quintile relative to the second is almost 37%, and from the second largest size

quintile is 28%.

       To compute a household-level savings measure we take the same approach as for sales,

but now considering the two largest size quintiles. In particular, we weight the category-level

savings from each size using household-size specific expenditure weights. We calculate the

household’s total savings as


                                                (1 − exp ( β                ))
                            5
        SaveSizeh = ∑             ∑w   p
                                           hj
                                                               p
                                                               j   − β j2           (5)
                            p=4   jt




where w p hj is the expenditure of household h on items of size p in product category j


                 ∑ expenditure
                 it ,i∈ j
                                        p
                                       iht

        whjp =                                                                      (6)
                 ∑ expenditure
                    it
                                       iht




This measure computes the savings from purchasing the largest sizes relative to the second

smallest size. If instead we computed the saving relative to the smallest size, the savings would

be even larger. We focus on the second largest size because it is the most popular size. On the

other hand, the smallest size is not very popular and in many cases only some, not very common,

brands are available in this size.




                                                                                            21
         The average household saves 16% of their annual expenditure from buying the largest

package sizes, which translates into savings of £224 per year. Figure 4 shows the distribution of

savings by households, which varies from just less than 0 to almost 70%8.

Figure 4: Savings made by each household from buying larger package sizes




Note: Histogram of the savings each household made by purchasing larger pack sizes in 2006 as defined by equation
(5); sample includes 23,877 households.

The amount saved varies with household size, with larger households saving more. Households

that shop by car, but only infrequently (once a month) save the most in bulk purchases, and

households in lower income categories also save more. The demographic variables, however, are

able to explain very little of the variation in savings from bulk purchasing, less than 1%.




8
  For some product groups the ‘saving’ from buying in the larger pack sizes is negative which in a few cases
translates into a negative household saving. This is probably because in some groups larger pack sizes are for
branded or higher quality goods and we are failing to adequately capture quality via store or brand effects in equation
(4).
                                                                                                               22
3.2.3    How well does a standard price index capture bulk pricing?

The issues in measurement of a price index are very similar to those we saw in the case of sales.

First, there is an issue of whether the statistical agencies are correctly sampling all the relevant

prices. In the UK, the specification of food items to be collected as part of the basket of goods

and services used to calculate inflation rates typically contains an exact size that must be priced

such that it is unusual for different sizes of the same product to be sampled. In this case there is

no way to account for a change in the relative price of different sizes. As prices change, the

tradeoffs between different sizes, and therefore consumer choices, will change. For example, as

prices increase consumers might substitute towards larger sizes. Without sampling different sizes

statistical agencies will miss this effect and compute an index that over estimates price increases.

        Occasionally, statistical agencies will sample different package size, for example, because

firms change the sizes they offer. A common practice for statistical agencies is to chain the price

from different sizes using unit values, i.e., price per ounce. This practice is justified if prices are

linear in size, which is rarely the case. As pointed out by Triplett (2004), this will generate an

under estimate in the price index.

        Finally, there is considerable variation across households in the propensity to buy in bulk.

This suggests that the biases will vary significantly across households.


3.3     Generic Brands and Product Choice

Product choice creates a well known bias in standard price indices. Consider, for example, an

increase in price. A standard index measures the difference in prices times the initial period

quantities. Such an index overstates the change in utility since it ignores the changes in quantities

in response to the price increase. For example, Boskin et al (1998) suggest “that this source of


                                                                                                23
substitution bias … leads to a combined substitution bias of 0.4 percentage points per year in

using the CPI to measure changes in the cost of living.” In principle, the problem can be handled

by using a weighted average of the two period quantities (Diewert, 1976). Indeed, this, among

other reasons, has led some researchers to claim that this is a second order problem (Hausman,

2003).

           To provide a point of comparison to this literature we look in our data at this form of

substitution. In order to keep the empirical exercise tractable below we will focus on substitution

towards store (‘generic’) brands.9 As we will show below, the fraction of store brands varies

across households and over products. Heterogeneity across income levels presented suggests that

there is substitution towards store brands as economic conditions worsen. Gicheva, Hastings and

Villas-Boas (2007) provide evidence that consumers buy more store brands when gas prices go

up. Caronia (2008) finds that the income shock caused by the Argentinean 2002 Peso devaluation

caused a flight from branded products towards store brands.


3.3.1      How much do households buy store brands?

In the UK store brands are more popular and are often of higher quality than US store brands.

The data allow us to distinguish between ‘economy’ and ‘standard’ store brands. Economy

brands are most similar to generic brands in the US. Figure 5a shows the share of household

expenditure on economy items, ranging from 0 to 100% with an average of 3.8%. Figure 5b

shows how ‘standard’ store brands are much more popular, also ranging from 0 to 100% but

averaging 41%.




9
    Given the scale of the analysis, it is not feasible to study substitution between branded products.
                                                                                                          24
         Families with children spend more on economy brands, as do households on lower

incomes. However, families with children are less likely to buy standard brands suggesting some

substitutability between them.


3.3.2    How much do households save by buying store brands?

In order to measure the saving we run the following regression:

         ln piht = β ej econ i + β sj stan i + η jf + t jt + r jr + eiht          (7)


where f indexes fascia and econi = 1 if the product is a economy own brand and stani=1 if the

product is a standard own brand. Letting the coefficients vary by category allows for different

quality of the store brands across categories. On average, the economy store brand is almost 39%

cheaper and the standard store brand is 25% cheaper.

         To compute a household-level savings measure we weight the category-level savings

using household specific expenditure weights as:


                                        (
         SaveGenerich = ∑ whj 1 − exp ( β j )
                                 jt
                                                       )                          (8)


where:


                 ∑ ( generic = 1) expenditure
                 it ,i∈ j
                                  iht                      iht

         whj =                                                                    (9)
                        ∑ expenditure
                            it
                                              iht




Households save on average 2% of their annual expenditure by buying store economy brands,

with consumers who buy standard store brands saving on average 3.7%. This translates into an

average saving of £25 for economy own brands and £50 for standard own brands on average. The

savings from standard are larger, despite the lower discounts, because its share of expenditure is

                                                                                           25
much higher. Again, some households make negative ‘savings’ from buying standard generic

brands – this illustrates the point that in the UK store own brands can often be of a comparable

quality to branded goods. Savings from economy store brands are always positive, suggesting a

more obvious quality differential.

Figure 5a: Share of household expenditure on “economy” items




Note: Histogram of the household expenditure shares on economy own brands in 2006. Sample includes 23,877
households.




                                                                                                  26
Figure 5b: Share of household expenditure on “standard” own label items




Note: Histogram of the household expenditure shares on standard own brands in 2006. Sample includes 23,877
households.

Figure 6a: Savings made by each household from buying economy brand




Note: Histogram of the savings each household made by purchasing economy own brands in 2006 as defined by
equation (10); sample includes 23,877 households.

                                                                                                   27
Figure 6b: Savings made by each household from buying standard brand




Note: Histogram of the savings each household made by purchasing standard own brands in 2006 as defined by
equation (10); sample includes 23,877 households.


3.3.3    What are the implications of substitution towards store brand for price indices?

If prices of the store brand are collected regularly, as part of the basket then the usual substitution

bias applies – the key issue is what quantity weight is used to weight the store brand prices.

However, if the store brand prices are not collected regularly, as is the case for many food items,

then the shift towards the cheaper products will be mostly missed by standard price indices.

        In the UK, for most food items, there is no particular instruction to collect branded or own

brand products when sampling prices (one exception is sliced bread where only branded items

can be chosen). Product choice is at the discretion of the price collector (the Consumer Price

Index Technical Manual (ONS, 2007) suggests that the product selected should be

“…representative of what people buy in your area from all products matching the specification of

each item to be priced in that outlet.” (page 21)). Without access to the raw price data collected

                                                                                                   28
by ONS it is not clear whether branded products are over- or under-sampled in the UK food price

index. It is likely that ‘representative’ items may well be branded more often than not: the

guidance given on the sorts of products to collect sometimes specifies particular branded products

that match the item description (in breakfast cereals, butter and soft drinks, for example) which

might to those products being sampled. Confectionery is the only example where specific

branded products are explicitly priced (KitKat, Polo Mints, Smarties, Mars Bar, Fruit Pastilles,

Crunchie, Dairy Milk) with no opportunity to price own brand alternatives. In some cases,

‘economy’ own brands are explicitly ruled out (for example for canned goods, condiments and

ready meals) but these can sometimes make up a substantial share of spending and may be

obvious substitutes when economic conditions worsen or relative prices shift.



3.4   Outlet Choice

Probably the largest change over the last decade in food retailing in the US and the UK is the

increase of the market share of a single firm: Walmart in the US and Tesco in the UK. Walmart is

the largest food retailer in the US, with sales higher than Kroger, Supervalu-Albertsons and

Safeway, which are the largest supermarket chains. In the UK Tesco has similarly gained market

share rapidly. The Competition Commission (2008) reports the Tesco grocery sales share

increasing from 20.2% in 2002 to 27.6% in 2007. Based on slightly different data, TNS (2008)

reported a Tesco grocery market share for August 2008 of 31.6%.

       However, as we show below, the fraction of expenditure in Tesco varies considerably

across households and over products. The implications of outlet substitution have been well

documented (for example, see Boskin et al, 1998, Hausman, 1998, Hausman and Leibtag, 2004).

In the US the way that prices are collected does not fully capture price changes in retailers like

                                                                                           29
Walmart, or they do not properly account for quality differences (treating the price difference as

purely a quality difference). The situation is somewhat different in the UK where the ONS does

attempt to reflect these changes in market share.


3.4.1   How much do households buy in Tesco?

Households vary substantially in the share of their purchases that are made at Tesco. The average

household spends 32% of total annual expenditure at Tesco. However, nearly 20% of households

spend nothing at Tesco, and 1.7% of households spend all of their budget there.10 Figure 7 shows

the distribution of the share of expenditure at Tesco.

Figure 7: Share of household expenditure in Tesco




Note: Histogram of the household expenditure shares at Tesco in 2006. Sample includes 23,877 households.

Couples and families with children buy a larger share of their groceries at Tesco, as do

households that shop more often by car. Higher income households are more likely to shop at



10
  Just as a comparison, using similar consumer-level data from the US we find that the average household spends
16% of their expenditure at Walmart, while 23% of households do not purchase any food at Walmart.
                                                                                                           30
Tesco, though lower income households are much less likely to. None of these demographics

explains much of the household level variation in the share of groceries purchased at Tesco.


3.4.2    How much do consumers save by shopping in Tesco?

We compare prices paid in Tesco, the UK’s largest supermarket chain, using a regression of the

form:

         ln piht = β j Tescoiht + η k + tt + rr + eiht                     (10)


where Tescoihts = 1 if household h bought good i at time t in a Tesco store. Relative to the other

dimensions, examined above, the potential savings are much more modest. The average discount

in Tesco is 1.6% and the median is 1.0%. Furthermore, there seems to be much less heterogeneity

in the savings across product categories, particularly compared to savings from generic brands

and bulk discounting.

         To compute a household-level savings measure we weight the category-level savings

using household specific expenditure weights as:


         SaveTescoh = ∑ whj 1 − exp ( β j )
                                 jt
                                            (         )                    (11)


where:


                 ∑ ( Tesco = 1) expenditure
                 it ,i∈ j
                                      iht                 iht

         whj =                                                             (12)
                       ∑ expenditure
                            it
                                                iht




                                                                                           31
Figure 8: Savings made by each household from shopping at Tesco




Note: Histogram of the savings each household made by purchasing standard own brands in 2006 as defined by
equation (13); sample includes 23,877 households.

Clearly the savings made from Tesco shopping are smaller than those from some of the other

channels discussed so far. On average, the saving is just 0.7% (median 0.2%) and even those

households that save the most through Tesco shopping save less than 10% by doing so. In cash

terms, the mean saving is around £10 per year (median £). Around 7.5% of households make

negative ‘savings’ through Tesco shopping – that is, the items they buy from Tesco are more

expensive than buying from the same product group elsewhere.

        These results show an important distinction between the UK and US experiences of a

single retailer coming to have a substantial market share. In the US, Wal-Mart’s growth was

largely attributable to having lower prices. In the UK, Tesco is not on average a low-price store:

across the 189 product groups in our analysis, the average saving in Tesco 1.6%, but is positive

(Tesco prices are higher) in 79 categories.



                                                                                                   32
         Pensioners and childless households save the least from Tesco shopping, whilst families

with children save the most. Larger savings are also made by those who shop by car, in particular

those who shop once or twice a week by car. Richer households also make larger savings. Once

again, however, these demographics are unable to explain much of the variation in the savings

made through Tesco purchases.


4 Comparing the savings

Up to this point we discussed each of the savings measures separately. We now compare the

measures to each other in order to gain an understanding of the relative importance of the

different dimensions.


4.1    Comparison of potential savings

The various regressions we described above tell us about the potential savings that are available

to consumers from each of the forms of substitution considered. The coefficients measure the

discount from sales, large sizes, generic brands and outlet choice, controlling for quality

differences across products. Table 6 shows the distribution of these savings implied by the beta

coefficients (an observation is one of the food categories, i.e. these are not weighted by quantity).

Table 6: Potential savings through different channels
                                                                          10th                            90th
         Savings channel                   Mean          Std. dev.                       Median
                                                                       percentile                      percentile
                            Sale           21.7%          6.0%           14.1%            22.4%          38.8%
                4th size quintile          28.1%          27.7%          -2.2%            27.1%          65.2%
                5th size quintile          36.8%          33.5%           8.0%            35.5%          72.7%
         Economy generic brand             38.8%          30.7%           0.0%            46.0%          75.1%
         Standard generic brand            25.4%          22.6%          -2.0%            25.4%          54.3%
                Tesco purchase              1.6%           9.9%          -8.5%             1.0%          12.7%
Notes: savings based on the coefficients obtained from equations (1), (4), (7), (10); for each channel there are 189
regressions, one for each food category. Savings in the size quintiles are relative to purchases in the second largest
size quintile.
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample


                                                                                                              33
The potential savings are highest from economy generic brands, followed by bulk purchases,

standard generic brands, economy brand, sales and then Tesco. Except for the savings from Tesco,

these savings seem to be of comparable magnitude.

        These numbers show the potential savings from each dimension. For example, if a

household bought all of their purchases on sale we would measure them as saving roughly 22%,

assuming equal expenditure in each category. This is significantly higher than the actual savings

made which depend on the expenditure shares devoted to each savings channel.


4.2   Comparison of shares

Given these potential savings, we ask how much do households use these different ways to save.

Table 7 summarizes the distribution of household expenditure on different savings channel. Note

that the distribution is across households.

Table 7: Household expenditure shares on various savings channels, 2006 TNS data
                                                                    10th                  90th
        Savings channel                 Mean         Std. dev.                Median
                                                                 percentile            percentile
                           Sale        29.5%           9.8%        17.7%      28.9%      42.0%
      Largest two size quintiles       37.0%          10.3%        24.1%      36.8%      50.0%
       Economy generic brand            3.8%           4.9%         0.1%       2.2%      9.4%
        Standard generic brand         41.1%          10.7%        28.0%      41.1%      54.0%
                Tesco purchase         31.6%          34.1%         0.0%      16.3%      88.4%
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample



The relative distribution of expenditure shares does not track the relative potential saving. For

example, economy generic brands offered the greatest potential for savings yet expenditure

shares on these brands are relatively small. This should not be surprising: economy brands are

probably of lower quality. Similarly, Tesco offers small potential savings, yet is very popular,

reflecting the fact that consumers shop at Tesco for reasons other then savings.


                                                                                            34
           Table 8 displays the correlation of expenditure shares of the different dimensions. The

correlations are intuitive. Consumers who buy more on sale also purchase in bulk, which is

reasonable since both these choices are driven by storage costs. On the other hand, households

that buy on sale tend to spend less on generic.11 Similarly, households that buy economy generic

tend to purchase in bulk.

Table 8: Correlation between expenditure shares on various savings channels




                                                                  Largest two


                                                                                 Economy


                                                                                            Standard
                                                                   quintiles


                                                                                  generic


                                                                                             generic


                                                                                                           Tesco
                                                       Sale

                                        Sale 1.000
                   Largest two size quintiles 0.226 1.000
                    Economy generic brand 0.033 0.255 1.000
                     Standard generic brand -0.119 -0.092 -0.051 1.000
                             Tesco purchase 0.058 0.019 0.129 -0.084                                     1.000
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample

4.3      Comparison of actual savings

In order to measure the actual, as apposed to potential, savings we present our computed

measures in Table 9. These measures combine the potential savings, presented in Section 4.1,

with the choices consumers make, presented in the previous section.

Table 9: Household savings from various channels
                                                                                   10th                               90th
            Savings channel                 Mean              Std. dev.                            Median
                                                                                percentile                         percentile
                              Sale          6.5%               2.3%                3.8%                 6.4%          9.5%
         Largest two size quintiles         15.6%              4.5%               10.1%                15.6%         21.2%
          Economy generic brand              2.0%              2.6%                0.1%                 1.1%         4.9%
           Standard generic brand           3.7%               4.3%                0.1%                 3.9%          7.6%
                   Tesco purchase            0.7%              0.9%                0.0%                 0.2%          2.0%
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample




11
     Leibtag and Kaufman (2003) report a similar finding for the US.
                                                                                                                        35
       The results suggest the savings from bulk purchasing are the largest, followed by sales,

purchases of generics and shopping at Tesco. These results follow directly from what we saw in

the previous sections. Bulk purchases offered the largest potential savings and made up a

significant share of total expenditures. It is not totally surprising that the actual savings are

therefore largest from buying in bulk. The figures in the table also demonstrate the importance of

computing the savings measures and not just settling for the numbers in the previous sections.

The potential savings from standard generic brands was relatively high, as was the share of

expenditure on these brands. However, the actual savings are relatively low. This is driven by a

negative correlation between potential savings and expenditure within categories: the categories

where the expenditure share is higher are those where the potential savings are relatively low.

       A couple of caveats are in place in interpreting these numbers. First, these measures do

not account for the costs of savings. In the case of sales and bulk purchases costs involve storage

and transport cost. In the case of generic brands, the cost could include quality differences. And

for outlet choice they include travel costs as well as potential quality differences between stores.

These costs are likely different for the different dimensions and therefore in a way make the

savings non-comparable.

       An additional caveat is that the savings measures are not orthogonal. For example, if

larger sizes tend to be more on sale, the savings from them are potentially counted twice, both in

bulk and in the sales measures (although note that in equation (4) we have controlled for sale

when measuring the savings from bulk purchasing). In order to explore this further we examine

in Table 10 the correlation between the various savings measures.




                                                                                             36
Table 10: Correlation between household savings from various channels




                                                        Largest two


                                                                      Economy


                                                                                 Standard
                                                         quintiles


                                                                       generic


                                                                                  generic


                                                                                             Tesco
                                                 Sale
                                    Sale       1.000
               Largest two size quintiles      0.275    1.000
                Economy generic brand          0.058    0.257         1.000
                 Standard generic brand        0.064    0.230         0.070      1.000
                         Tesco purchase        0.146    0.120         0.107      0.060      1.000
Source: Authors’ calculations from 2006 TNS sample

        As before, consumers who save by buying on sale also save by purchasing in bulk, with

both decisions driven by storage costs. Households that save by purchasing on sale also save

more when purchasing in Tesco. This is perhaps what we would expect: Tesco is not an ‘every

day low price’ retailer but instead uses frequent in store price and quantity promotions more

heavily. Consumers that save with the standard generic brand also save bulk discounts, but seem

to save less by timing their purchases (i.e., buying on sale) and by switching stores. The

correlation between savings from economy and standard generics is also quite low, again

suggesting they are close substitutes for each other.

        In order to further explore the correlation across savings measures we examine how

savings vary with demographics, focusing on income and family composition. The figures below

plot the coefficients and confidence intervals from a regression of the household saving from

each channel on a categorical dummy for the income (figure 9) and family type (figure 10).

        The correlation for savings from bulk purchases and economy brands follow similar

patterns: they decrease monotonically with income. Relatively, these dimensions seem to be used

more by low income households. On the other hand, saving from sales, and to a lesser extent

saving from Tesco, seem to be non-monotonic in income. Low income households do not seem


                                                                                                     37
to save, maybe because they are unable, and neither do high income households, maybe because

it is not worth their time.

Figure 9: Savings by income group (relative to households with incomes under £10,000)




Source: Calculated from 2006 TNS sample

        The results for family types suggest that families with children save more through each of

the savings channels than those without. The relative gains are highest for bulk discounting and

sales. This makes sense: larger families have larger consumption needs and so they are able to

take advantage of sales and larger packets, for example, even if their storage costs are high.

Retired households tend to be less likely to save in all dimensions, except bulk purchases, relative

to other household groups.




                                                                                             38
Figure 10: Savings by family type (relative to single childless adult)




Source: Calculated from 2006 TNS sample




5 Concluding Comments

We use a rich household-level data set to document purchasing patterns. We focus on four

dimensions of consumer choice behaviour: purchase on sales, purchase in bulk, purchase of

generic products and store choice. For each dimension we compute an estimate of how much the

consumers save. Our findings suggest that all dimensions of choice yield significant and

comparable savings.




                                                                                      39
        The data we used in this paper comes from the UK. An interesting question is whether the

results we find are also present in other countries as well. We also have similar data from the US.

Preliminary analysis suggests similar findings in the US, with some interesting differences. Sales

and bulk purchases, and the savings they entail, seem to be more significant in the US. This

should not be surprising. On average, US homes are larger and consumers tend to shop more with

cars, so transport and storage costs are lower. As a result, in the US larger sizes are offered and

purchased (for example, gallon size ice cream pack, which are quite popular in the US, are

basically not available in the UK).

        Store brands are also different in the US. They are a larger share of expenditure than the

economy brands in the UK, but significantly less than the combined economy and standard

brands in the UK. Overall, it seems to us store brands are less important in the US. As we

discussed above, the savings from Walmart seem to be more significant than the savings from

shopping at Tesco. In summary, it seems the conclusion – that savings from sales and bulk

purchases are important – holds even stronger in the US.

        The statistics we offer measure the monetary savings from behaviour along various

dimensions. The measures ignore the cost of substitution. When buying on sale or in bulk

households incur a transportation cost and a storage cost, which we ignore. We also ignore the

cost of travelling to various stores and the potentially lower quality of store brands. To fully

account for these costs one needs to estimate a demand system. Based on our results we hope

future work will go in this direction. Indeed, our measures suggest that the biases due to sales and

bulk purchasing might be of the same (or even a greater) order of magnitude as substitution and

outlet bias. Yet they have received much less attention. We second Triplett (2003) in suggesting

that this is a fruitful area for future research.

                                                                                             40
References

Abraham, K.G. (2003), “Toward a Cost-of-Living Index: Progress and Prospects”, The Journal
      of Economic Perspectives, 17(1), 45-58.
Baye, M. (1985), “Price Dispersion and Functional Price Indices”, Econometrica 53(1), 213-23.
Boizot, C., J-M Robin and M. Visser (2001) “The Demand for Food Products: An Analysis of
       Interpurchase Times and Purchased Quantities”, The Economic Journal, 111, 391-419
Boskin, M. et al (1998), “Consumer Prices, the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of Living”,
       The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1), 3-26.
Caronia, M. (2008), “The Microeconomics of Large Devaluations”, Northwestern University,
       mimeo.
Competition Commission (2008), “Market Investigation Into the Supply of Groceries in the UK”,
     Appendix 3.1,
       http://www.competition-commission.org.uk/rep_pub/reports/2008/fulltext/538_3_1.pdf
Crawford, I. (1996), “UK Household cost-of-living indices, 1979-92”, in John Hills (ed.) New
      Inequalities: The Changing Distribution of Income and Wealth in the United Kingdom.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Cambridge.
Crawford, I. and Z. Smith (2002), “Distributional Aspects of Inflation”, IFS Commentary 90,
      London: IFS
Deaton, A. (1998), “Getting Price Right: What Should Be Done?” The Journal of Economic
      Perspectives, 12(1), 37-46.
Deaton, A. and J. Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior, Cambridge
      University, Cambridge.
Department for Transport (2005), "Focus on Personal Travel 2005 Edition", London: The
      Stationery                                                                          Office
      (http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/statistics/datatablespublications/personal/focuspt/2005/focuso
      npersonaltravel2005edi5238)
Diewert, W.E. (1976), “Exact and Superlative Index Numbers”, Journal of Econometrics 4:2 ,
      115-145.
Diewert, W.E. (1993), “The Early History of Price Index Research”, in Essays in Index Number
      Theory, Volume I, Contributions to Economic Analysis 217, W.E. Diewert and A.O.
      Nakamura (eds.), Amsterdam: North Holland, 33-65.
Feenstra, R.C. and M.D. Shapiro (2003), “High-Frequency Substitution and the Measurement of
       Price Indexes”, in Scanner Data and Price Indexes.
Gicheva, D., J. Hastings and S. Villas-Boas (2007), “Revisiting the Income Effect: Gasoline
      Prices and Grocery Purchases”, NBER Working Paper 13614.
Hausman, J. (2003), “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer Price Index”, The
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17(1), 23-44.


                                                                                         41
Hausman, J. and E. Leibtag (2004), “CPI bias from Supercenters: Does the BLS Know that Wal-
     Mart Exists?”, NBER Working Paper 10712.
Hausman, J. and E. Leibtag (2007), “Consumer Benefits From Increases Competition in
     Shopping Outlets: Measuring the Effect of Wal-Mart”, Journal of Applied Econometrics,
     22, 1157-1177.
Hendel, I. and A. Nevo (2006a) “Sales and Consumer Inventory”, The RAND Journal of
      Economics, 37(3), 543-561.
Hendel, I. and A. Nevo (2006b) “Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
      Behavior”, Econometrica, 74(6), 1637-1673.
Leibtag, E. and P. Kaufman (2003), “Exploring Food Purchase Behavior of Low-Income
       Households: How Do they Economize?”, Agriculture Information Bulletin No 747-07,
       http://www.ers.usda.gov/Publications/AIB747/aib74707.pdf
Office for National Statistics (2007), “Consumer Prices Index Technical Manual”,
      http://www.statistics.gov.uk/downloads/theme_economy/CPI_Technical_Manual.pdf
Pollak, R.A. (1998), “The Consumer Price Index: A Research Agenda and Three Proposals”, The
        Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1), 69-78.
Reinsdorf, M. (1994), “The Effect of Price Dispersion on Cost of Living Indexes”, International
      Economic Review, 35(1).
TNS (2008), “Price Now Clearly Driving Market Shares”, Press Release 19th August 2008,
      http://www.tnsglobal.com/_assets/files/TNS_Market_Research_Supermarket_Share_data
      _mmentary.pdf
Triplett, J. (2003), “Using Scanner Data in Consumer Price Indexes: Some Neglected Conceptual
        Considerations”, in Scanner Data and Price Indexes.
Triplett, J. (2004), “Handbook on Hedonic Indexes and Quality Adjustments in Price Indexes:
        Special Application to Information Technology Products”, OECD Science, Technology
        and Industry Working Papers, 2004/9, OECD Publishing.




                                                                                        42
