                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   PORTFOLIO SUBSTITUTION AND THE REVENUE COST OF EXEMPTING STATE
   AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT INTEREST PAYMENTS FROM FEDERAL INCOME
                                TAX

                                          James M. Poterba
                                       Arturo Ramirez Verdugo

                                         Working Paper 14439
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14439


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We are grateful to participants in the NBER Tax Expenditure Project, especially William Gentry, Roger
Gordon, and Eric Toder, for helpful comments, and to the National Science Foundation (Poterba) for
research support. Pablo Villanueva and Jose Cabrera provided outstanding research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James M. Poterba and Arturo Ramirez Verdugo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Portfolio Substitution and the Revenue Cost of Exempting State and Local Government Interest
Payments from Federal Income Tax
James M. Poterba and Arturo Ramirez Verdugo
NBER Working Paper No. 14439
October 2008
JEL No. H24,H7

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper explores how alternative assumptions about household portfolio behavior affect estimates
of the revenue cost of excluding state and local government interest payments from the federal income
tax base. Standard tax expenditure estimates assume that current holders of tax-exempt bonds would
replace their holdings of tax-exempt bonds with taxable bonds if the tax exemption were eliminated.
 We consider a number of alternative possible portfolio responses. Because taxable bonds are among
the most heavily taxed assets, assuming that investors holding tax-exempt bonds would otherwise
hold taxable bonds yields a larger estimate of the revenue cost of tax exemption than many alternative
assumptions. Based on data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances, we estimate that the revenue
cost of tax exemption under the "taxable bond substitution hypothesis" is $14.2 billion, compared
with $10.1 billion if corporate stock replaces tax-exempt bonds in household portfolios, and $7.9 billion
if investors distribute their tax-exempt bond holdings in proportion to the other assets currently in
their portfolios. We also explore the revenue effects of capping the dollar amount of tax-exempt interest
per tax return and of limiting tax-exempt interest as a fraction of AGI.


James M. Poterba
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge, MA 02138
poterba@mit.edu

Arturo Ramirez Verdugo
Protego Public Finance
Blvd. Manuel Avila Camacho 36, Piso 22
Mexico, D.F.
MEXICO
aramirez@protego.com.mx
                                                    1

       Exempting the interest paid by state and local governments from federal income taxation is

one of the largest tax expenditures. The U.S. Treasury Department (2006) suggests that the tax

expenditure on public-purpose tax-exempt bonds was $23.6 billion for FY2007. The Joint

Committee on Taxation’s (2006) estimate is $20.1 billion. These estimates assume that if

individual investors did not hold tax-exempt bonds, they would hold taxable bonds instead. In all

likelihood, more complex portfolio adjustments would follow changes in the tax treatment of

interest payments on state and local government bonds. Taxable bonds are among the most heavily

taxed portfolio assets, so assuming that the high-marginal-tax rate household who own tax-exempt

bonds would shift to holding highly-taxed taxable bonds if tax-exemption were repealed is likely to

overstate the revenue cost of tax exemption. If repeal of tax exemption leads current holders of tax-

exempt bonds to substitute into other lightly taxed assets, such as common stocks with low dividend

yields, then the revenue gain from repeal could be much smaller than calculations based on the

taxable bond substitution assumption suggest.

       Several studies, most notably Galper and Toder (1981), Slemrod (1983), and Toder and

Neubig (1985), have examined the tax exemption in general equilibrium models that endogenize

household portfolio choices, the stock of state and local government capital, and the use of debt by

states and localities. These studies make the important point that “taxable bond substitution” is

likely to misstate the revenue cost of tax exemption. They also note that calibrating models of

portfolio choice is difficult, because there are few empirical settings in which it is possible to

identify how household portfolio decisions respond to tax policy.

       This paper explores the revenue cost of exempting state and local interest payments from

income taxation. It focuses on revenue estimates, which unlike tax expenditure calculations, can

consider a range of taxpayer responses to tax provisions. Although we present new estimates of
                                                  2

how taxes affect portfolio structure, we conclude that existing empirical evidence admits a wide

range of potential behavioral responses to the elimination of tax exemption. Rather than using such

estimates to calibrate a general equilibrium model to examine the revenue cost of tax exemption, we

therefore explore how alternative assumptions about portfolio response affect estimates of the

aggregate revenue cost of the interest exemption as well as the distribution of its benefits. We limit

our analysis to the household sector, although corporate ownership of tax-exempt bonds also has a

substantial revenue cost. For FY2007, the Joint Committee on Taxation (2006) estimates that the

corporate income tax expenditure for tax-exempt bonds is roughly one third as large as the

individual income tax expenditure.

       The paper is divided into six sections. The first summarizes the yield spread between

taxable and tax-exempt bonds over the last two decades and the aggregate holdings of taxable and

tax-exempt bonds by different classes of investors. The second section describes the data sources

that we use to analyze tax-exempt bond holdings and reports on the current cross-sectional

distribution of tax-exempt bond holdings. Section three briefly reviews the previous literature on

how marginal income tax rates affect portfolio structure and then presents estimates of probit and

tobit models for portfolio choice, emphasizing ownership of tax-exempt bonds, based on the 2004

Survey of Consumer Finances. The estimates of the link between a household’s marginal tax rate

on interest income, and the share of tax-exempt bonds in the portfolio, admit a wide range of

possible behavioral responses to tax changes. The fourth section presents revenue estimates under

the taxable bond substitution assumption as well as other assumptions about substitution patterns. It

demonstrates the substantial range that can result from alternative assumptions about portfolio

response. Section five considers the revenue and distributional effects of policies that would restrict
                                                  3

but not eliminate the income tax exclusion for state and local interest payments. The final section

concludes and suggests several directions for further research.

1. The Taxable-Tax Exempt Yield Spread and Aggregate Bond Holdings

       The yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt bonds has varied substantially over time,

and in recent years has narrowed to levels that seem inconsistent with a simple interpretation of this

yield spread as a reflection of the marginal tax rate at which an investor would be indifferent

between investing in a taxable and a tax-exempt bond. Simple yield comparisons are valid only

when the risk attributes of the taxable and tax-exempt bonds are similar. When the yield spread is

narrow, some argue that the federal government is losing revenue while the state and local

borrowers are not much better off than they would be without income tax exclusion of their interest

payments. An alternative explanation of narrow yields is that they reflect periods when the

perceived risk of tax-exempt bonds is particularly high.

1.1 The Yield Spread, 1990-2008

       Table 1 shows annual average yields on AAA municipal, U.S. Treasury, and AAA corporate

bonds with a ten-year maturity. These averages are based on daily yields provided by Bloomberg,

which reports information on prices and yields for various tax-exempt and taxable securities. The

data suggest two conclusions. First, the average yield differential between Treasury bonds and tax-

exempt bonds corresponds to an “implicit tax rate” well below the top statutory marginal tax rate in

the federal income tax code. The implicit tax rate θ is the value that satisfies (1-θ)RT = RM, where

RT denotes a taxable interest rate and RM denotes the interest rate on a tax-exempt bond. For 2007

this implicit tax rate averaged less than 24 percent, and for 2003 and 2005 it fell below 20 percent.

For the first nine months of 2008, the implicit tax rate averaged only 10.7 percent. At the beginning

of the 1990s, by comparison, the implicit tax rate was greater than 30 percent.
                                                   4

       Second, the implicit tax rate computed by comparing corporate and municipal bond yields

with similar ratings is higher than that computed by comparing Treasury bonds with municipals,

and it has not fallen nearly as far as the Treasury-based implicit tax rate during the last twenty

years. For 2007, the implicit tax rate based on corporate yields averaged 41.2 percent, suggesting

that some of the narrowing of the Treasury-municipal bond yield spread is due to developments in

the Treasury market rather than in the tax-exempt bond market.

       The recent data in Table 1 are among the most striking. The implicit tax rate of 10.7 percent

between Treasury bonds and tax-exempt bonds in the first nine months of 2008 is extraordinary by

historical standards. During this period even the implicit tax rate with corporate bonds, 29.8

percent, fell well below its historic average. This reflects the impact of the financial turmoil of

2008. Yields on tax-exempt securities, particularly so-called “auction rate municipals” with short

maturities, rose sharply and in many cases exceeded the yields on taxable securities with

comparable maturities. Figure 1 shows the yield spreads for different maturities and credit ratings,

including the period when the yield spread became negative and municipal bond yields exceeded

the yields on Treasury bonds. The low yields on Treasury securities during this period were

apparently driven in part by a flight to quality during particularly unstable times in the financial

markets.

       The entries in Table 1 show that the implicit tax rate fluctuates substantially over time.

Various studies have developed frameworks for analyzing these differences. Green (1993)

emphasizes the need to recognize that bonds may not be held to maturity, and demonstrates that this

can affect the interpretation of the yield spread. Poterba (1986) argues that changes in the yield

spread may be linked to changing expectations of future tax policy, although it is not clear that tax

events can explain the narrowing of yield spreads in 2008. Changing risk factors are another
                                                  5

potential source of time series variation in yield spreads. Chalmers (2006), however, shows that

risk considerations seem unable to explain the level of the taxable-tax exempt yield spread.

       The data in Table 1 correspond to bonds that generate fully tax-exempt interest. Some

private-purpose bonds issued by state and local governments generate interest that is exempt from

the federal income tax but that is subject to the Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT). Table 2 shows

yield spreads at the one-, ten-, and thirty-year maturity for both fully tax-exempt and AMT-taxable

bonds in 2003. We use daily yields for AMT-free tax-exempt bonds, AMT-subject private taxable

bonds, and Treasury bonds to construct the entries. The implicit tax rate on AMT bonds is about

twenty percentage points lower than that on fully tax-exempt bonds at the one-year maturity, ten

percentage points lower at the 10-year maturity, and five percentage points lower at the 30-year

maturity. These changes across maturities may reflect declining market beliefs about the

probability of the AMT being in force in future years. The implicit tax rate differential between

fully tax-exempt and AMT-taxable bonds at the short maturity, between 19 and 26 percentage

points depending on the specific comparison, is close to the AMT tax rate. The yields on Treasury

bonds with maturities of one year, and of thirty years, were below the yields of tax-exempt bonds

that paid interest subject to the AMT.

1.2 Aggregate Holdings of Tax-Exempt and Taxable Bonds

       The revenue cost of excluding interest paid by state and local governments from the federal

income tax depends on who owns state and local government bonds and what those investors would

do in the absence of tax exemption. Table 3 displays data on the ownership of both taxable and tax-

exempt bonds in 2003. Households owned 36 percent of the outstanding debt of state and local

governments directly. Another 29 percent was held by mutual funds, which are in turn owned

primarily by households. In contrast, one quarter of outstanding U.S. Treasury bonds were held
                                                   6

abroad. Fourteen percent were held directly by households and another ten percent are held by

mutual funds. In the Flow of Funds, the “household” sector includes untaxed nonprofit institutions

as well as taxable households. Nonprofit institutions are much more likely to hold taxable bonds

than are taxable households. The data in Table 3 are relevant for analyzing the change in portfolio

structure that might follow the elimination of tax exemption, since if currently tax-exempt bonds

became taxable, the ownership profile for these bonds might ultimately resemble that for currently

taxable bonds rather than currently tax-exempt bonds.

2. Household Data: The 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances and TAXSIM

       We rely on household-level data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances to evaluate

the potential revenue consequences of changing the tax exemption. We impute marginal tax rates to

SCF households using the code provided by Moore (2004) to construct the twenty-two variables

needed to run the NBER’s Internet TAXSIM program, run the TAXSIM program, and then append

the marginal tax rates to each household record. Feenberg and Coutts (1993) describe the basic

structure of the TAXSIM program, which can be used to produce both first-dollar and last-dollar

marginal tax rates on taxable interest income and other components of adjusted gross income. The

difference between these tax rates arises from differences in the income components that

households are assigned before the marginal tax rate calculation. The first dollar tax rate measures

the tax rate on interest income, for example, if the household had no other interest income; the last

dollar rate reflects the tax rate on the actual last dollar of such income, and consequently is affected

by the household’s portfolio holdings and income composition. The link between portfolio

structure and the last-dollar tax rate makes this tax measure an endogenous variable in econometric

models of household portfolio selection.
                                                   7


2.1 Aggregate Consistency Checks for SCF Data

       The SCF is the most detailed and reliable source of data on household finances. We

nevertheless performed some external validation tests for the data on tax-exempt bond holdings. In

2004, the SCF interviewed 4,519 households. The public use SCF data file includes 22,595

observations, which corresponds to five “replicates” for each underlying SCF observation. Because

the SCF file includes imputed values for some data items that are missing in the household’s actual

responses, the replicates associated with a given underlying observation may have different values

of some variables. Different observations have different sample weights, and the weighted sum of

SCF households corresponds to 112 million U.S. households. Total financial assets of these

households, defined following Poterba and Samwick (2002) as the sum of directly held equity,

equity in mutual funds, tax deferred equity, tax deferred bonds, tax-exempt bonds, taxable bonds,

interest bearing accounts and other financial assets, is $17.4 trillion. The tax-exempt bonds

category includes tax-exempt bonds held through mutual funds that are identified as tax-exempt

bond funds. Taxable bonds include government bonds, corporate bonds, foreign bonds, and

mortgage bonds, once again including both direct holdings and holdings through mutual funds.

Interest bearing accounts include checking and savings accounts, plus certificates of deposits.

Other financial assets include annuities, trust funds, hedge funds with equity interest, and life

insurance premiums.

       The 2004 SCF reports aggregate direct household ownership of tax-exempt bonds of $756

billion. By comparison, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2007) Flow of Funds Accounts

Table L.211 shows $704 billion of direct household-owned tax-exempt bonds. The “household

sector” for this purpose includes nonprofit institutions, but since they are tax-exempt, they are

unlikely to hold substantial amounts of tax-favored state and local debt. In addition, the Flow of
                                                  8

Funds show holdings of tax exempt bonds by mutual funds, money market mutual funds, and

closed-end funds of $290 billion, $292 billion, and $89 billion, respectively, at year-end 2003. The

household sector owned 62.3 percent of mutual fund shares and 48 percent of money market mutual

fund shares. The SCF reports tax-exempt bonds in mutual funds, but it does not distinguish

between money market mutual funds and regular mutual funds. The SCF total for these holdings is

$300 billion, compared with $376 based on the ownership shares and aggregate values of the

various funds from the Flow of Funds accounts. While these summary statistics suggest some

differences between the Flow of Funds aggregates and the SCF, they also suggest that the SCF asset

stocks are reasonably close to other information on the aggregates.

       Shifting from stocks to flows, the amount of tax-exempt interest that SCF households

reported for 2003, $57.5 billion, can be compared with information reported on tax returns. The

U.S. Internal Revenue Service (2005) indicates that in 2003, households reported $53.7 billion of

tax-exempt interest on their Forms 1040. This suggests reasonably close agreement between the

survey and tax return information.

2.2 Consistency of Stocks and Flows in SCF

       One potential difficulty with the SCF data is the imperfect matching between asset income

and asset holdings. Table 4 illustrates the problem. Nearly three percent of SCF observations,

corresponding to slightly less than two percent of the population, report holding tax-exempt bonds

but receiving no tax-exempt interest. In addition, just over three percent of the observations,

representing slightly more than one percent of the population, report tax-exempt interest but no

holdings of tax-exempt bonds.

       The mismatch problem can be further illustrated by calculating the distribution of the ratio

of tax-exempt interest payments to tax-exempt bond holdings. Table 5 presents summary
                                                    9

information on this “implied interest rate.” The median, computed for all households with tax-

exempt bond holdings, is 4.9 percent. The interquartile range spans 3.2 to 12.7 percent. When

implied interest rates for each household are weighted by the household’s ownership of tax-exempt

bonds, we find a median yield on tax-exempt bond holdings of 3.7 percent. The interquartile range

when weighted is 2.0 to 5.4 percent. There are some extreme outliers in the data set. Nearly five

percent of households reporting tax-exempt interest rates of less than one percent, and interest rates

of more than ten percent reported by at least ten percent of the households with tax-exempt debt.

       One potential explanation for the inconsistencies is that while households were interviewed

in 2004, the questionnaire specifically asks about tax information for fiscal year 2003. The

households with stock-flow inconsistencies might have bought or sold tax-exempt securities

between 2003 and 2004. It is also possible that the differences are due to misreporting in either

flows of income or stocks of assets – measurement error or failures of some households to

understand their detailed financial affairs. Finally, it is possible that the errors arise because of the

imputation algorithm used to construct the various SCF replicates. It imputes information on

interest income separately from information on tax-exempt bond holdings, so it may generate

outlying ratios of the two. The source of such stock-flow inconsistencies is a subject of ongoing

SCF research. Some view the SCF’s balance sheet data as more reliable than income flow

variables. However, since computing marginal tax rates requires data on income flows from many

different sources, such as dividends, taxable interest, and capital gains, we do not disregard SCF

flow data but instead use both stock and flow data in our analysis.

2.3 Holdings of Tax-Exempt Debt by Marginal Tax Rate

       Table 6 presents information on the percentage of tax-exempt debt that is held by

households in various marginal tax rate categories for 2003. The table shows that 53 percent of tax-
                                                  10

exempt bonds are held by households with marginal tax rates in excess of 30 percent, and that 49

percent of tax-exempt interest is reported by households in these tax brackets. As in Feenberg and

Poterba (1991), households with very low marginal tax rates hold close to ten percent of tax-exempt

debt. For these households, holding tax-exempt debt would appear to be a tax-inefficient decision,

although it is possible that data errors or specialized financial circumstances explain these

outcomes. It is possible that our algorithm has assigned these households incorrectly low marginal

tax rates, either because the SCF has omitted or understated some components of income, or

because we have over-stated deductions. It is also possible that the tax rates for these households

may be lower than their long-run average. We cannot evaluate transitory movements in marginal

tax rates using our data, which is confined to a single cross-section.

3. Tax Rates and Household Portfolio Structure

       The data on tax-exempt bond holdings by household marginal tax rate suggest that tax

clienteles form to at least some degree. The central empirical issue for analyzing the revenue

impact of changes in the tax exemption for state and local interest payments is how households with

current holdings of tax-exempt bonds would modify their portfolios in the absence of tax

exemption. The studies that most directly address this issue are Galper and Toder (1981), Slemrod

(1983), and Toder and Neubig (1985). All of these studies rely on general equilibrium models of

household portfolio choice to model how changes in the institutional setting for state and local

bonds, such as repeal of tax exemption or expansion of the set of borrowers who are granted tax

exemption, would affect portfolio holdings and yield spreads. These studies note that there is

remarkably little empirical evidence on the way household portfolios might evolve following a

change in the tax exemption. In the more than two decades since these studies were published,

there have been several studies of taxes and portfolio behavior, including Scholz (1994), Bakija
                                                    11

(2000), and Poterba and Samwick (2003), but they do not deliver clear guidance on how portfolios

would adjust if tax exemption were eliminated. Each of these studies estimates the relationship

between household marginal tax rates and portfolio structure. The results, however, typically offer

relatively wide bands of potential household response.

       The wide range of empirical findings on portfolio behavior is not surprising, and may arise

from two challenges in modeling portfolio choices. One is conceptual: studies such as Auerbach

and King (1983) suggest that clientele equilibria are a realistic possibility, even though factors

beside taxes such as demand for diversification play an important role in portfolio choice. Because

clientele equilibria involve households choosing to locate at corner solutions, they do not generate

the smooth changes in individual behavior as a function of tax rates – the type of behavior that we

typically model in household-level empirical work.

       The other challenge arises from the complexity of the economic environment in which

portfolio decisions are made. The effect of taxes on the demand for one asset is likely to depend on

the menu of other assets available, on the tax treatment of the other assets, and on the availability of

short-selling opportunities in some asset classes. It can be difficult to fully characterize all of these

constraints in household-level data sets, particularly because different households may have access

to different financial opportunities. In spite of these difficulties, each of the three studies mentioned

above suggest that households with higher marginal tax rates on taxable bonds are more likely to

invest in tax-exempt bonds than their less-heavily-taxed counterparts.

       To provide new empirical evidence on how taxes affect portfolio structure, we follow

Poterba and Samwick (2003) by estimating probit and tobit models for household portfolio

holdings. We focus on tax-exempt bond holdings, with household income, net worth, marginal tax

rate, and demographic variables as explanatory variables. We estimate models using the 2004
                                                   12

Survey of Consumer Finances data that we use throughout this study. Unlike the 1998 SCF data set

that was used in that earlier study, the 2004 SCF does not include location identifiers so it is not

possible to impute even an imprecise measure of state marginal income tax rates. We also use

TAXSIM and Moore’s (2003) interface between SCF data records and TAXSIM to compute

marginal tax rates; Poterba and Samwick (2003) used a tax rate calculator written specifically for

the 1998 SCF. They also computed a variant of a first-dollar marginal tax rate as their key

explanatory variable, by calculated a measure of the increase in the household’s tax burden

associated with a hypothetical increment to their capital income, relative to that income increment.

To assess how the differences in this component of our methodology may affect our findings, we

also present estimates using our tax rate calculation and the 1998 SCF data.

       The baseline specification for the latent variable (S*i) that determines household i’s notional

portfolio share in tax exempt bonds is

       S*i = Xiβ+ εi .                                                                        (1)

The set of explanatory variables, Xi, includes six categorical variables for the household’s income

excluding income from portfolio assets. This income measure is defined as the sum of wages,

business income, rent, unemployment insurance, alimony, and Social Security and pension income.

The specification also includes five categorical variables for household net worth, four indicators

for educational attainment, and several variables that proxy for household risk tolerance. The

explanatory variable of primary interest is the household’s last-dollar marginal tax rate on interest

income. Because last-dollar tax rates are potentially endogenous, we follow an instrumental

variable estimation strategy that relies on first-dollar marginal tax rates or state-level marginal tax

rates as instruments. The latter strategy is only possible in the 1998 data, which has some

information on geographic location.
                                                   13

        Table 7 presents our estimates. The table is divided into two panels, each of which presents

four specifications. The left-hand panel shows probit models for the ownership of tax-exempt debt,

while the right-hand panel reports tobit models for the share of tax-exempt debt in the household’s

portfolio. The first specification in each panel uses the 2004 SCF data, with a last-dollar marginal

tax rate variable based only on federal taxes, and the first-dollar federal marginal tax rate used as

the instrumental variable. The second specification uses the 1998 SCF data, with a last-dollar

marginal tax rate based on both federal and an estimate of state income taxes, instrumented in this

case using the first-dollar state and federal marginal tax rate. The third specification uses the

estimate of state marginal tax rate as the instrumental variable for the combined federal and state

last-dollar marginal tax rate. This specification again uses 1998 data. Finally, the last specification,

also for 1998, uses two instruments: the state marginal tax rate and the first-dollar federal marginal

tax rate.

        The results suggest substantial variation in the marginal tax rate coefficient across

specifications, and relatively imprecise estimates in all cases. The 2004 data, in the first columns,

yields a negative point estimate for the marginal tax rate effect, but the standard error is roughly the

same size as the coefficient. The 1998 data yield positive coefficients on the marginal tax rate in all

cases, suggesting that a higher marginal tax rate is associated with higher tax-exempt bond

holdings, but the standard errors are again large. The findings differ from those in Poterba and

Samwick (2003), who found positive and statistically significant effects of marginal tax rates on

tax-exempt bond holdings using something similar to a first-dollar marginal tax rate. When we

replaced our last-dollar marginal tax rates in the specifications in Table 7 with first-dollar rates, and

re-estimated without instrumental variables, our coefficients for the 1998 SCF were negative but

statistically indistinguishable from zero. This suggests that the difference between our findings and
                                                   14

those in Poterba and Samwick (2003) may arise from differences in the marginal tax rate

calculation or other aspects of the estimation sample. The disparities suggest that whatever links

between marginal tax rates and holdings of tax-exempt bonds may emerge in these data, they are

not particularly robust.

       The right-hand panel of Table 7 reports tobit models for the portfolio share devoted to tax-

exempt bonds. The tobit coefficients display the same pattern as the probit coefficients, and once

again fail to differ from zero at standard levels of statistical significance. The large standard errors

associated with our estimates of how tax rates on interest income affect holdings of tax-exempt

bonds make us reluctant to use these estimates as a basis for evaluating how portfolios might shift

in response to the end of tax exemption. Instead, we devote the balance of this paper to considering

a range of possible revenue effects under different assumptions about portfolio adjustment.

4. Revenue Cost of Tax Exemption

       This section computes a baseline estimate of the revenue cost of the individual income tax

exemption for state and local interest payments assuming that neither investors nor tax-exempt

borrowers change their behaviors in response to the repeal of tax exemption, and then explores

several alternative calculations.

4.1 Baseline Estimates: Taxable Bond Substitution

       Our baseline analysis, which corresponds to the standard tax expenditure calculation,

assumes that households who hold tax-exempt bonds replace their holdings with taxable bonds, an

assumption that is consistent with tax-exempt borrowers continuing to borrow whatever they did

when their interest was tax-exempt, although now with taxable debt, and with the same investors

who held tax-exempt bonds holding these newly-taxable bonds. Moreover, this calculation assumes

that the interest rate on these now-taxable bonds is the same as the current taxable interest rates to
                                                              15

which we have compared tax-exempt bond yields. If the current comparison is not capturing like-

risk bonds, then the actual interest rate if tax-exempt bonds became taxable might differ from the

rate that we assume.

       We compute the revenue cost by multiplying each household’s reported tax-exempt interest,

Rj,2003, by 1.2182, the ratio of the taxable and the tax-exempt interest rate in 2003, and by the

TAXSIM estimate of the household’s federal marginal income tax rate on interest income (τj,2003).

We sum this over all households using SCF weights:

                           ⎛                         i taxable ⎞                           (2)
     ΔRevenue2003 = ∑ w j ⎜⎜τ j , 2003 × R j , 2003 × 2003
                                                       exempt ⎟
                                                               ⎟.
                    j      ⎝                         i2003     ⎠

In this expression, i denotes the average interest rate in 2003 on either taxable and tax-exempt

securities; w is the SCF weight; the subscript j corresponds to households. This calculation yields

an estimated revenue cost of $19.5 billion for 2003.

       A parallel estimate could be developed using data from the Statistics of Income Public Use

File, by calculating a marginal tax rate on interest income for each tax filer using TAXSIM and then

applying the interest rate gross-up factor described above. A key feature of this calculation is the

assumption that a constant marginal tax rate applies to all of the interest income received by the

household. In practice, the progressive nature of the tax code implies that the last dollar of interest

income may face a higher tax rate than the first dollar – so the foregoing calculation may overstate

the revenue yield from taxing state and local interest payments.

       We also estimate the revenue cost of the tax exemption using SCF balance sheet data on

holdings of tax-exempt bonds rather than reported tax-exempt interest income. In this case, we

multiply the tax-exempt bond holdings of each investor (Bj,2004) by the average 2004 return on

taxable bonds (4.495%), which we calculate as the equal-weighted average of 4.24%, the yield on
                                                                 16

Treasury bonds, and 4.75%, the yield on AAA corporate bonds. We then multiply the resulting

product by the household’s marginal income tax rate on taxable interest income.

     ΔRevenue2004 = ∑ w j (τ j , 2003 × B j , 2004 × i2003 ) ,                              (3)
                           j



This approach generates an estimated 2004 revenue cost of $12.7 billion for the interest exemption.

       The difference in the estimated revenue costs using the flow-based and stock-based

approaches could arise from an error in the assumed interest rate on taxable bonds in (3), or from an

error in the gross up factor in (2). Our analysis uses the yields on AAA bonds, but if investors hold

lower quality bonds, the yield spread and the corresponding gross-up factor may be smaller and the

$19.5 billion estimate may be too high. If we assume, very conservatively, that taxable state and

local bonds would yield the same interest rate that these bonds paid when tax-exempt, the revenue

estimate is $16.0 billion. The stock-flow difference could also arise from the mismatch between

stocks and flows noted above. If stocks are measured better than flows, then the balance-sheet

based approach may provide better revenue estimates, and vice versa.

4.2 Alternative Portfolio Adjustments

       The average marginal interest income tax rate of tax-exempt bond holders is 26.8 percent,

weighted by bond holdings. Assuming that these investors would replace tax-exempt bonds in their

portfolios with taxable bonds therefore generates substantial revenue – but this assumption is open

to question, since existing portfolio patterns suggest that highly-taxed investors tilt their portfolios

toward lightly-taxed assets.

       Table 8 describes the aggregate portfolio shares of various assets in the portfolio of all SCF

respondents with and without positive holdings of tax-exempt bonds. For the latter group, taxable

bonds account for four percent of their portfolio while interest-bearing accounts represent 24

percent. For those with tax-exempt bonds, taxable bonds represent six percent, and interest bearing
                                                  17

accounts nine percent, of the total. Tax-exempt bonds, in contrast, represent 18 percent of the

portfolio for these households. Taxable interest-bearing assets are a smaller share of the portfolios

of households with tax-exempt bonds than of households without such bonds. Equity, held directly

or through mutual funds, accounts for 44 percent of the portfolio of those who hold tax-exempt

bonds and 35 percent of those who do not. If the households who currently hold tax-exempt bonds

were to sell these bonds and allocate the proceeds in proportion to their holdings of all other assets

in their portfolios, only 18.2 percent (=15/(1-.18)) of the current holdings of tax-exempt bonds

would be replaced by taxable bonds – much less than the foregoing revenue calculations assumed.

Other more lightly taxed assets, such as equities, and assets that generate low rates of return, such as

holdings in transaction accounts, would account for the remainder of the portfolio. The tax increase

for current holders of tax-exempt bonds would be smaller in this case than if they substituted toward

taxable bonds.

       Table 9 presents information on the degree of clientele specialization in portfolio structure.

Direct asset holdings are combined with holdings through mutual funds. Sixty-nine million of the

112 million SCF households hold no stocks in taxable accounts, no taxable bonds, and no tax-

exempt bonds either directly or in mutual funds. Some of these households (4.5 million) hold

stocks or bonds through tax-deferred accounts such as IRAs and 401(k)s, but such holdings do not

bear on tax-induced portfolio specialization. Just over ten million households have only taxable

interest-bearing assets, almost 19 million have only corporate equity, and 0.24 million have only

tax-exempt bonds. Those who specialize in equities hold 31 percent of all financial assets, while

those who have both equities and taxable bonds represent 20 percent of the total.

       To illustrate how various degrees of portfolio adjustment affect estimates of the revenue cost

of tax exemption, we consider four potential portfolio adjustment strategies. These are (i) taxable
                                                  18

bond substitution; (ii) “proportional substitution,” which assumes that investors replace tax-exempt

bonds with all other assets in the same proportion as they were found in their original taxable

portfolio; (iii) “equity substitution,” which assumes that investors substitute tax-exempt bonds with

direct equity holdings; and (iv) “tax efficient substitution,” which assumes that investors substitute

direct equity holdings for tax-exempt bonds if their marginal tax rate on other income is lower than

20 percent and with taxable bonds otherwise. In each case, we assume that the taxable households

who are changing their portfolios are trading with tax-exempt institutions: foundations,

endowments, or foreign investors who are not subject to U.S. income taxes. In the absence of such

an assumption, our calculations would need to recognize the revenue consequences of portfolio

adjustment for the other investors whose portfolios also change as households rebalance their

holdings. Our substitution assumptions rule out any transfers of assets between tax-deferred

retirement accounts, such as 401(k)s and IRAs, and taxable portfolios, on the grounds that many

households view these as distinct sub-portfolios. We regard the “proportional” and “equity

substitution” cases as invoking simple rules of thumb for portfolio change that may provide some

indication of how households might respond to a change in tax rules.

       Table 10 shows how household portfolios would change if investors responded in each of

these ways to elimination of tax exemption. We compute the taxable income for each household in

the SCF under each of the alternative portfolio substitution scenarios. We assume an interest rate of

3.69 percent on tax-exempt bonds -- the average of daily yields on AAA municipal bond indices

with 10 year maturities for 2003. For taxable bonds we assume an interest rate of 4.495 percent, the

simple average of the mean of daily yields on Treasury bonds (4.24) and AAA Corporate bonds

(4.75) in 2003, both for 10 year maturities. We assume an average return on interest bearing

accounts equal to one-quarter of the interest rate on taxable bonds: 1.124 percent. Equities are
                                                          19

assumed to generate realized capital gains equal to 2.75 percent of their market value. This value,

which is one-quarter of the historical total return on large-cap stocks that Morningstar (2007)

reports for the period 1926-2006, minus the corresponding dividend yield of 2.0 percent, reflects

underlying assumptions both about the appreciation rate for stocks and the gain realization rate. We

assume that only one quarter of unrealized capital gains are taxed in a given year. For equity held

through mutual funds we assume that half of accruing gains are realized, which translates into a

correspondingly higher tax burden on capital gains. We assume the same dividend yield for

directly-held equity and for stocks held through mutual funds.

       We compute the revenue consequences of eliminating the interest tax exemption under each

of these alternative behavioral assumptions in several steps. First, we construct each household’s

portfolio under the corresponding assumption about portfolio adjustment. Then, we impute the

capital income flows that would be associated with this portfolio, under the rate of return

assumptions described above. Finally, we compute the household’s federal tax liabilities in this

setting by using TAXSIM to compute the income tax liability of a taxpayer with the household’s

modified income components. Finally, we estimate the revenue cost of the tax-exemption as:

     ΔRevenue2003
             k
                             (                       )
                  = ∑ w j FTLkj , 2003 − FTL*j , 2003 ,                                  (4)
                        j



where, FTL: are the Federal Tax Liabilities of investor j obtained through TAXSIM when portfolio

substitution pattern k is assumed, FTL*: are the Federal Tax Liabilities of investor j obtained

through TAXSIM using original data from the SCF for fiscal year 2003. The sum over j with

weight wj indicates a weighted sum over all SCF households using the sampling weights.

Comparing federal tax liabilities with and without tax exempt debt in the portfolio, subject to our

portfolio adjustment rules, yields estimates of the revenue cost that recognize that the marginal tax

rate applicable to the household’s portfolio income is not constant.
                                                  20

       Table 11 presents our revenue estimates under different portfolio adjustment scenarios. The

highest revenue effect of repealing tax exemption corresponds to the taxable bonds adjustment

($14.20 billion), since tax exempt bonds are replaced with the most heavily taxed asset in taxable

portfolios. When we assume that households replace tax-exempt debt with equity, or that they

choose between equity and other assets in a tax-efficient way, we find smaller estimates of the

revenue cost of the tax expenditure: $10.1 billion and $10.9 billion, respectively. The proportional

substitution case produces the lowest estimate of the tax cost ($7.9 billion), in part because some

tax-exempt bonds are replaced with low-interest assets such as balances in transaction accounts.

Since investors who hold tax-exempt bonds are unlikely to use them for liquidity purposes, this

does not seem like a very plausible substitution pattern.

       While we focus on revenue estimates rather than tax expenditures, we should note that each

of the alternative adjustment strategies we consider would result in changes to the tax expenditure

budget because they would affect household ownership of securities that generate dividends and

capital gains, both of which are currently the subject of distinct tax expenditures. The tax

expenditure for capital gains would increase, for example, in our equity substitution case. This

underscores the limited nature of the calculations we present: we are not describing the net effect of

eliminating tax exemption on the tax expenditure budget, but rather the revenue effect of one aspect

of behavioral change.

4.3 Distributional Effects of Repealing Tax Exemption

       The last five columns of Table 11 present information on the distributional burden of

eliminating the tax exemption. Each column reports the share of the revenue increase that

corresponds to households in a particular income range: below $40K, $40-75K, $75-125K, $125-

250K and $250K+. Because the ownership of tax-exempt bonds is highly skewed, the highest
                                                   21

income group bears roughly eighty percent of the tax increase when the tax exemption is repealed.

Households with incomes below $40,000, in contrast, bear less than one percent of the burden.

       Table 12 reports the weighted mean change in federal tax liabilities due to the repeal of the

tax exemption. For households with incomes below $40,000 but some holdings of tax-exempt

bonds, the mean and median changes are close to zero. For those with incomes above $250,000, the

average tax increase exceeds $10,000, while the median tax increase is around $2,200.

5. Alternatives to the Elimination of Tax Exemption

       While elimination is the most frequently proposed change to the current tax exemption for

state and local interest payments, there are also other proposals that are sometimes discussed by tax-

writing committees. One involves limiting the amount of exempt interest to a fixed fraction of AGI,

and the other involves capping the amount of exempt interest per tax return. Tables 13 and 14

report the distribution of tax-exempt interest as a share of AGI, and the distribution of the total

amount of tax-exempt interest, respectively. Table 13 shows that without any behavioral changes,

limiting exempt interest to ten percent of AGI would affect households who hold approximately

sixty percent tax-exempt bonds. Limiting tax-exempt interest to thirty percent of AGI would affect

households owning 37 percent of tax-exempt bonds. Table 14 shows that limiting the amount of

tax-exempt interest to $10,000 per tax return would affect households that own 78 percent of tax-

exempt bonds, while increasing this limit to $100,000 would reduce the impact to households that

own 39 percent of tax-exempt bonds.

       To compute the revenue effects of various limits on tax-exempt interest, we use the

procedure outlined in conjunction with equation (4), along with our four portfolio adjustment

assumptions. For a given exempt interest threshold, if a household’s exempt interest in 2004 would

place half of this interest above the limit, then we assume that this investor would adjust half of her
                                                   22

tax-exempt bond holdings in accordance with the assumed adjustment strategy. Table 15 reports

our estimates of the revenue effects of various limits on tax-exempt interest. We estimate that

limiting tax-exempt interest to $100,000 per tax return would raise $3.9 billion if households

substitute taxable bonds for tax-exempt bonds, and $2.7 billion if they substitute with equity. For a

$50,000 limit, the corresponding values are $6.2 and $4.3 billion. Limiting tax-exempt interest to

30 percent of AGI would raise $1.4 billion in the taxable bond substitution case, and $0.9 billion in

the equity substitution case.

6. Conclusion

       This paper suggests that the revenue cost of exempting state and local government interest

payments from the federal income tax may be smaller than standard tax expenditure estimates

indicate. If high-tax-bracket individual investors react to restrictions on or elimination of tax

exemption by selling their previously tax-exempt bonds and shifting their portfolios toward lightly-

taxed assets such as low-yield corporate equities, the revenue gain from curtailing the exemption is

likely to be substantially smaller than standard analyses suggest. The standard assumption is that

households will continue to hold their tax-exempt bonds, even when their interest becomes taxable

and their yields rise accordingly. Under plausible assumptions about the degree of portfolio

substitution, the revenue cost might be as little as half the standard estimate. These results echo

other recent studies of portfolio adjustment in response to tax deductions, such as Gervais and

Pandey’s (2008) analysis of the home mortgage interest deduction.

       Our analysis has relied on illustrative examples of portfolio adjustment strategies, rather

than a model of portfolio adjustment estimated on household data, because the estimates of such

models do not appear precise enough for use in detailed revenue estimation. Better estimates of

these responses are an important future need. Such research might begin by comparing the findings
                                                    23

of previous studies and seeking to explain the sensitivity of those results to alternative measures of

the household tax rate. A second critical need is for estimates of the potential behavioral response

by state and local governments if tax exemption were eliminated or restricted. Our revenue

estimates assume that the stock of tax-exempt bonds does not change when the income tax rules

governing tax exemption are modified. This is unlikely; Gordon and Slemrod (1983, 1985) and

Gordon and Metcalf (1991), among others, emphasize that some shift toward tax finance would be

likely if tax exemption were eliminated. Their analysis focuses on the choice between borrowing

through a state or local government, or borrowing on personal account and financing public

spending with taxes. The choice between borrowing options is affected by the tax-exemption rules

as well as other parameters of the tax code. Recognizing the potential changes in borrowing by

states and localities could affect the equilibrium interest rate on their bonds, as well as the other

deductions claimed by households who pay property taxes and state income taxes.

        We have stopped short of exploring many interesting issues related to the current tax

exemption. For example, we do not consider whether the tax exclusion for interest payments by

state and local governments is a cost-effective policy for supporting these governments. Addressing

this issue requires resolving the extent to which the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt

bonds is attributable to risk differentials, and the extent to which it is due to the fiscal subsidy.

Several decades of active research notwithstanding, this is still an open issue on which progress is

likely to require insights from both public finance and financial economics. We have also avoided

any analysis of the holdings of tax-exempt bonds by corporations, and their potential response to a

change in tax rules. Because corporate holders of tax-exempt bonds may be engaged in a range of

complex financing transactions, described for example in Erikson, Goolsbee and Maydew (2003),
                                                 24

tracking the range of potential responses to a tax change may be even more difficult for this group

than for households.
                                              25

                                           References

Auerbach, Alan J., and Mervyn King. 1983. “Taxation, Portfolio Choice and Debt-equity Ratios: A

       General Equilibrium Model”. Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 588-609.

Bakija, Jon. 2000. “The Effect of Taxes on Portfolio Choice: Evidence from Panel Data Spanning

       the Tax Reform Act of 1986.” Mimeo, Williams College Department of Economics.

Chalmers, John M.R. 2006. “Systematic Risk and the Muni Puzzle,” National Tax Journal 59, 833-

       848.

Erickson, Merle, Austan Goolsbee, and Edward Maydew. 2003. “How Prevalent is Tax Arbitrage?

       Evidence from the Market for Municipal Bonds.” National Tax Journal 56, 259-70.

Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 2008. Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Flows

       and Outstandings, Fourth Quarter 2007. (Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the

       Federal Reserve System).

Feenberg, Daniel, and Elisabeth Coutts, 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM model”. Journal of

       Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1), 189-194.

Feenberg, Daniel and James M. Poterba. 1991. “Which Households Own Municipal Bonds?

       Evidence from Tax Returns,” National Tax Journal, 44, 93-103.

Galper, Harvey and Eric Toder, 1981, “Modeling Revenue and Allocation Effects of the Use of

       Tax-Exempt Bonds for Private Purposes,” in George G. Kaufman, ed., Efficiency in the

       Municipal Bond Market: The Use of Tax-Exempt Bonds for Private Purposes (Greenwich,

       Connecticut, JAI Press).

Gervais, Martin and Manish Pandey, 2008, “Who Cares About Mortgage Interest Deductibility?,”

       Canadian Public Policy. 34, 1-24.
                                                26

Gordon, Roger H. and Gilbert E. Metcalf. 1991. “Do tax-exempt bonds really subsidize municipal

       capital?” National Tax Journal, 44(4), 71-79.

Gordon, Roger H. and Joel Slemrod. 1983. “A General Equilibrium Simulation Study of Subsidies

       to Municipal Expenditures”. The Journal of Finance, 38, 585-594.

Gordon, Roger H. and Joel Slemrod, 1986, “An Empirical Examination of Municipal Financial

       Policy,” in H. Rosen, ed., Studies in State and Local Public Finance (Chicago: University of

       Chicago Press), 53-78.

Green, Richard C. 1993. “A Simple Model of the Taxable and Tax-Exempt Yield Curves,” Review

       of Financial Studies 6, 233-264.

Moore, Kevin B. 2004. “The Effects of the 1986 and 1993 Tax Reforms on Self-Employment”.

       Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2004-5.

Morningstar. 2007. 2006 Ibboston Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation Classic Yearbook (Chicago:

       Morningstar, Inc.)

Poterba, James M. and Andrew A. Samwick. 2003. “Taxation and Household Portfolio

       Composition: Evidence from Tax Reforms in the 1980s and 1990s”. Journal of Public

       Economics, 87(1), 5-39.

Poterba, James M. 1986. "Explaining the Yield Spread Between Taxable and Tax-Exempt Bonds:

       The Role of Expected Future Tax Policy," in H. Rosen, ed., Studies in State and Local

       Public Finance (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 5-49.

Scholz, J. Karl. 1994. “Tax Progressivity and Household Portfolios: Descriptive Evidence from

       the Surveys of Consumer Finances,” in J. Slemrod, ed., Tax Progressivity and Income

       Inequality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 219-267.
                                                27

Slemrod, Joel. 1983. “A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous Financial

       Behavior,” in M. Feldstein, ed., Behavioral Simulation in Tax Policy Analysis (Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press), 427-454.

Toder, Eric and Thomas Neubig. 1985. “Revenue Cost Estimates of Tax Expenditures: The Case f

       Tax-Exempt Bonds,” National Tax Journal 38, 395-414.

United States Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation. 2006. Estimates of Federal Tax

       Expenditures for Fiscal Years 2006-2010. (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office).

United States Internal Revenue Service. 2005. Statistics of Income – 2003 Individual Income Tax

       Returns. (Washington: Internal Revenue Service).

United States Treasury Department. 2006. Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the United States

       Government, Fiscal Year 2007. (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office).
                                                                                                                      -150
                                                                                                                             -100
                                                                                                                                    -50
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                                   100




                                                                                                         01/01/2008
                                                                                                         08/01/2008
                                                                                                         15/01/2008
                                                                                                         22/01/2008




                                                                                               1y AAA
                                                                                                         29/01/2008
                                                                                                         05/02/2008
                                                                                                         12/02/2008
                                                                                                         19/02/2008




                                                                                               1y AA+
                                                                                                         26/02/2008
                                                                                                         04/03/2008
                                                                                                                                                         28




                                                                                                         11/03/2008
                                                                                                         18/03/2008




Months of 2008, Various Maturities and Credit Ratings
                                                                                                         25/03/2008

                                                                                               1y A+
                                                                                                         01/04/2008
                                                                                                         08/04/2008
                                                                                                         15/04/2008
                                                                                                         22/04/2008
                                                                                                         29/04/2008
                                                                                               10y AAA




                                                                                                         06/05/2008
                                                                                                         13/05/2008
                                                                                                         20/05/2008
                                                                                                         27/05/2008
                                                                                               30y AAA




                                                                                                         03/06/2008
                                                                                                         10/06/2008
Figure 1: Yield Spreads (in Basis Points) Between Tax-Exempt and Treasury Bonds in First Six
                                                               29




  Table 1: Implicit Tax Rates on Prime-Grade Municipal Bonds Relative to Taxable
                      Treasury and Corporate Bonds, 1991-2007
                                 Yields                               Spreads                     Implicit tax rates
                                                             Treasury – Corporate –
Year       Munis             Treasury        Corporate         Muni          Muni            Treasuries     Corporates
1991       6.02%              8.17%           8.39%            2.14%         2.4%             35.59%         39.2%
1992        5.58               7.25            7.43             1.68           1.8             30.03          33.2
1993        4.74               6.19            6.32             1.45           1.6             30.62          33.2
1994        5.28               7.21            7.49             1.93           2.2             36.47          41.8
1995        5.04               6.71            6.97             1.67           1.9             33.01          38.2
1996        4.92               6.55            6.82             1.63           1.9             33.24          38.7
1997        4.75               6.48            6.73             1.73           2.0             36.40          41.7
1998        4.31               5.49            5.83             1.17           1.5             27.17          35.2
1999        4.62               6.00            6.46             1.39           1.8             29.99          39.8
2000        4.97               6.25            7.14             1.28           2.2             25.85          43.8
2001        4.28               5.23            6.00             0.95           1.7             22.22          40.2
2002        4.05               4.91            5.57             0.86           1.5             21.24          37.3
2003        3.69               4.24            4.75             0.55           1.1             14.92          28.6
2004        3.66               4.45            4.91             0.78           1.2             21.32          34.0
2005        3.72               4.40            4.90             0.68           1.2             18.13          31.7
2006        3.93               4.88            5.51             0.96           1.6             24.34          40.4
2007        3.89               4.76            5.48             0.86          1.59             22.20          29.0
2008 (Jan-
Sep)        3.74                4.14            5.33            0.40            1.59           10.69           29.8
Average     4.51                5.74            6.22            1.23            1.71           26.30           36.4
Source: Authors’ calculations using data from Bloomberg



                      Table 2: Yield Spread (Basis Points) on AMT Bonds and
                                   Fully Tax Exempt Bonds, 2003
                                                                                  Maturity
                                                                       1 Year    10 Year       30 Year
                   Fully-Tax-Exempt Bonds:
                   Treasury vs Municipal AAA                           11.62      14.63         5.84
                   Corporate AAA vs Municipal AAA                      32.54      28.06         21.58
                   Corporate AA vs Municipal AA+/AA-                   44.36      30.56         25.71
                   Corporate A vs Municipal A+/A-                      37.17      28.46         25.56
                   Bonds with Interest Subject to AMT:
                   Treasury vs AMT AAA                                 -10.01     4.70          -1.35
                   Corporate AAA vs AMT AAA                             6.85      16.96         13.32
                   Corporate AA vs AMT AA-                             19.19      21.17         19.12
                   Corporate A vs AMT A+/A-                             17.90     22.38         20.37
                   Source: Authors' calculations using data from Bloomberg.
                                                        30




          Table 3: Ownership of Tax-Exempt and Taxable Bonds, 2004
                                                        Tax-exempt bonds          Taxable bonds
                                                      $ Billions Percentage $ Billions Percentage
Household sector                                         743         37       1,351          11
Money market mutual funds                                314         15        359            3
Mutual funds                                             294         14        772            6
Property-casualty insurance companies                    268         13        317            3
Commercial banking                                       141          7        671            5
Closed-end funds                                         89           4         74            1
Government-sponsored enterprises                         45           2        428            3
Brokers and dealers                                      32           2        208            2
Nonfinancial corporate business                          32           2         33            0
Rest of the world                                        26          1        3,875          32
Life insurance companies                                  30          1       1,847          15
Private pension funds                                     0           0        377            3
State and local govt. retirement funds                     2          0        365            3
State and local governments                               5           0        507            4
Monetary authority                                        0           0        718            6
Other                                                    11          0         341            0
Total assets                                            2,031       100      12,241         100
Notes: Data are drawn from the Flow of Funds, Tables L.209, L.211 and L.212. The outstanding value of tax-exempt
bonds was $2.031 trillion, while the outstanding stock of taxable bonds was $12.241 trillion. “Other” includes credit
unions, ABS issuers, REITs, nonfarm noncorporate business, saving institutions, federal government retirement funds,
exchange traded funds, and funding companies).
                                                                 31



    Table 4: Stock-Flow Inconsistency in Tax-Exempt Bond Holdings and Tax-Exempt
                      Interest, 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances
                                                Households                Observations            Financial Assets
                                           Millions Percentage        Thousands    Percentage   Trillions Percentage
Neither bonds nor interest                  106.7       95.2%           19.1         84.6%        10.0       57.6%
Bonds and interest                           2.1         1.8             2.1           9.3         4.8        27.3
No bonds but interest                        1.2         1.1             0.7           3.3         1.5        8.6
Bonds but no interest                        2.1         1.8             0.6           2.8         1.1        6.5
Total                                       112.1       100.0           22.6         100.0        17.4       100.0
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2004 SCF.




               Table 5: Distribution of Implied Interest Rates on Tax-Exempt Bond
               Holdings in 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances (Percentage Points)
                                                   Weighting Variable
                           Households Observations Financial Assets Tax-exempt bond holdings
           Minimum            0.0         0.0            0.0                  0.0
           10th percentile    1.8         1.6            1.7                  1.5
           25th percentile    3.2         2.7            2.5                  2.0
           Median              4.9        4.7            4.5                  3.7
           75th percentile    12.7        9.0            8.4                  5.4
           90th percentile    45.5       23.4           20.0                  8.4
           Maximum         320,000.0   320,000.0      320,000.0            320,000.0
           Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2004 SCF.




                 Table 6: Tax-exempt Bonds and Tax-exempt Interest by TAXSIM
                              Estimate of Federal Marginal Tax Rate
                                                     Tax-exempt bond holdings       Tax-exempt interest
             Federal MTR:                             $ Billions   Percentage      $ Billions   Percentage
             <0%                                          1.0         0.1%            0.0          0.0%
             0%                                          95.3           9.0           5.0           8.8
             0-10%                                       21.2           2.0           0.9           1.6
             10-15%                                      89.7           8.5           6.0          10.5
             15-25%                                     153.0          14.4           8.0          13.9
             25-30%                                     133.0          12.5           9.4          16.3
             30%+                                       562.0          53.0          28.1          48.9
             Total                                     1,060.0        100.0          57.5          100.0
             Source: Authors' calculations using the 2004 SCF.
                                                                                     0

      Table 7: Portfolio Holdings of Tax-exempt Bonds: Probit and Tobit Estimates Instrumenting for Last-Dollar MTRs
                                         Probit Models                                                               Tobit Models
Instrument Set:        "First-dollar" MTR        State average             “First-dollar"          “First-dollar" MTR        State average           “First-dollar"
                                                     MTR                      & State                                            MTR                    & State
                                                                           Average MTR                                                               Average MTR
                      2004               1998               1998               1998               2004              1998               1998              1998
Parameter         Coeff.   SE        Coeff.   SE        Coeff.   SE        Coeff     SE       Coeff    SE       Coeff    SE        Coeff    SE       Coeff     SE
Constant        -3.4168 0.8525 -6.9355 0.5758 -7.2275 1.1565 -6.9712 0.5924 0.3371 0.0133 0.3475 0.0131 0.2217 0.5305 0.3479 0.0132
MTR             -0.6716 0.6861 0.4697 0.5614 9.9768 38.408 0.4711 0.5611 -0.3403 0.2236 0.1139 0.1635 2.6404 10.566 0.1141 0.1634
Income (excluding capital income)
15-25             -0.0937   0.2203   -0.1181   0.1691   -1.3187   5.1073   -0.1181   0.1691 -0.0337 0.0689 -0.0348 0.0532 -0.3609 1.4345             -0.0348   0.0532
25-50             0.1838    0.1960   -0.1546   0.1541   -1.7012   6.1512   -0.1547   0.1541 0.0419 0.0610 -0.0236 0.0488 -0.4409 1.7173              -0.0236   0.0488
50-75             0.2200    0.2223    0.1043   0.1870   -1.9022   7.8898    0.1040   0.1869 0.0710 0.0689 0.0543 0.0576 -0.4896 2.2014               0.0542    0.0576
75-100            0.1875    0.2516    0.0990   0.2054   -2.1888   9.0554    0.0986   0.2052 0.0606 0.0785 0.0529 0.0653 -0.5639 2.5148               0.0528    0.0653
100-250           0.4493    0.2448    0.2311   0.2062   -2.4309   10.543   0.2306    0.2060 0.1566 0.0778 0.1044 0.0622 -0.6102 2.9171                0.1043   0.0622
250+              0.9662    0.2732    0.6630   0.2276   -2.5363   12.715   0.6624    0.2275 0.3258 0.0870 0.2538 0.0676 -0.6025 3.5121               0.2536    0.0675
Net worth
50-100            0.3328    0.3224   0.4759    0.2028   0.4138    0.3907   0.4758    0.2028   0.1353   0.1066   0.2032    0.0666   0.1819   0.1396   0.2032    0.0666
100-250           0.5429    0.2028   0.8319    0.1627   0.7117    0.5408   0.8317    0.1627   0.1845   0.0669   0.3142    0.0577   0.2798   0.1827   0.3142    0.0577
250-1000          0.9577    0.1731   0.8831    0.1601   0.6409    1.1188   0.8829    0.1601   0.3165   0.0564   0.3342    0.0536   0.2663   0.3386   0.3341    0.0536
1000+             1.3037    0.1493   1.2113    0.1257   0.9044    1.3451   1.2112    0.1257   0.4470   0.0496   0.4298    0.0430   0.3454   0.4089   0.4297    0.0431
Education
High Schl         0.0834    0.1996   0.0679    0.1594 -0.1523 1.0257 0.0680 0.1594            0.0323   0.0621   -0.0044   0.0501 -0.0597 0.2642 -0.0043 0.0501
Some Col          0.4157    0.1930   0.2683    0.1635 0.0904 0.8571 0.2685 0.1635             0.1429   0.0604   0.0712    0.0523 0.0329 0.1971 0.0713 0.0523
Col Deg           0.5387    0.1893   0.2880    0.1523 -0.0704 1.6320 0.2881 0.1523            0.1525   0.0602   0.0647    0.0476 -0.0198 0.4019 0.0647 0.0476
Post Col          0.6611    0.1904   0.5003    0.1592 0.1306 1.6740 0.5004 0.1592             0.1967   0.0596   0.1116    0.0503 0.0260 0.4097 0.1116 0.0503

Age 25-34       -0.7419 0.4449 4.7362 0.4453 4.7507 0.5829 4.7722 0.4421 -0.1910 0.1545 -0.0828 0.0493 -0.0428 0.2029 -0.0828 0.0493
35-44           -0.2918 0.3484 4.5585 0.4412 4.4790 0.9438 4.5946 0.4382 -0.0554 0.1167 -0.1615 0.0378 -0.1423 0.0944 -0.1615 0.0378
45-54           -0.1134 0.3439 4.5566 0.4368 4.4576 1.0039 4.5926 0.4350 -0.0139 0.1157 -0.1507 0.0329 -0.1344 0.0915 -0.1508 0.0329
55-64            0.0531 0.3459 4.6240 0.4361 4.4903 1.1242 4.6601 0.4344 0.0552 0.1166 -0.1325 0.0328 -0.1204 0.0779 -0.1325 0.0328
65+*             0.2187 0.3475 5.1264 0.4375 4.8736 1.6262 5.1624 0.4353                    na        na       na       na        na       na      na       na
Risk averse     -0.1527 0.0989 -0.2503 0.0993 -0.1015 0.6974 -0.2504 0.0993 -0.0216 0.0312 -0.0333 0.0334 -0.0005 0.1660 -0.0333 0.0334
Female           0.0251 0.1391 0.1611 0.1180 0.2635 0.5204 0.1610 0.1180 0.0058 0.0445 0.0438 0.0376 0.0722 0.1445 0.0437 0.0377
Married          0.0098 0.1082 -0.0367 0.1048 0.1405 0.6867 -0.0367 0.1048 -0.0111 0.0341 -0.0061 0.0323 0.0346 0.1560 -0.0061 0.0323
HH size          0.0366 0.0314 -0.0561 0.0317 0.0253 0.3699 -0.0561 0.0317 0.0101 0.0102 -0.0232 0.0102 0.0001 0.1115 -0.0232 0.0102
Observations      4,519             4,305              4,305             4,305            4,519              4,305              4,305            4,305
Robust standard errors in parentheses. All equations include industry and occupation indicator variables (except as noted), and weight all SCF observations
equally. STATA was not able to achieve convergence with and indicator for 65+.
                                                            33




 Table 8: Portfolio Composition of Households with and without Tax-Exempt Bonds
                                                                                    Households with tax-exempt
                                        Households without tax-exempt bonds                   bonds
Directly held equity                                   25%                                     29%
Equity in mutual funds                                  10                                      15
Tax deferred equity                                      8                                       5
Tax deferred bonds                                      15                                       8
Tax-exempt bonds                                         0                                      18
Taxable bonds                                            4                                       6
Interest bearing accounts                               24                                      9
Other financial assets                                  14                                      10
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2004 SCF.




     Table 9: Household Portfolio Holdings of Equity, Taxable Bonds, and Tax-Exempt
                         Bonds, Including Mutual Fund Holdings
                                                               Households                Financial assets
                                                                         Average                       Average
                                                                          Federal                      Federal
                                                                         Marginal    $                Marginal
                                                       Millions Percent Tax Rate Trillions Percent Tax Rate
   No holdings of equity, taxable bonds, or tax-
   exempt bonds (including mutual funds)                69.16     62%         11%        2.06      12%      19%
   Specialized in taxable bonds                          10.30      9          17         0.62       4       20
   Specialized in equity                                 18.59     17          19         5.41      31       22
   Specialized in tax-exempt bonds                       0.24      0           14         0.10       1       10
   Mixed (taxable bonds & equity)                        9.91      9           21         3.43      20       23
   Mixed (equity & tax-exempt bonds)                     1.46      1           21         1.67      10       24
   Mixed (taxable & tax-exempt bonds)                    0.13      0           12         0.05       0       21
   Holdings of all three asset classes                    2.31      2          24         4.07      23       25
   Total                                                112.11    100          14        17.42     100       23
   Source: Author's calculation using 2004 SCF.
                                                                      34



 Table 10: Structure of Household Portfolios, After Repealing Tax Exemption, Assuming
                            Various Portfolio Substitutions
                                                            Assumption About Portfolio Substitution
                                                     Taxable Bonds                   Equity Replaces
                                                      Replace Tax-                     Tax-Exempt
                                     Original        Exempt Bonds      Proportional      Bonds           Tax efficient
                                                             Share of Aggregate Household Portfolio
Directly held equity                   0.290             0.290            0.373           0.469             0.424
Equity in mutual funds                 0.149             0.149            0.175           0.150             0.149
Tax deferred equity                    0.045             0.045            0.046           0.045             0.045
Tax deferred bonds                     0.085             0.085            0.087           0.085             0.085
Tax-exempt bonds                       0.180               0                0               0                 0
Taxable bonds                          0.060             0.239            0.078           0.060             0.105
Interest bearing accounts              0.088             0.088            0.114           0.088             0.088
Other financial assets                 0.104             0.104            0.126           0.104             0.104
                                                     Average Portfolio Share (Households Weighted Equally)
Directly held equity                   0.167             0.167            0.193           0.316             0.258
Equity in mutual funds                 0.202             0.202            0.237           0.202             0.202
Tax deferred equity                    0.062             0.062            0.062           0.062             0.062
Tax deferred bonds                     0.117             0.117            0.117           0.117             0.117
Tax-exempt bonds                       0.149               0                0               0                 0
Taxable bonds                          0.043             0.192            0.051           0.043             0.102
Interest bearing accounts              0.151             0.151            0.191           0.151             0.151
Other financial assets                 0.109             0.109            0.122           0.109             0.109
Source: Author's calculation using 2004 SCF, Internet TAXSIM and Kevin B. Moore's Code.
In Column 2, investors substitute taxable bonds for tax-exempt bonds. In Column 3, investors replace tax-exempt bonds with all other assets in
proportion to the initial holdings of those other assets in their taxable portfolios. In Column 4, taxable equity replaces tax-exempt bonds. In
Column 5, tax exempt bonds are replaced with equity or taxable bonds depending on each investor’s first-dollar marginal tax rate on capital
income.
                                                                   35




   Table 11: Revenue Cost and Distributional Effects of Eliminating Tax Exemption
                 Under Different Portfolio Substitution Assumptions
                                                     Estimated          Percentage of Tax Increase Allocated to Households
                                                      Revenue                       in Different Income Groups
Portfolio Substitution Assumption                    Effect ($B)        0-40 K 40-75 K 75-125 K 125-250 K 250+
Taxable bonds                                           14.20             0.4        2.8         3.4        11.5      81.7
Proportional                                             7.91             0.4        3.8         2.2        12.6      81.0
Equity                                                  10.10             0.4        2.9         3.3        12.5      80.5
Tax efficient                                           10.90             0.4        3.1         3.3        12.6      80.3


Source: Authors' calculations using 2004 SCF, Internet TAXSIM and Kevin B. Moore's Code. See Table 11 for further details. .
Taxable bonds: substitute tax-exempt bonds with taxable bonds in investor's portfolio. Proportional: substitute tax-exempt bonds with a
portfolio of assets (excluding tax deferred accounts) that is proportional to each investor's original portfolio. Equity: substitute tax-
exempt bonds with direclty held equity. Tax efficient: substitute tax exempt bonds with equity or taxable bonds depending on each
investor marginal tax rate on the first dollar of capital income. Households with income between 125-250K paid 22.9% of federal
income tax liabilities in 2003, and those in the 250K+ category paid 42.9% income taxes.




         Table 12: Increase in Federal Income Tax Liabilities From Repeal of Tax
                Exemption, Stratifying Households by Household Income
        Portfolio Substitution                                        Income level
        Assumption                          0-40 K       40-75 K 75-125 K 125-250 K       250+     Total
                                                                Mean for All Households
        Taxable bonds                          1         13          25         178       4,176     127
        Proportional                           1         10          9          108       2,300     71
        Equity                                 1          9         17          137       2,919     90
        Tax efficient                           1        11          19         148       3,141      97
                                                 Mean for All Households with Tax-Exempt Bond Holdings
        Taxable bonds                         144       366         536        1,798     14,146    3,434
        Proportional                          81        274         203        1,089      7,791    1,912
        Equity                                105       264         366        1,386      9,887    2,429
        Tax efficient                         127       309         396        1,499     10,639    2,624
                                               Median for All Households with Tax-Exempt Bond Holdings
        Taxable bonds                         27        108         225         315       3,147     243
        Proportional                           8         38         54          179       1,288     81
        Equity                                18         68         182         235       2,164     189
        Tax efficient                          27       108         182         235       2,164     225

        Source: Authors' calculations using 2004 SCF, Internet TAXSIM and Kevin B. Moore's Code. See Table 11 for details
        of substitution assumptions. Taxable bonds: substitute tax-exempt bonds with taxable bonds in investor's portfolio.
        Proportional: substitute tax-exempt bonds with a portfolio of assets (excluding tax deferred accounts) that is
        proportional to each investor's original portfolio. Equity: substitute tax-exempt bonds with directly held equity. Tax
        efficient: substitute tax exempt bonds with equity or taxable bonds depending on each investor marginal tax rate on the
        first dollar of capital income.
                                                          36




              Table 13: Distribution of Ratio of Tax-Exempt Interest to AGI
                                               Holdings of Tax Exempt         Household-weighted Marginal
                                                         Bonds               Tax Rate on Interest Income for
                                              $ Billions   Share of total      Households with this Ratio
0%                                               107           10.2%                     14.5%
0 - 10%                                          313            29.7                      25.3
10 - 30%                                         241            22.8                      24.3
30 - 50%                                         127            12.0                      16.9
50 - 100%                                        124            11.7                      12.0
100% +                                           144            13.6                      12.2
Total                                           1,056          100.0                      14.8
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2004 SCF.




           Table 14: Distribution of Amount of Tax-Exempt Interest Received
                                               Holdings of Tax Exempt
                                                         bonds                Household-weighted Marginal
                                              $ Billions    Share of total    Tax Rate on Interest Income
$0                                               100            9.5%                      14.5
0 - 10K                                          130            12.3                      23.5
10 - 50K                                         160            15.1                      24.8
50 - 100K                                        251            23.7                      26.5
100 - 250K                                       135            12.8                      28.7
250 - 500K                                       121            11.5                      31.8
500K - 1M                                        101             9.6                      22.3
1M +                                              58             5.5                      29.9
Total                                           1,056          100.00                     14.8
Source: Authors’ calculations using the 2004 SCF.




                      Table 15: Revenue Effects ($ billion) of Limiting Tax
                                         Exemption
                Substitution Assumption:
                                                    Limit to 10% of AGI      Limit to 10K
                Taxable Bond Substitution                   5.45                  9.79
                Equity Substitution                         3.84                  6.87
                                                    Limit to 20% of AGI      Limit to 50K
                Taxable Bond Substitution                   2.38                  6.21
                Equity Substitution                         1.66                  4.30
                                                    Limit to 30% of AGI      Limit to 100K
                Taxable Bond Substitution                   1.36                  3.92
                Equity Substitution                         0.91                  2.66
                Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF, Internet TAXSIM and
                Moore’s Code. See Table 11 for further details and explanation of
                substitution assumptions.
