NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE BUSINESS CYCLES SYMMETRIC?

J.

Bradford DeLong

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. i)411J4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1981

We wish to thank the National Science Foundation for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NEER Working Paper #1)4)4)4
September 198)4

Are Business Cycles Symmetric?

ABSTRACT

This note shows that contrary to widespread belief there is little

evidence that the business cycle is asymmetric. Using American data for the
pre— and post—war periods and data on five other major OECD nations for the
post—war period, we are unable to support the hypothesis that contractions

are shorter and sharper than expansions. We conclude that there is not much
basis for preferring some version of traditional cyclical techniques to more
modern statistical methods.

J. Bradford DeLong
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics
Harvard University

Cambridge, MA 02138

Cambridge, MA 02138

(61i) )495—2)4)47

(6i) 495—24)47

—1--

The dating of peaks and troughs and the concommitant emphasis on the
different qualitative mechanisms involved in cyclical expansions and contractions

have been major features of the NBER program on business cycle research.
Asymmetry between expansions and contractions has long been a focus of such
business cycle research. Thus Wesley Mitchell wrote in 1927, "the most violent
declines exceed the most considerable advances. . . . Business contractions appear

to be a briefer and more violent process than business expansions." Keynes wrote
in the General Theory that "the substitution of a downward for an upward tendency

often takes place suddenly and violently . . . no such sharp turning point occurs
when an upward is substituted for a downward tendency." Indeed, Neftci (1984)

states that "the claim that major economic time series are asymmetric over
different time phases of the business cycle arises in almost all major works on
business cycles."

In many respects the techniques of modern statistics and econometrics surely

supersede earlier methods of cyclical analysis. They make possible the application

of techniques of statistical estimation and inference. They remove the need for
judgment in data description. And they provide a rigorous basis for non-judgmental

forecasting. Yet, statistical models of the sort used in economics--whether built in

the structural spirit of the Cowles Commission or in the more modern time series

tradition--are entirely unable to capture cyclical asymmetries. If, as Keynes,

Mitchell, and others believed, cyclical asymmetries are of fundamental
importance, then standard statistical techniques are seriously deficient. Something

like traditional business cycle analysis may then be necessary to provide an
adequate empirical basis for theorizing about cyclical behavior.

Hence, the question of the magnitude of cyclical asymmetries seems to be of

substantial methodological importance. Yet, with the exception of the work of
Neftci (1984), it appears to have attracted relatively little attention. This paper

—2—

examines the extent of cyclical asymmetries using American data for the pre-war
and post-war periods and data on five other major OECD nations for the post-war

period. We find no evidence of asymmetry in the behavior of GNP or industrial
production. For the U.S. only, we find evidence of some asymmetry in the behavior

of unemployment. We conclude that asymmetry is probably not a phenomenon of

first order importance in understanding business cycles. It appears that there is

not much basis for preferring some version of traditional cyclical techniques of
analysis and forecasting to more modern statistical methods.
Section II of this note describes our methods and presents the results of our

analysis of GNP and industrial production. Section III follows Neftci (1984) in
considering unemployment. We note some methodological problems we have with
his analysis and then show that his conclusions about the behavior of unemployment
appear to be invalid outside the U.S. Section IV provides some brief conclusions.

—3—

II. Asymmetries in put?
The essence of the claims of Keynes and Mitchell quoted in the
previous

section was that economic downturns are brief and severe relative to trend, while

upturns are longer and more gradual. This hypothesis has a clear implication:
there should be significant skewness in a frequency distribution of periodic growth

rates of output. That is, the distribution should have significantly fewer than half
its observations below its mean; and the average deviation from the mean of the

observations below the mean should be significantly more than the average
deviation of the observations above the mean. The median output growth rate
should exceed the mean by a significant amount. Figure 1 depicts the predicted
frequency distribution of output growth under the null hypothesis of symmetry and
under the alternative hypothesis of Keynes and Mitchell.

Our procedure is simple: it is to calculate the coefficient of skewness of the

distribution of output growth rates for a variety of output measures and time
intervals. The coefficient of skewness is defined as the ratio of the third centered

moment to the cube of the standard deviation. For a symmetric distribution, the
coefficient of skewness is zero, and the mean equals the median.

Evaluation of the statistical significance of any measured deviations from
symmetry clearly requires an estimate of the sampling variability in our estimates
of skewness. Standard statistical works such as Kendall and Stuart (1969) note that

under the null hypothesis of zero skewness, the estimated skewness of a set of n
independent random normal observations is normally distributed with a standard

error of (6/n). Unfortunately, the observations on growth rates considered here
are highly serially correlated, and so tlìis formula is inapplicable. We therefore

used the following Monte Carlo procedure for each series and siimpIe period
considered.

First, a third-order autoregressive process was esthnated for

—4—

Figure

1

Standardized (Zero tean and Unit Variance) Distributions

with Zero and Unit keness, Respectively

0

00

0
0
C

00
c\J

C

00

Lc)

N;
C)

0
LI)

—5—

the time

series

of growth rates. It was then used to generate 300 artificial series

for the sample period under the assumption that the shocks to the autoregressive

process were normally distributed. The standard deviation of the estimated
skewness under the null hypothesis was then used calculated as the standard
deviation of the skewnesses of the artificially generated series.1

Table 1 presents some evidence on skewness in quarterly and annual growth

rates of U.S. GNP and industrial production for various sample periods. We use
industrial production as well as GNP because the latter contains a greater number

of imputed series, and because cyclicality is most apparent in the manufacturing

sector of the economy. Because quarterly data is complicated by the need for
seasonal adjustment and by high-frequency movements that might render existing
skewness undetectable, both annual and quarterly data are examined.

Very little evidence of significant asymmetries emerges. Before World War

II, quarterly GNP growth rates exhibit positive skewness, the opposite of that
implied by the hypotheses of Keynes and Mitchell. The failure of the steep 19291933 decline to dominate the interwar period is somewhat surprising. We expected

significant skewness to be most apparent around the Great Depression. Similar
conclusions are obtained with annual GNP data and with data on annual industrial

production for the pre-war period. Asymmetries do not appear to be substantial

enough to be important. The difference between the median and mean growth
rates reaches a maximum of .3% using quarterly data on industrial production for

the post-war period. This difference is only 2% of the inter-quartile range of the
distribution of quarterly growth rates: it is a very small number.

There is a little bit of evidence in favor of skewness in post-war data. All
the estimated skewnesses are negative, as predicted by Keynes and Mitchell. In

the case of annual GNP data, the estimated skewness approaches statistical
significance. However, no equivalent result is found with either quarterly GNP or

—6—

Table 1.

Skewness of U.S. GNP and Industrial Production Growth Rates

Annual Data

Quarterly Data

Standard

Variable Period
GNP
GNP
GNP
IP

1891—1915
1923—1940
1949—1983
1949—1983

Skewness Error

Standard

Skewness Error

—.47
—.70
—1.37

1.12

.55
.04

.74

—.33

.29
.42
.29

—.55

.68

—

.58

.40

.73

Data from Gordon (1982) and from the 1984 Business Conditions
Digest.

—7—

annual industrial production data.

Hence we are inclined to discount its

significance. It is of course possible that with longer time series significant
asymmetries would emerge—the estimate of skewness would become sharper. But

as Figure 2 reveals, the observed skewness does not appear to be substantively
important. The naked eye cannot easily judge the direction of asymmetry.

As a further check, Table 2 reports estimated skewnesses of quarterly GNP
and industrial production for other major OECD countries for the post-war period.
Skewness is noticeably negative for only two of the five countries--for only Canada

and lapan--using either industrial production or GNP data. There is no significant

evidence of asymmetry for any country. The only natural grouping suggested by
the data is a possible division into the U.S., Canada, and 3apan on the one hand and

the U.K., France, and West Germany on the other. But this possible difference
between "non-European" and "European" business cycles is not strongly enough

present in the data to give us any confidence that it is anything more than the
workings of chance.

How has the picture of recessions as short violent interruptions of the process

of economic growth emerged? Part of the answer lies in the way economic data
are frequently analyzed. Figures 3 and 4 depict the NBER reference cycles and

growth cycles of the post-war period. Using reference cycles, contractions are

definitely shorter than expansions, confirming the judgments of Keynes and
Mitchell. But this is a statistical artifact. The superposition of the business cycle
upon a trend of economic growth implies that only the most severe portions of the

declines relative to trend will appear as absolute declines and thus as reference

cycle contractions. Even a symmetric business cycle superimposed on a rising
trend would generate reference cycles for which the recessions would be short and

severe relative to trend, even though the growth cycles--the cycles in detrended
indices--would be symmetric. As this argument suggests, there is little difference

—8—

Figure 2
Histogram of Quarterly GNP Growth Rates
1949—1982

0
0
10

c'J

0
C
IC)

-4

IC)
C-

C.)

C
C
—4

—
(\J

cJ

O

0

—9—

Table 2
Skewness of Quarterly Changes in GNP
and Industrial Production
1950—1979

Country
U.S.
Japan

Canada
W. Germany
U.K.

France

md. Pdn.
Skéwnéss S.E.
—.61
—.66
-.52
—.01
.13
.27

GNP

Skewness S.E.

.42
.40
.39
.34

—.33
—.43
-.42
-.11

.29
.29

.35
.33

.6].

.27

—.03

.24

.30
.26

Data from the OECD Historical Statistics and from the
1984 Business Conditions Digest.

Figure 3
Deviation of U.S. GNP from its Natural Rate
NBER Reference—Cycle Recessions Shaded

OD
C)

IC)

C)

(0
(0
0)

':10
C)

-

—

C)

a

0

a) 0W -

—10—

0

Figure 4

Ôéviation of U.S. GNP from its Natural Rate
NBER Growth-Cycle Recessions Shaded

-------=------------.---.

-

-

. .—

• - .A.

.

;P.

:.

i:

N.

.___________________
-

- —w .I.
I

.

...

--—

——
.-——-—.

.

--

-.—.- ..

.. ..

..

-..

,.

—

-.

.

.-.. --..

.. . .

'44

..',

—.

—--- - :

.J

TT--:T: .i:

. r'- .

--

•-

--

2

2- -'-•-'-- - ---

D

-.

-

..:._.

-

--

.

-

.-..

..
D

LO

—

-..-

—11--

.-.

4._•_

,.

If)
I

0W 4J

0)

0

—12—

between the lengths of growth cycle expansions and contractions. The difference
in length between expansions and contractions for the nine growth cycles averaged

.9 quarters; the standard deviation of this estimate of the average is 1.4 quarters.2

By contrast, the average length of the seven reference cycle expansions was 11.4
quarters longer than the length of the subsequent contractions.3

We conclude from this investigation that once one takes proper account of
trend growth--either using our skewness-based approach or the traditional NBER

cycle-dating approach--little evidence of cyclical asymmetry in the behavior of
output remains. The impression to the contrary that we used to hold seems to
result from a failure to take account either impressionistically or quantitatively of

the effects of long-run economic growth. Few extant theories suggest that

business cycles should depend on the rate of underlying growth of either
productivity or population.4

The next section considers whether similar

conclusions are obtained using data on unemployment.

13—

III. Asymmetries in Unemployment?

Our conclusions so far contradict those of Neftci (1984), who examines the
behavior of the unemployment rate and finds evidence against the null of symmetry

at the .80 level.

Neftci's statistical procedure seems inappropriate to us:

eliminating the quantitative information in the data by reducing it to a series of l's
(unemployment increasing) and 0's (unemployment decreasing) cannot lead to a test

of maximum power.
Table 3 presents estimates of the skewness in detrended unemployment rates

for the U.S. and other major OECD countries for the post-war period. We examine
only the post-war data because earlier unemployment estimates are, in general, not

derived independently from output data.

For the U.S., we confirm Neftci's

conclusion. Indeed, we are able to reject the null hypothesis of symmetry at the

.95 level. Annual data suggest as much skewness as quarterly data, but the
skewness in annual data is not statistically significant.

None of the other OECD countries, however, have statistically significant
skewnesses in their detrended unemployment rates.5 This suggests that skewness

in the U.S. is either a statistical accident or a result of a peculiarity in the U.S.

labor market. Asymmetry in changes in unemployment rates is not a strong
general feature of business cycles.

We have briefly attempted to examine the reasons for asymmetry in
American unemployment rates. Skewness does not arise from the behavior of labor

force participation: labor force participation rates exhibit no noticeable skewness,

and skewness is present in detrended unemployment numbers as strongly as in
detrended unemployment rates. Moreover, quarterly changes in employment over
the 1949-1982 period exhibit a skewness coefficient of -1.90, significant at the .95
level. Skewness in employment and unemployment but not in GNP clearly indicates

a breakdown in Okun's law. In figure 5, inverted deviations of industrial production

—14—

Table 3

Skewness of Quarterly Changes in Unemployment Rates
1950—1979

Country
U.S.

Japan
Canada
W. Germany

Skewness
1.02
.40
.55

-.13

U.K.

.27

France

.14

Standard Error
.30
.28

.29
.27
.30
.33

Data from the 1984 Business Conditions Digest.

—15--

deviation of unemployment (solid) from trend (percentage points)
c••4

(n

'-4

0

m

—4

a)

c\j

>1

0

0)

E

a)

Vt,

.01

Lfl Qo
a)

4

.,-I

Co

0)

—4

Oc•i
'—I

('j
4)
U)

Vt,

(0

s-I

0)
U)

(0

0

QJ

(0

deviation of industrial production (dashed) from trend (percent)

—16—

from trend are plotted alongside the detrended unemployment rate. At business

cycle peaks—unemployment troughs—the unemployment rate lags behind output
measures. Output measures start to decline relative to trend before unemployment

starts to rise. There is a period of time, after the growth cycle peak and before

the reference cycle peak, during which output is falling relative to trend and
employment is still rising relative to trend. This discrepancy in timing appears only
near business cycle peaks. At business cycle troughs, the unemployment rate peaks
within one quarter of the trough of output measures.

The significant coefficient of skewness found in the U.S. unemployment rate

is apparently another manifestation of the "end of expansion" productivity effect

documented in Gordon (1979). According to Gordon, normal equations for raw

labor productivity go awry in the quarters after output reaches its maximum
relative to trend. The magnitude of this effect can be seen in Gordon's figure 1
(reprinted as figure 6). Output has begun to fall relative to trend; employment is

still rising relative to trend; and so raw labor productivity naturally declines
sharply. Firms are able to expand their work forces rapidly after business cycle

troughs in order to keep pace with rising aggregate demand. Why don't they
contract their work forces relative to trend after growth cycle peaks? We suspect
that there is an explanation related to the burgeoning literature on labor hoarding

(see Medoff and Fay (19S3) or Fair (1984), for example), but it is beyond our
competence to suggest here what the explanation might be.

Figure 6

Output per Hour in the Nonfarin Business Sector,
Actual and Predicted from Alternative Equations
1969:2—1979:3

*peak of real over potential output
Reprinted from Gordon (1979)

-17-

—18—

IV. Conclusion

Our investigation into the possible asymmetry of the business cycle has, in

our estimation, failed to turn up significant evidence that the econometric modelbuilding approach to business cycles is misguided. We could not find the skewness

coefficients that we had thought we would find; and we therefore conclude that it

is reasonable to, in a first approximation, model business cycles as symmetric

oscillations about a rising trend. GNP growth rates and industrial production
growth rates do not provide significant evidence of asymmetry. We therefore think
that the main advantage of the econometric model-building approach—the body of

statistical theory behind it--makes it the methodology of choice for analyzing
macroeconomic fluctuations.

Our results call into question at least one possible justification for using

reference cycles in studying macroeconomic fluctuations.

An alternative

justification for the reference-cycle approach stresses the commonality of the
patterns of comovements in variables across different business cycles. Blanchard

and Watson's paper in this volume challenges this proposition.

Studies of

macroeconomic fluctuations using the reference-cycle approach are the foundation

of empirical macroeconomics. But, given the availability of modern statistical
methods, there appears to be no scientific basis for the use of reference cycles in

either macroeconomic analysis or forecasting.

As yet, no phenomenon or

regularity has been adduced which can be studied using the reference-cycle
approach, but is inconsistent with the assumptions of standard time series methods.

Until such a demonstration is provided, there is little justification for the
continued use of reference cycles in studying or forecasting macroeconomic
fluctuations.

—19—

Notes

1.

We verified that the estimated skewnesses were approximately normally
distributed. Coefficients of kurtosis were less than ten percent away from

their value of three under the null hypothesis. Note that our test of
asymmetry is appropriate if output is stationary either when detrended or
when differenced. Our standard errors are calculated under the second
assumption, which is weakly supported by Nelson and Plosser (1982). Because
they include periods in their analysis like the Great Depression and World War

I! during which no one would expect the underlying rate of growth of the

economy to stay constant, it is hard to interpret how their warnings against
the practice of detrending apply to analyses that deal only with periods for
which one has good reason to suspect that the underlying growth of potential
output has been approximately constant.

For the U.S. industrial production index, estimated skewnesses for subperiods of the post-World War II period are very variable--more variable than

the stochastic errors calculated under the assumption of an AR(3) generating
process would suggest. Apparently, modelling the generating process as an
AR(3) does not capture all of the serial dependence in the series and leads to

estimated standard errors that are presumably too low.

Therefore the

standard errors reported in this paper are probably below their actual values.
2.

Assuming that each post-war business cycle is an independent draw from a

population characterized partly by the difference in length between the
expansion and the recession phase. Cycle dates are taken from Moore and
Zarnowitz's "The Development and Role of the National Bureau's Business
Cycle Chronologies." Note that, as Moore and Zarnowitz report, it was not
always the case that expansions were as a rule longer than contractions.

—20--

3.

With a standard error of the mean of 3.3 quarters. Excluding the highly
anomalous 1961-1970 reference cycle, the mean difference is 8.1 quarters
and its standard error is 1.8 quarters.

4.

But see Schumpeter (1939) for arguments that the cyclical variance of output

is itself positively related to the rate of long-run growth.
5.

Detrending European unemployment rates is not easy: there appears to have

been an enormous rise in structural unemployment rates all over Europe in

the last ten years. The results reported used a second degree polynomial to
detrend the data. The results were effectively unchanged when a third or a
fourth degree polynomial was used, or when a piecewise linear trend with a

breakpoint in 1973 was used. If the rise in unemployment is attributed

entirely to cyclical factors--if the skewness of raw changes is calculated-then changes in European unemployment rates since 1970 appear strongly
skew.

—21—

Bibliography

BURNS, Arthur F. and Wesley C. Mitchell (1946). Measuring Business Cycles.
New York: Columbia.

FAIR, Ray C. (1984). "Excess Labor and the Business Cycle." Cambridge: NBER
Working Paper 1292.
GORDON, Robert 1. (1979). "The 'End-of-Expansion' Phenomenon in Short-Run
Productivity Behavior." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 79:2.

______ (1982). "Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the U.S., 1890-1980."
3ournal of Political Economy 90:6.
KENDALL, Maurice and Alan Stuart (1969). The Advanced Theory of Statistics (3
vol. ed.). London: McGraw-Hill.
KEYNES, J. Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money. London: Macmillan.
MITCHELL, Wesley C. (1927). Business Cycles: The Problem and Its Setting.
New York: NBER.

MEDOFF, 3ames L. and ohn A. Fay (1983). "Labor and Output over the Business
Cycle: Some Direct Evidence." Cambridge: mimeo.
MOORE, Geoffrey, ed. (1961). Business Cycle Indicators. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NEETCI, Salih N. (1984). "Are Economic Time-Series Asymmetric Over the
Business-Cycle? 3ournal of Political Economy 92:21.
NELSON, C.R. and C.I. Plosser (1982). "Trends and Random Walks in
Macroeconomic Time Series." 3ournal of Monetary Economics 10:2.
SCHUMPETER, Joseph A. (1939). Business Cycles.

