NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POST-1500 POPULATION FLOWS AND THE LONG RUN DETERMINANTS OF
ECONOMIC GROWTH AND INEQUALITY
Louis Putterman
David N. Weil
Working Paper 14448
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14448

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We thank Charles Jones, Oded Galor and seminar participants at Brown University, the NBER Summer
Institute, the Stockholm School of Economics, The CEGE annual conference at the University of California
at Davis, and University College London for helpful comments. We also thank Federico Droller, Bryce
Millett, Momotazur Rahman, Isabel Tecu, Ishani Tewari, Yaheng Wang, and Joshua Wilde for valuable
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Louis Putterman and David N. Weil. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long Run Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality
Louis Putterman and David N. Weil
NBER Working Paper No. 14448
October 2008,Revised October 2009
JEL No. F22,N30,O40
ABSTRACT
We construct a matrix showing the share of the year 2000 population in every country that is descended
from people in different source countries in the year 1500. Using this matrix, we analyze how post-1500
migration has influenced the level of GDP per capita and within-country income inequality in the world
today. Indicators of early development such as early state history and the timing of transition to agriculture
have much better predictive power for current GDP when one looks at the ancestors of the people
who currently live in a country than when one considers the history on that country’s territory, without
adjusting for migration. Measures of the ethnic or linguistic heterogeneity of a country’s current population
do not predict income inequality as well as measures of the ethnic or linguistic heterogeneity of the
current population’s ancestors. An even better predictor of current inequality in a country is the variance
of early development history of the country’s inhabitants, with ethnic groups originating in regions
having longer histories of agriculture and organized states tending to be at the upper end of a country’s
income distribution. However, high within-country variance of early development also predicts higher
income per capita, holding constant the average level of early development.

Louis Putterman
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
Louis_Putterman@brown.edu
David N. Weil
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
david_weil@brown.edu

Economists studying income differences among countries in the world today have
been increasingly drawn to examine the influence of long-term historical factors. While
the theories underlying these analyses vary, the general finding is that things that were
happening 500 or more years ago matter for economic outcomes today. Hibbs and
Olsson (2004) and Olsson and Hibbs (2005), for example, find geographic factors that
predict the timing of the Neolithic revolution in a country also predict income and the
quality of institutions in 1997. Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2006, 2009) show that the
state of technology in a country 500, 1500, or even 3000 years ago has predictive power
for the level of output today. Bockstette, Chanda and Putterman (2002) find that an index
of the presence of state-level political institutions from year 1 to 1950 has positive
correlations, significant at the 1% level, with both 1995 income and 1960-95 income
growth. And Galor and Moav (2007) provide empirical evidence for a link from the
timing of the transition to agriculture to current variations in life expectancy.
Examining this sort of historical data immediately raises a problem, however: the
further back into the past one looks, the more the economic history of a given place tends
to diverge from the economic history of the people who currently live there. For
example, the territory that is now the United States was inhabited in 1500 largely by
hunting, fishing, and horticultural communities with pre-iron technology, organized into
relatively small, pre-state political units.1 By contrast, a large fraction of current U.S.
population is descended from people who in 1500 lived in settled agricultural societies
with advanced metallurgy, organized into large states. The example of the United States
also makes it clear that, because of migration, the long-historical background of the
people living in a given country can be quite heterogeneous. This observation, combined
with the finding that long-history of a country’s residents affects the average level of
income, naturally raises the question of whether heterogeneity in background of a
country’s residents is a determinant of income inequality within the country.
Previous attempts to deal with the impact of migration in modifying the influence
of long-term historical factors have been somewhat ad hoc. Hibbs and Olsson, for
example, acknowledge the need to account for the movement of peoples and their
technologies, but do so only by treating four non European countries (Australia, Canada,
New Zealand and the U.S.) as if they were in Europe. Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2006)
similarly add dummy variables to their regression model for countries with “major”
European migration (the four mentioned above) and “minor” European migration (mostly
in Latin America).2 In other cases, variables meant to measure other things may in fact
be proxying for migration. For example, the measure of the origin of a country’s legal
systems examined by La Porta et al. (1998) may be proxying for the origins of countries’
people. This is also true of Hall and Jones’s (1999) proportion speaking European
languages measure. The apparent effect of institutions that were either brought along by
European settlers or imposed by non-settling colonial powers, as found in Acemoglu,
1

Anthropologists subscribing to cultural evolutionary models speak of political institutions evolving from
the band to the tribe to the chiefdom and finally the state (see, for instance, Johnson & Earle, 1987). There
were no pre-Columbian states north of the Rio Grande, according to such schema.
2
Comin, Easterly, and Gong use this technique in their 2006 working paper. In the 2009 version of the
paper, they adjust for migration using Version 1.0 of our migration matrix.

2

Johnson, and Robinson (2001, 2002), may be proxying for population shifts themselves,
despite their attempt (discussed below) to control for the European-descended population
share.
In this paper we pursue the issue of migration’s role in shaping the current
economic landscape in a much more systematic fashion than previous literature. We
construct a matrix detailing the year-1500 origins of the current population of almost
every country in the world. (Throughout the paper, we use the term “migration” to refer
to any movement of population across current nation borders, although we are cognizant
that these movements included transport of slaves and forced relocation as well as
voluntary migration.) We then use this matrix as a tool to examine how early
development and the pattern of population movements across borders have impacted
current income and inequality.
The most thorough previous work along these lines is in the papers by Acemoglu,
Johnson, and Robinson (AJR) mentioned above, where they calculate the share of the
population that is of European descent for 1900 and 1975. There are a number of
conceptual and operational differences between our approach and theirs. Our estimates
break down ancestor populations much more finely than “European” and “nonEuropean.” This distinction is important both in the Americas, where there is great
variation in the fraction of the population descended from Amerindians vs. Africans, and
also in other regions, where important non-native populations are not descended from
Europeans (consider the large Chinese-descended populations in Singapore and Malaysia,
or Indian descendants in South Africa, Malaysia, and Fiji). Even when we use our matrix
to construct a measure of the European population fraction, there are considerable
differences between our data and AJR’s. They use as their measure of the European
population the fraction of people who are “white,” while we also include an estimate of
the fraction of European ancestors among mestizo populations. In Mexico, for example,
AJR estimate the European population in 1975 to be 15%, even though (in their data)
there is an additional 55% of the population that is mestizo. Our estimate of the
European share of ancestors for today’s Mexicans is 29%. The AJR estimates are
primarily based on data in McEvedy and Jones (1978), which sometimes apply to whole
regions, and occasionally involve extrapolation from as far in the past as 1800. Our data
are based on a broader selection of more recent sources, including genetic analyses,
encyclopedias, government reports, and compilations by religious groups, which are
summarized in Appendices A and B. The correlation between our measure of the
European fraction and the AJR measure is 0.89.3

3

The largest differences occur in the Americas. For example, for the five Central American
countries of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Panama, Costa Rica, and Honduras, AJR use a uniform value of 20%
European; our estimates range from 45% in Panama to 60% in Costa Rica. The largest outlier in the other
direction is Trinidad and Tobago, which they list as 40% European and is only 7% in our measure. Here
they seem to have erroneously counted all non-Africans as European, despite the presence of a large Asian
population.

3

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 1 describes the
construction of our migration matrix, and then uses the matrix to lay out some of the
important facts regarding the population movements that have reshaped genetic and
cultural landscapes in the world since 1500. We find that a significant minority of the
world’s countries have populations mainly descended from the people of other continents
and that these countries themselves are quite economically heterogeneous. In Section 2,
we apply our migration matrix to analyze the determinants of current income. Using
several measures of early development, we show that adjusting the data to reflect where
people’s ancestors came from improves the ability of measures of early social and
technological development to predict current levels of income. The positive effect of
ancestry-adjusted early development on current income is robust to the inclusion of a
variety of controls for geography, climate, and current language. We also examine the
effect on current income of heterogeneity in early development. We find that, holding
constant the average level of early development, heterogeneity in early development
raises current income, a finding that might indicate spillovers of growth-promoting traits
among national origin groups. In Section 3, we turn to the issue of inequality. We show
that heterogeneity in the early development of a country’s ancestors predicts current
income inequality and that this effect is robust to the inclusion of several other measures
of the heterogeneity of the current population. We also show that ethnic groups
originating in regions with higher levels of early development tend to be placed higher in
a recipient country’s income distribution. Section 4 concludes.

1. Large-scale population movements since 1500
We use the year 1500 as a rough starting point for the era of European
colonization of the other continents. It is well known that most contemporary residents
of countries such as Australia and the United States are not descendants of their
territory’s inhabitants circa 1500, but of people who arrived subsequently from Europe,
Africa, and other regions. But exactly what proportions of the ancestors of today’s
inhabitants of each country derive from what regions and from the territories of which
present-day countries has not been systematically studied. Accordingly, we examined a
wide array of secondary compilations to form the best available estimates of where the
ancestors of the long-term residents of today’s countries were living in 1500. Generally,
these estimates have to work back from information presented in terms of ethnic
groupings in modern populations. For example, sources roughly agree on the proportion
of Mexico’s population considered to be mestizo, that is having both Spanish and
indigenous ancestors, on the proportion having exclusively Spanish ancestors, on the
proportion exclusively indigenous, and on the proportion descended from migrants from
other countries. There is similar agreement about the proportion of Haitians descended
from African slaves, the proportion of people of (east) Indian origin in Guyana, the
proportion of “mixed” and “Asian” people in South Africa, and so on.
A crucial and challenging piece of our methodology is the attribution, with proper
weights, of mixed populations such as mestizos and mulattoes to their original source
countries. Saying, for example, that Mexican mestizos are descended from Spanish

4

immigrants and native Mexicans gives no information about the shares of these different
groups in that ancestry. Socially constructed descriptions of race and ethnicity may differ
from the mathematical contributions to individuals’ ancestry in which we are interested.
Contributions from particular groups may be suppressed, exaggerated, or simply
forgotten.
For these reasons, whenever possible we have used genetic evidence as the basis
for dividing the ancestry of modern mixed groups that account for large fractions of their
country’s population.4 The starting point for this analysis is differences in the frequency
with which different alleles (alternative DNA sequences at a fixed position on a
chromosome) appear in ancestor populations from different parts of the world.
Comparing the allele frequency in a modern population to the frequency in source
populations, one can derive an estimate of the percentage contribution of each source.
Early studies in this literature used blood group frequencies in modern populations to
estimate ancestry. More recent studies use allele frequencies for multiple genes. In
selecting among studies, we favored those based on larger samples with well-identified
source populations as well as those done in more recent years using modern techniques.5
The genetic studies we consulted were sometimes of specific groups (such as mestizos)
and sometimes of the population as a whole, unconditional on race or ethnicity. In the
former case, we applied the genetic evidence to divide up ancestry in the particular mixed
group, and multiplied by that group’s representation in the overall population.6
Examination of this genetic evidence produced a number of surprises regarding
the ancestry of new-world populations. For example, the usual historical narrative is that
many native populations in the Caribbean, such as the Arawak who occupied the island
of Hispaniola (present day Haiti and Dominican Republic), died out during the early
decades of colonial rule due to disease and the effects of enslavement. However, genetic
evidence suggests that of the ancestors of current residents of the Dominican Republic
alive in 1500, 3.6% were local Amerindians. In the case of Costa Rica, 86.5% of
residents describe themselves as being of Spanish origin, but genetic evidence
(unconditional on ethnicity or race) shows Costa Rican’s ancestry (apart from a small
Chinese minority) to be 61% Spanish, 30% Amerindian, and 9% African. A final
4

By “substantial,” we mean 30% or greater. In addition, we incorporated findings from genetic studies on
U.S. African-Americans and on Puerto Ricans and Costa Ricans of primarily Spanish descent, for whom
modern genetic studies indicate appreciable admixture (with Europeans and Amerindians, respectively)
since 1500.
5
We focus on autosomal DNA, which is not sex linked, in preference to information on either the Y
chromosome, indicating descent along the male line, or mitochondrial DNA, which indicates descent along
the female line. However, evidence from sex-linked genes can provide a useful check on our historical
understanding. For example, among many mixed populations in the Caribbean, Native American
characteristics are far more common in mitochondrial DNA than on Y chromosomes, indicating that native
men were largely unable to breed, while native women produced children with European and African men.
6
We used genetic evidence in our analyses of Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Cape Verde, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Puerto Rico,
United States, and Venezuela. We also searched for genetic data for other countries for which our
conventional sources list large mixed ancestry populations, but were unsuccessful in finding anything in the
cases of El Salvador, Honduras, and Panama. See section II.4 of the Main Appendix as well as the
individual country entries in the regional appendices for details.

5

example: the genetic data we examined show a significant contribution of Africans (10%)
to the ancestry of the mestizos who make up 60% of Mexico’s population.
In cases where genetic evidence on the ancestry of mixed groups was not
available, we relied on textual accounts and/or generalizations from countries with
similar histories for which genetic data were available. Genetic information can only
distinguish between broad ancestry groups, such as Africans, Native Americans, and
Europeans. Beyond this genetic information, other sources were brought to bear to help
in the decomposition of mixed categories. For example, we use an archive on the slave
trade to estimate the proportion of slaves in a given region who originated from parts of
Africa identifiable with certain present-day countries. We apply estimates of where the
world’s Ashkenazi Jews and Gypsies lived in 1500 to map people with these ethnic
identifications to specific countries of today. Similarly, in some countries such as the
United States and Canada, national censuses contain information on the breakdown by
specific country of ancestry.
Using these methods, we constructed a matrix of migration since 1500. The
matrix has 165 rows, each for a present-day country, and 172 columns (the same 165
countries plus seven other source countries with current populations of less than one half
million.) Its entries are the proportion of long-term residents’ ancestors estimated to have
lived in each source country in 1500. Each row sums to one. To give an example, the
row for Malaysia has five non-zero entries, corresponding to the five source countries for
the current Malaysian population: Malaysia (0.60), China (0.27), India (0.075),
Indonesia (0.04) and the Philippines (0.025). 7
The principal diagonal of the matrix provides a quick indication of differences in
the degree to which countries are now populated by the ancestors of their historical
populations. The diagonal entries for China and Ethiopia (with shares below half a
percent being ignored) are 1.0, while the corresponding entries for Jamaica, Haiti and
Mauritius are 0.0 and that of Fiji is close to 0.5. In some cases, the diagonal entry may
give a misleading impression without further analysis; for example, the diagonal entry for
Botswana is 0.31 because only 31% of Botswanans’ ancestors are estimated to have lived
in present-day Botswana in 1500, but another 67% were Africans who migrated to
Botswana from what is now neighboring South Africa in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Figures 1a and 1b are histograms of the proportion of countries and people,
respectively, falling into decile bands with respect to the proportion of the current
people’s ancestors residing in the same or an immediate neighboring country in 1500.8
The figures show bimodal distributions, with 9.7% of countries having 0 to 10%
indigenous or near-indigenous ancestry and 70.3% of countries having 90 to 100% such
7

The entire matrix and all appendices can be downloaded at
http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Louis_Putterman/ . Appendix A to this paper briefly describes our
sources and methods. Appendix B provides further details, including summaries of the factors behind the
estimate for each row.
8
We define immediate neighbor as sharing a land boundary or being separated by less than 24 miles of
water. Data are from Correlates of War Project (2000).

6

ancestry. Altogether, 80.9% of the world’s people (excluding those in the smallest
countries, which are not covered) live in countries that are more than 90% indigenous in
population, while 10.0% live in countries that are less than 30% indigenous, with the rest
(dominated by Central America, the Andes, and Malaysia) falling in between.
The compositions of non-indigenous populations are also of interest. The
populations of Australia, New Zealand and Canada are overwhelmingly of European
origin, while Central American and Andean countries have both large Amerindian and
substantial European-descended populations, and Caribbean countries and Brazil have
substantial African-descended populations. Guyana, Fiji, Malaysia and Singapore are
among those countries with substantial minorities descended from South Asians, while
Malaysia and Singapore also have large Chinese-descended populations.9 We illustrate
differences both in the proportions of people of non-local descent and in the composition
of those people by means of Map 1. Country shading indicates the proportion of the
population not descended from residents of the same or immediate neighboring countries.
Pie charts, drawn for thirteen macro-regions, show the average proportions descended
from European migrants, from migrants (or slaves) from Africa, and from migrants from
other regions, as well as the proportion descended from people of the same region.10 In
terms of territory, about half the world’s land mass (excluding Greenland and Antarctica),
comprising almost all of Africa, Europe and Asia, is in countries with almost entirely
indigenous populations (shown in black), while about a third has less than 20%
indigenous inhabitants, and the remainder, dominated by Central America, the Andes and
Malaysia, falls somewhere in between. The heterogeneity of regions in the Americas and
Australia/New Zealand is highlighted by the pie charts, showing strong European
dominance in Australia/New Zealand, the U.S., Canada, and eastern South America,
stronger indigenous presence in the Andes, and strong African representation in the
Caribbean. We consider the effects of this heterogeneity in Section 3.
While we are mostly interested in using the migration matrix to better understand
the determinants of long-run economic performance in countries as presently populated,
the versatility of the data can be illustrated by using it to calculate the number of
descendants of populations that lived five centuries ago and to see how they’ve fared.
Given data on country populations in 2000, the matrix will tell the total number of people
9

The populations of Hong Kong and Taiwan are also overwhelmingly descended from Chinese who came
to their territories after 1500, giving those entities 97.1% and 98% ancestry from what is now China,
according to the matrix.
10
Regions were defined with the aim of keeping their number small enough for purposes of display and
grouping countries with similar population profiles. The Caribbean includes Cuba, Dominican Republic,
Haiti, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, and Trinidad and Tobago. Europe is inclusive of the Russian Republic. North
Africa, West and Central Asia includes all African and Asian countries bordering the Mediterranean,
including Turkey, the traditional Middle East, Afghanistan, and former Soviet republics in the Caucasus
and Central Asia. South Asia includes Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Nepal and Bhutan. East
Asia includes Mongolia, China, Hong Kong, North and South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan. Southeast Asia
includes the remainder of Asia plus New Guinea and Fiji. Note that for calculation of the pie chart shares,
ancestors are assumed to be from “the same region” if they are from countries in the regions as thus
indicated. This assumption means that Europeans are left out of the “European migrant” category of the
pie charts if they live in Europe, even if they’ve migrated within the continent, and likewise for subSaharan Africans in SSA.

7

today who are descended from each 1500 source country, and where on the globe they
are to be found. For instance, using 2000 population figures from Penn World Tables
6.2, we find that there were 32.9 million descendants of 1500’s Irish alive at the turn of
the millennium, of whom 11.3% lived in Ireland itself, 77.2% in the U.S., 5.0% in
Australia, and 4.1% in Canada.
Combining the information in the matrix with population data for the years 1500
and 2000 yields a number of interesting insights. Because population data for 1500 are
very noisy, particularly at the country level, we confine our analysis to looking at 11
large regions.11 The first two columns of Table 1 list the estimated population of each
region in 1500 and 2000. The third column shows the increase in total population over
the 500 year period. The primary determinant of this increase in density is the level of
economic development in 1500. Europe, East Asia, and South Asia, which were highly
developed, had the smallest increases in density. The U.S. and Canada, Australia and
New Zealand, and the Caribbean, which were relatively lightly populated, lacked urban
centers, and were still home to many pre-agricultural societies in 1500, had the largest
increases.12 The next four columns of the table use the matrix to track the relationship
between ancestor and descendant populations. In column 4, we calculate the number of
descendants per capita for each region in 1500, which can be thought of as a kind of
“genetic success” quotient. The lowest values of this measure are in the US and Canada
and Australia and New Zealand, where native populations were largely displaced by
European colonizers. Among the regions that were relatively developed in 1500, Europe,
not surprisingly, has the largest number of descendants per capita. The two regions with
the highest genetic success are sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia, which were both
relatively poor (and thus less densely populated) in 1500 but in which the native
population was hardly at all displaced by migrants. Column 5 calculates the fraction of
the current regional population that is descended from the region’s own 1500 ancestors.
This ranges from 0.03 for the US and Canada and Australia and New Zealand to almost
one for South Asia and East Asia. Column 6 shows the fraction of descendants of the
1500 population that still live in the same region. This is lowest in the Caribbean (38%),
Europe (54%), Mexico and Central America (85%) and sub-Saharan Africa (86%). The
last column of the table calculates the total number of people descended from a region
who live outside it. There were a total of 777 million such people in 2000, amounting to
12.8% of world population. Here Europe is by far the dominant contributor, with 578
million descendents living outside the region, followed by sub-Saharan Africa with 103
million and East Asia with 37 million.13

11

Data are from McEvedy and Jones (1978). The regions are the same as those in Map 1, except that the
three parts of South America are collapsed into a single region.
12
Estimates of pre-Columbian population in the Americas are highly controversial due to considerable
uncertainty about the death rates in epidemics that followed European contact. Since McEvedy and Jones’s
estimates fall toward the low end of some more recent appraisals, the resulting estimates of the increase in
population density since 1500 could be overstated.
13
It is worth reminding the reader that we calculate “descendents” by adding up fractions of individuals’
ancestry. Thus two individuals who each have half their ancestry from Europe add up to one descendent in
our usage.

8

2.

Reassessing the Effects of Early Economic Development

2.1

Measures of Early Development

In the introduction, we noted that studies including Hibbs and Olsson (2004,
2005), Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2006) and Chanda and Putterman (2006) find strong
correlations between measures of early agricultural, technological, or political
development and current levels of economic development, but that these studies make
relatively ad hoc adjustments, if any, to account for the large population movements on
which this paper focuses. The new migration matrix puts us in a position to remedy these
shortcomings and thereby put the theory that very early development persists in its effects
on economic outcomes to a more stringent test.
We use two measures of early development. The first is an index of state history
called statehist. The index takes into account whether what is now a country had present
a supra-tribal government, the geographic scope of that government, and whether that
government was indigenous or by an outside power. The version used by us, as in
Chanda and Putterman (2006, 2007), considers state history for the fifteen centuries to
1500, and discounts the past, reducing the weight on each half century before 1451-1500
by an additional 5%. Let sit be the state history variable in country i for the 50 year
period t. sit ranges between 0 and 50 by definition, being 0 if there was no supra-tribal
state, 50 if there was a home-based supra-tribal state covering most of the present-day
country’s territory, 25 if there was supra-tribal rule over that territory by a foreign power,
and taking values ranging from 15 (7.5) to 37.5 (18.75) for home- (foreign-) based states
covering between 10 and 50% of the present-day territory or when several small states
co-exist on that territory. statehist is computed by taking the discounted sum of the state
history variables over the thirty half centuries and normalizing it to be between 0 and 1
(by dividing it by the maximum achievable, i.e. the statehist value of a country that had
sit = 50 in each period). In a formula:
29

∑ (1.05)
statehist =

t =0
29

−t

∑ (1.05)

−t

s i ,t
50

t =0

For illustration, Ethiopia has the maximum value of 1, China’s statehist value is 0.906
(due to periods of political disunity), Egypt’s value is 0.760, Spain’s 0.562, Mexico’s
0.533, Senegal’s 0.398, and Canada, the U.S., Australia and New Guinea have statehist
values of 0.14
14

Bockstette et al. (2002) and Chanda and Putterman (2006) also use versions of statehist that include data
for the years between 1501 and 1950. The variable that we call statehist in this paper is the same as what
Chanda and Putterman (2006, 2007) call statehist1500. Details on the construction of the state history
index, and the data itself, can be found in Putterman (2004). Note that by beginning with 1 C.E., statehist
ignores some difference in the onset of state-level society, i.e. those between the most ancient states like
Mesopotamia and Egypt (third millennium, B.C.E.), and more recent ones like Rome and pre-Colombian
Mesoamerica (first millennium, B.C.E.).

9

Our second measure of early development, agyears, is the number of millennia
since a country transitioned from hunting and gathering to agriculture. Unlike a similar
measure used by Hibbs and Olsson, which had values for eight macro regions, these data
are based on individual country information augmented by extrapolation to fill gaps
within regions. The data were assembled by Putterman with Trainor (2006) by
consulting region- and country-specific as well as wider-ranging studies on the transition
to agriculture, such as MacNeish (1991) and Smith (1995). The variable agyears is
simply the number of years prior to 2000, in thousands, since a significant number of
people in an area within the country’s present borders are believed to have met most of
their food needs from cultivated foods. The highest value, 10.5, occurs for four Fertile
Crescent countries (Israel, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria) followed closely by Iraq and
Turkey (10), Iran (9.5), China (9) and India (8.5). Near the middle of the pack are
countries like Belarus (4.5), Ecuador (4), Ivory Coast (3.5) and Congo (3). At the
bottom are countries like Haiti and Jamaica (1) which received crop-growing immigrants
from the American mainland only a few hundred years before Columbus, New Zealand
(0.8), which obtained agriculture late in the Austronesian expansion, and Cape Verde
(0.5), Australia (0.4) and others in which agriculture arrived for the first time with
European colonists.15 It is worth noting that while statehist measures a stock of
experience with state-level organization that takes into account, for example, set-backs
like the disappearance, break-up, or annexation of an existing state by a neighboring
empire, agyears simply measures the time elapsed since agriculture’s founding in the
country, with no attempt to gauge temporal changes in the kind, intensity, or prevalence
of farming within the country’s territory.16
We examine each of these variables both in its original form and adjusted to
account for migration. Supposing the “early developmental advantages” proxied by
statehist and agyears to be something that migrants bring with them to their new country,
the adjusted variables measure the average level of such advantages in a present-day
country as the weighted average of statehist or agyears in the countries of ancestry, with
weights equal to population shares. For instance, ancestry-adjusted statehist for
Botswana is simply 0.312 times the statehist value for Botswana plus 0.673 times
statehist for South Africa (referring to the people in South Africa in 1500, not those there
presently) plus weights of 0.005 each times the statehist values of France, Germany and
the Netherlands (the ancestral homes of Botswana’s small Afrikaner population).
Algebraically, the “matrix adjusted” form of any variable is Xv, where X is the migration
matrix and v is the variable in its unadjusted form.
Figures 2 and 3 show the effect of this adjustment on the variables statehist and
agyears, respectively. The horizontal axis shows the variable in its unadjusted form and
the vertical axis shows the variable in its adjusted form. In the case of statehist the data
form a sort of check mark: there are a large number of countries along the 45 degree line,
where adjusted and unadjusted statehist are the same because there has been little or no in
15

For further description, see Putterman with Trainor (2006).
The difference is primarily due to data availability. Accounts of the histories of kingdoms, dynasties, and
empires are considerably easier to come by than are detailed agricultural histories.

16

10

migration. These range from China and Ethiopia, with very high levels of statehist,
down to eleven countries at or very near the origin, where there was no history of
organized states before 1500 and there has been insignificant migration of people from
countries that did have organized states in 1500. There are also a large number of
countries along the vertical axis, where a population that had zero statehist has been
replaced by migrants who have positive values. There is a great deal of dispersion in the
adjusted values of statehist in this group, however, reflecting different mixes of
immigrants (primarily European vs. African) and different degrees to which the native
population was displaced. Only a handful of countries do not fall into one of these two
categories.
In the case of agyears, as show in Figure 3, there are still a lot of countries along
the 45 degree line where there has been no in-migration. However, because almost all
countries had a history of agriculture prior to the spread of European colonialization after
1500, there is not the strong vertical element that is seen in Figure 2. In this sense,
agyears is clearly picking up a different and prior aspect of early development than is
statethist.17
2.2

The Effect of Early Development on Current National Income

Table 2 shows the results of regressing the log of year 2000 per capita income on
our early development measures. Each regression includes the unadjusted form of one
early development measure, the adjusted form, or both. Not surprisingly, given previous
work, the tests suggest significant predictive power for the unadjusted variables.
However, for both measures of early development, adjusting for migration produces a
very large increase in explanatory power. In the case of statehist, the R2 goes from .06 to
.22, while in the case of agyears it goes from .08 to .24. The coefficients on the measures
of early development are also much larger using the adjusted than the unadjusted values.
In the third and sixth columns of the table we run “horse race” regressions including both
the adjusted and unadjusted measures of early development. We find that the coefficients
on the adjusted measures retain their significance and become larger while the
coefficients on the unadjusted measures become negative and significant.
Before proceeding further we test the robustness of our finding to different
indicators of population flows, the addition of controls for geography, and alternative
measures of early development. In Table 3, we start by constructing measures of
statehist and agyears that are adjusted in the spirit of Hibbs and Olsson (2004, 2005) by
simply assigning to four “neo European” countries (the United States, Canada, New
Zealand, and Australia) the statehist and agyears values of the United Kingdom.18 As the
table shows, these adjusted versions perform better than the unadjusted ones, but not
nearly as well as the versions we construct using the migration matrix. When we run
17

Agriculture began in places like the Fertile Crescent, China and Mesoamerica millennia before states
arose there, and there are numerous present-day countries, e.g. in the Americas and Africa, on the territories
of which agriculture had arisen but states had not as of 1500.
18
Hibbs and Olsson actually assign these countries the values for the region treated as inheriting the
Mesopotamian agrarian tradition, which includes all of North Africa, the Middle East and Europe.

11

“horserace” regressions including statehist and agyears adjusted using both our matrix
and the “neo Europes” method (columns 2 and 4), the coefficients on the matrix-adjusted
measures rise in size and significance, while the coefficient on the “neo Europes”
adjusted measures become negative and significant.
We then construct a series of other measures from our matrix. The first is the
fraction of the population made up of “natives” (that is, people whose ancestors lived
there in 1500). We include this alongside our measures of adjusted statehist and agyears
in order to check that we are not just picking up the fact that there is a correlation
between the share of a population’s ancestors who lived elsewhere and the types of
countries they lived in. In a similar spirit we construct a measure of the fraction of the
descendants of each country’s people in 1500 who live in that country today, which we
call “retained population.” For example, only 40.2% of those descended from the 1500
population of what’s now the United Kingdom live there today, whereas 97.4% of Indian
descendants still live in India.19 Neither of these measures eliminates the statistical
significance of our adjusted history measures. Native is negative and significant,
showing that immigrant-populated countries are better off on average. Retained
population enters our regression with a negative sign and is marginally significant,
suggesting either that the venting of surplus population may have aided growth or that
characteristics that led to countries being able to implant their population abroad also led
them to be richer today.
Our third set of robustness checks examines whether our adjusted measures of
statehist and agyears are simply proxying for a large European population or for
speaking a European language. In columns 7-9 we include the fraction of the population
descended from 1500 inhabitants of European countries, a variable that we create using
the matrix. Not surprisingly, given that most of the world’s highest income countries
are either in Europe or mainly populated by persons of European descent, the European
descent variable comes in very significantly. By itself, it explains 46 percent of the
variance in the log of GDP per capita. However, even controlling for this variable, our
adjusted measures of state history and agriculture are quite significant. It is also worth
pointing out that in controlling for European descent rather than, say, Chinese or Indian
descent, we are implicitly taking advantage of ex-post knowledge about which of the
regions that were well developed in 1500 would have the wealthiest descendents today.
In columns 10-12, we include the fraction of the population speaking one of five
European languages (English, French, German, Spanish, and Italian), which is used by
Hall and Jones (1999) as an instrument for “social infrastructure.” This variable explains
only 20 percent of the variation in log of income per capita by itself, and has a negligible
effect on the magnitude and significance of our measures of early development.

19

Note that the migration matrix is a rather blunt tool to use for this sort of exercise, because (even with the
added population data) it doesn’t tell us how many people left the country in question but only how many
descendants they have today and where the descendants live. A small number of émigrés may have
produced a large number of descendants (for example, the French Canadians) or a large number of émigrés
may have produced relatively few (for example, African slaves shipped to the Caribbean).

12

In Table 4, we consider the effect of a series of measures of geography on the
statistical significance of our adjusted statehist and agyears variables, in order to make
sure that our measures of early development are not somehow proxying for physical
characteristics of the countries to which people moved. Specifically, we control for a
country’s absolute latitude, a dummy for being landlocked, a dummy for being in Eurasia
(defined as Europe, Asia, and North Africa), and a measure of the suitability of a country
for agriculture. This last variable, constructed by Hibbs and Olsson (2004), takes
discrete values between 0 (tropical dry) and 3 (Mediterranean). Taken one at a time,
each of these controls has a significant effect on log income, with the predictable sign.
However, none of them individually, or even all four taken together, eliminates the
statistical significance of matrix-adjusted statehist or agyears.
Our final check for robustness is to see whether our matrix-adjustment procedure
works similarly well on measures of early development other than statehist and agyears.
We consider four other measures of early development. The first two come from Hibbs
and Olsson (2005) and are meant to capture the conditions that favored the early
transition of a region to agriculture, as proposed by Diamond (1997). Geo Conditions is
the first principal component of climate (as measured above), latitude, the size of the
landmass on which a country is located, and a measure of a landmass’s East-West
orientation. Bio Conditions is the first principal component of the number of heavyseeded wild grasses and the number of large domesticable animals known to have existed
in a macro region in prehistory. The other two measures come from Comin, Easterly, and
Gong (2009), and measure the degree of technological sophistication in the years 1 and
1500 CE in the regions that correspond to modern countries.
In Table 5 we show univariate regressions in which the dependent variable is the
log of GDP per capita in 2000 and each measure of early development appears in either
its original form or adjusted using the migration matrix. The most notable finding of the
table is that, as expected, adjusting for migration substantially improves the predictive
power of any of the alternative measures of early development that we consider. In the
cases of the two Hibb-Olsson measures as well as the technology index for 1 CE, the Rsquared of the regression rises by roughly 15 percentage points. In the case of the
technology index for 1500, the R-squared rises by 34 percentage points.20
A second finding of Table 5 is that the migration-adjusted versions of three of the
variables we look at – bio conditions, geo conditions, and the technology index for 1500
– do a better job of predicting income today than the matrix adjusted version of statehist
and agyears. In the case of technology in 1500, this is not particularly surprising.
Statehist and agyears are meant to measure political and economic development in the
millennia before the great shuffling of population that is captured in the migration matrix
(for example, the average value of agyears is 4.7 millennia). The technology measure, by
contrast, measures development immediately prior to that shuffling, and so focuses on
information that is more likely to be predictive of current outcomes. By contrast, the fact
that the matrix-adjusted versions of geo conditions and bio conditions outperform the
similarly adjusted versions of agyears in predicting income today is more mysterious.
20

Comin, Easterly, and Gong (2009) perform a similar exercise using version 1.0 of our matrix.

13

The Hibbs and Olsson variables are designed to be a measure of the suitability of local
conditions to the emergence of agriculture. Hibbs and Olsson think that these variables
should predict the timing of the Neolithic revolution, and through that channel predict
income today. One would thus expect that a measure of when agriculture actually did
emerge, agyears, would have superior predictive power.21
Overall, the results in Tables 2-5 show that adjusting for migration improves the
predictive power of measures of early development, and that once migration is taken into
account, the ability of these historical measures to predict income today is surprisingly
high. This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that especially Europeans and to
some extent East and South Asians carried something with them – human capital, culture,
institutions, or something else – that raised the level of income in the Americas,
Australia, Malaysia, and elsewhere. The findings are also consistent with the possibility
that a corresponding disadvantage of Africans has played out in new homes such as
Jamaica and Haiti, although not ruling out the possibility that their arrival in these places
as slaves rather than as migrants may also have played a role.
By contrast, the findings of Tables 2-5 cast doubt on the idea that the same
favorable climactic conditions that led some regions to develop early are also responsible
for those regions enjoying an economic advantage today This can be seen in both the
superiority of migration-adjusted measures of early development to the unadjusted
versions of these measures, and also in the robustness of migration adjusted early
development measures to inclusion of measures of countries’ geographic characteristics.
As implied above, our preferred interpretation of these results is that they reflect a
causal link from migration of people from countries with higher levels of early
development to subsequent economic growth. It is nonetheless worth considering
whether the results might instead simply reflect, or at least be biased by, the endogeneity
of migration. Suppose that people from countries with earlier development ended up
migrating to places that were better in some respect (climate, institution, etc.), and that it
21

The superior predictive power of bio conditions results from the classification of the world into only
eight “macro regions” and, most importantly, the grouping of Europe and the Fertile Crescent into a single
region. This region, which stretches all the way from Sweden to Pakistan, has the highest values of bio
conditions. By contrast, our variable agyears has a value of 5.5 millennia for the United Kingdom and 10
millennia on average for the Fertile Crescent countries. By assigning to Europe, the region that was the
source of most rich country populations today, the high value of the Fertile Crescent, the Hibbs-Olsson
measure mechanically makes bio conditions an excellent predictor of income today, when adjusted by the
migration matrix. Another way to see this problem is to note that despite the fact that China had lower
values for bio conditions than does a Europe treated as part of a ‘greater Fertile Crescent’ macro region
(0.153 vs. 1.46, on a scale with a mean of zero and standard deviation of one), China developed agriculture
some three thousand years earlier than Europe. Thus the prediction of the Hibbs-Olsson story – that
biogeographic conditions should predict the timing of the Neolithic revolution, which in turn predicts
income today – is falsified by more location-specific Neolithic revolution timing. Similarly, the mapping
from geo conditions to the development of agriculture does not work nearly as well as the mapping from
geo conditions (in its matrix adjusted form) to current income. For example, within Europe, the region
with the highest values of geo conditions, the correlation between geo conditions and agyears is slightly
negative, driven by the strongly negative correlation between latitude and agyears.

14

was this aspect of quality rather than the presence of migrants from areas of early
development that ended up making these places wealthy. Some reassurance that this is
not all that is going on is provided by Tables 3 and 4. Controlling for aspects of the
quality of physical environment in destination countries, such as climate and latitude,
does not make the effect of early development go away. Similarly, if relative emptiness
of some countries both attracted a lot of migrants from early developing areas and also
made those countries wealthy, then this effect would be picked up by the variables native
in Table 4. Further, Engerman and Sokolof (2002) show that European migrants , when
they were able to choose where in the New World to migrate, were not attracted to those
regions which in the long run would achieve the highest levels of economic success. In
future work we hope to further address the issue of causality by looking more closely at
the timing of migration and changes in institutions and income. For now, however, we
continue to examine the link between early development of a population and the
subsequent income of their descendants, wherever they may live, with the strong
suspicion that this is causal.
Under the assumption that early development of a country’s population is causally
linked to current income, one would want to know the specific channel through which
this effect flows. For the most part, we consider this an issue for future research.
However, we cannot resist taking an initial look at one possibility. Recent literature has
stressed the role of institutions as a fundamental determinant of national income. One
could well imagine that whatever it was that immigrants with long histories of state
development took with them that led to higher income manifests itself in better
institutions. In Table 6, we look at the relationship between our statehist measure and
three indicators of institutional quality: executive constraints, expropriation risk, and
government effectiveness (all from Glaeser et al., 2004). In each case, the dependent
variable is normalized to have a standard deviation of one. Not surprisingly, using the
matrix to adjust statehist to reflect the experience of a country’s population greatly
improves the ability of this variable to predict the quality of institutions. Once matrix
adjusted, it is also statistically significant in all three cases. Similarly, the estimated
coefficient on statehist rises in each case moving from the unadjusted to the adjusted
measure. The coefficient in column (6), for example, implies that moving from statehist
of zero (for example, Rwanda) to statehist of one (Ethiopia), raises government
effectiveness by 1.32 standard deviations – roughly the difference between Bhutan or
Bahrain, on the one hand, and the United States, on the other. Of course this exercise
does not say anything about the path of causality from early development to high income
and good institutions. Early development could cause good institutions, which cause
high income; or early development could cause high income through some other channel,
and only affect institutions through income.
2.3 Source Region and Current Region Regressions
Although our interest in most of this paper is in how the migration matrix can be
used to map data on place-specific early development into a measure of early
development appropriate to a country’s current population, the matrix can also be used to
infer characteristics of the source countries based only on current data. More

15

specifically, if we assume that emigrants from a particular region share some
characteristics that affect the income of countries to which they have migrated, then we
can back out these characteristics by looking at data on current outcomes and migration
patterns.
To pursue this idea we regress log GDP per capita in 2000 on the fraction of the
current population that comes from each of the 11 regions defined previously for the
exercises of Table 1. We call the coefficients from this regression, shown in column (1)
of Table 7, “source region coefficients.” Loosely speaking, they measure how having a
country’s population composed of people from a particular region can be expected to
affect GDP per capita. For example, the source region coefficient for Europe is 2.35,
while that for sub-Saharan Africa is zero, since this is the omitted category. Thus these
coefficients say that moving 10% of a country’s population from European to African
origin would be expected to lower ln(GDP) by .235 points.22
The second column of Table 3 shows a more conventional regression of the log of
GDP per capita in the year 2000 on dummies for the region in which the country is
located (as in the first column, sub-Saharan Africa is the omitted region). We call these
“current region coefficients.” The R2 of the regression with current region dummies is
about .05 lower than the R2 of the regression with source region shares. It is also
interesting to compare the coefficients on the source and current regions. There is a
strong tendency for regions that are rich to also have large values for their source region
coefficients. For example, among the six source regions that account for 97% of the
world’s population (in size order: East Asia, South Asia, Europe, sub-Saharan Africa,
Southeast Asia, and North Africa/West and Central Asia) the magnitudes of the
coefficients are very similar, with the single exception of South Asia. This similarity of
coefficients in the two regressions is not much of a surprise, given the fact, discussed
above, that most countries are populated primarily by people whose ancestors lived in
that same country 500 years ago. In column (3) of Table 3, we regress log income in
2000 on both the source region and current region measures. The R2 is somewhat higher
than in the first two columns, indicating that source regions are not simply proxying for
current regions, or vice versa. F-tests easily reject the null hypotheses that either the
coefficients on source region or on current region are zero. Interestingly, the source
region coefficients on Europe and East Asia remain positive, while the current region
coefficients become negative, suggesting that having population from these regions,
rather than being located in them, is what tends to make countries rich.

2.4

Population Heterogeneity and Income Levels

22

There are three surprisingly high coefficients in this column: US and Canada, the Caribbean, and
Australia and New Zealand. In all three cases the explanation is that the source populations in question
contributed a small share of the population to only a few current countries. For example, descendants of
people living in the US and Canada as of 1500 contribute only 3.1% and 3.3% of the populations of those
two countries, and are found nowhere else in the world. Thus, because the US and Canada are wealthy, this
source population gets assigned a high coefficient in the regression. For this reason, we focus our attention
on source region coefficients for populations that account for larger population shares in more countries.

16

The exercises in Section 2.2 show that a higher average level of early
development in a country is robustly correlated with higher current income. The most
likely explanation for this finding is that people whose ancestors were living in countries
that developed earlier (in the sense of implementing agriculture or creating organized
states) brought with them some advantage—such as human capital, knowledge, culture,
or institutions—which raises the level of income in their country up until today.
Depending on what exact advantage is conferred by earlier development, there might also
be implications for how the variance of early development among a country’s
contributing populations would affect output. For example, if early development
conferred some cultural attribute that was good for growth, then in a population
containing some people with a long history of development and some with a short
history, this growth-promoting cultural trait might simply be transferred from the long
history group to the short history group. Similarly, growth-promoting institutions
brought along by people with a long history of development could be extended to benefit
people with short histories of development. An obvious model for such transfer is
language: in many parts of the world, descendents of people with short histories of
development speak languages that come from Europe, which has a long history of
development. If growth-promoting characteristics also transfer in this fashion, then a
country with half its population coming from areas with high statehist and half from areas
with low statehist might be richer than a country with the same average statehist but no
heterogeneity.
The above logic would tend to predict that, holding average history of early
development constant, a higher variance of early development would raise a country’s
level of income. However, there are channels that work in the opposite direction. As
will be shown below, higher variance of early development predicts higher inequality.
Inequality is often found to negatively impact growth (see, for example, Easterly 2007),
and one could easily imagine that the inequality generated by heterogeneity in early
development history would lead to the inefficient struggles over income redistribution or
the creation of growth-impeding institutions. This is certainly the flavor of the story told
by Sokoloff and Engermann (2000). Similarly, the ethnic diversity that comes along
with a population that is heterogeneous in its early development history could hinder the
creation of growth-promoting institutions.
To assess the effect of heterogeneity in early development, we create measures of
the weighted within-country standard deviations of statehist, agyears, and source region
coefficients, where the weights are the fractions of that source country’s descendants in
current population. The mean within-country standard deviation of statehist is .097, and
the standard deviation across countries is .089. For agyears the mean standard deviation
is .764, and the standard deviation across countries is .718. For the source region
coefficients, the values are .347 and .686, respectively. In all cases, the distribution of
the heterogeneity measures is skewed to the right, with a significant number of countries
(those which experienced no immigration) having values of zero.
In Table 8 we present regressions of the log of current income per capita on the
standard deviation of each of our three measures of early development (statehist, agyears,

17

and source region coefficients), with and without controls for the mean of each of the
variables. Once the mean level of statehist is controlled for, the standard deviation of
statehist has a positive and significant effect on current income. The same is true for
agyears. Interestingly, the coefficient on the standard deviation of the source region
coefficient is not significant at all once the mean of the source region coefficients is
included. Including these measures of standard deviation has little effect on the size or
significance of the coefficients on the means of statehist or agyears, as seen in Table 2.23
The positive coefficients on the standard deviations of statehist and agyears
imply, as discussed above, that a heterogeneous population will be better off than a
homogeneous population with the same average level of early development. For
example, using the coefficients in Column 2 of Table 8, a country with a population
composed of 50% people with a statehist of 0.4 and 50% with a statehist of 0.6 will be
20% richer than a homogenous country with statehist of 0.5. A country with 50% of the
population having statehist of 1.0 and 50% with statehist of zero would be twice as rich
as a homogenous country with the same average statehist. (This latter example is quite
outside the range of the data, however. The highest values of the standard deviation of
statehist in our data set are Fiji (0.346), Cape Verde (0.301) and Guyana (0.293). In the
example, the standard deviation is 0.5).
The coefficients also have the unpalatable property that a country’s predicted
income can sometimes be raised by replacing high statehist people with low statehist
people, since the decline in the average level of statehist will be more than balanced by
the increase in the standard deviation. For example, the coefficients just discussed imply
that combining populations with statehist of 1 and 0, the optimal mix is 86% statehist=1
and 14% statehist=0. A country with such a mix would be 41% richer than a country
with 100% of the population having a statehist of 1.24
We think that this somewhat counterintuitive finding may result from a particular
set of historical contingencies that make simple policy inferences problematic. First,
23

We also considered the possibility that the effect of heterogeneity in early development on current
income is non-linear. Ashraf and Galor (2008) argue that this is the case for genetic diversity: people with
different genetic backgrounds are complements in production of knowledge, but genetic diversity also
reduces social cohesion and hinders the transmission of human capital within and across generations. As a
result, there should be a hump-shaped relationship between genetic diversity and income. Ashraf and Galor
find evidence for this in cross country data. Proxying for genetic diversity with migratory distance from
East Africa, they find that the optimal level of genetic diversity occurs in East Asia. About three quarters
of the countries in the world have genetic diversity that is higher than optimal. We tested for a similar
effect by including the square of the standard deviation of the relevant early development in columns (2),
(4), and (6) of Table 8. In the cases of statehist and agyears, this new term entered insignificantly. In the
case of the source region coefficients, the coefficient on the square of the standard deviation was negative
and significant, implying a hump-shaped relationship. However, the peak of the hump was when the
standard deviation of the source region coefficients was equal to 2.95. Only two countries, the US and
Canada, had values that exceeded this level.

24

The specification that we use implies that this property must hold as long as the coefficients on both the
mean and standard deviation are positive. However, when we use variance on the right hand side, in which
case the property does not automatically hold, it is nonetheless implied by the estimates.

18

during the long era of European expansion spanning the 15th to early 20th centuries,
European-settled countries like the United States, Chile, Mexico and Brazil having
substantial African and/or Amerindian minorities attained considerably higher incomes
than many homogenously populated Asian countries with relatively long state histories,
including Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, Indonesia and China. Second, the latter
group of countries experienced little growth, or negative growth, during those same
centuries. Chanda and Putterman (2007) argue that the underperformance of the
populous Asian countries during the 1500 – 1960 period is an exception to the rule
(which they find to have held up to 1500 and again since 1960) that earlier development
of agriculture and states has been associated with faster economic development during
most of world history. While our regression result reflects the fact that population
heterogeneity has not detracted from economic development in the first group of
countries, it seems best not to infer from it that “catch up” by homogeneous Old World
countries would be speeded up by infusions of low statehist populations into existing
high statehist countries.

3.

Population Heterogeneity and Income Inequality

The finding that current income is influenced by the early development of a
country’s people, rather than of the place itself, provides evidence against some theories
of why early development is important, but leaves many others viable. Early
development may matter for income today because of the persistence of institutions
(among people, rather than places), because of cultural factors that migrants brought with
them, because of long-term persistence in human capital, or because of genetic factors
that are related to the amount of time since a population group began its transition to
agriculture.
Many of the theories that explain the importance of early development in
determining the level of income at the national level would also support the implication
that heterogeneity in the early development of a country’s population should raise the
level of income inequality. For example, if experience living in settled agricultural
societies conveys to individuals some cultural characteristics that are economically
advantageous in the context of an industrial society, and if these characteristics have a
high degree of persistence over generations, then a society in which individuals come
from heterogeneous backgrounds in terms their families’ economic history should ceteris
paribus be more unequal.
We pursue three different approaches to examining the determinants of withincountry income inequality. We begin by showing that heterogeneity in the historical
level of development of countries’ residents predicts the level of income inequality in a
cross-country regression. Second, we construct measures of population heterogeneity
based both on the current ethnic and linguistic groupings and on the ethnic and linguistic
differences among the sources of a country’s current population. We show that allowing
for these other measures of heterogeneity does not reduce the importance of
heterogeneity in historical development as a predictor of current inequality. Finally, we

19

pursue an implication of these findings by asking whether, within a country, people
originating from countries that had characteristics predictive of low national income are
in fact found to be lower in the income distribution.

3.1 Historical Determinants of Current Inequality
In this exercise our dependent variable is the gini coefficient 2000-2004 or in the
most recent decade using data from the UN World Income Inequality Database as
supplemented by Barro (2008). Our key right hand side variables are the weighted
within-country standard deviations of statehist, agyears, and source region coefficients,
as constructed in Section 2.4. We experiment with including as additional controls the
levels of these matrix-adjusted early development measures. The results are show in
Table 9.
Our finding is that heterogeneity in the early development experience of the
ancestors of a country’s population is significantly related to current inequality. To give
a feel for the size of the coefficients, we look at the case of agyears. The standard
deviation of agyears in Brazil is 1.976 millennia. By contrast, in countries which have
essentially no in-migration, such as Japan, the standard deviation is zero. Applying the
regression coefficient of .0571 from the fourth column of Table 9, this would say that
variation in early development in Brazil would be expected to raise the gini there by .11,
which is certainly an economically significant amount. Since Brazil’s gini was .57 and
Japan’s .25, the exercise suggests that about one third of the difference in inequality
between the two countries may be attributable to the difference in the heterogeneity of
their populations’ early development experiences.
The results in columns (5) and (6) for source region coefficients are similar in
flavor but somewhat smaller in magnitude. Taking the case of Brazil again, the variance
of the source region coefficient in that country is 0.888, reflecting a composition of
74.4% people from Europe (SRC of 2.53), 9.1% from South America (SRC of .498) and
15.7% from Africa (SRC of 0). The coefficient in the sixth column of Table 9 implies
that the difference in standard deviation of the source region coefficients between Brazil,
on the one hand, and a country like Japan where the standard deviation of source region
coefficients is zero, on the other, would be expected to raise the gini coefficient by .043 .
3.2 Other Measures of Heterogeneity
Our main finding in the last section was that heterogeneity of a country’s
population’s ancestors with respect to measures of early development contributes to
current income inequality. We now pursue the question of whether heterogeneity in the
background of migrants more generally may affect the level of income inequality in a
country. If this were the case, then in our previous findings heterogeneity of early
development might simply be proxying for more general heterogeneity. To address this
issue, we examine two standard measures of heterogeneity as well as two new measures

20

created using the matrix, and we compare the predictive power of these measures to each
other and to the measures that incorporate early development.
The theory implicit in this exercise is that a country made up of people who are
similar in terms of culture, language, religion, skin color, or similar attributes will ceteris
paribus have lower inequality. This could come about through a number of different
channels. Populations that are similar in the dimensions just listed may be more likely to
intermarry and mix socially than populations that are diverse. This mixing could by itself
reduce any inequality in the groups’ initial endowments, and would also likely be
associated with an absence of institutions that magnify ethnic, racial, or economic
distinctions. Countries in which people feel a strong sense of kinship with other citizens
might also be expected to more actively redistribute income or promote economic
mobility.
The first heterogeneity measure we use is ethnic fractionalization from Alesina et
al (2003). This is the probability that two randomly selected individuals will belong to
the same ethnic group. Alesina et al. find that higher ethnic fractionalization is robustly
correlated with poor government performance on a variety of dimensions.
We create a second measure of fractionalization using the data in the matrix,
which we call “historic fractionalization.” This is

1 − ∑ wi2 ,
i

where wi is the fraction of a country’s ancestors coming from country i. Unlike the ethnic
fractionalization index, the historic fractionalization index does not take into account
ethnic groups composed of people who came from several source countries, such as
African Americans, but instead differentiates among, for example, Ghanaian, Senegalese,
Angolan, and other ancestors of current residents of the United States. As Alesina et al.
point out, individual self-identification with ethnic groups can change as result of
economic, social or political forces. Thus ethnicity has a significant endogenous
component that is absent in the case of historical fractionalization.
Ethnic and historical fractionalization are almost uncorrelated (correlation
coefficient .15). In particular, a large number of African countries have values of ethnic
fractionalization near one but historical fractionalization near zero. The reason is that in
these countries there is fractionalization based on tribal affiliation that is unrelated to the
movement of people over current international borders over the last 500 years. There are
also several countries (Haiti, Jamaica, Argentina, Israel, the United States) that have a
high historic fractionalization because they contain immigrants from many different
countries, but a low level of ethnic fractionalization because immigrant groups from
similar countries are viewed has having a single ethnicity.
The third measure of heterogeneity we use is “cultural diversity” as constructed
by Fearon (2003). Fearon’s measure is similar in spirit to the ethnic heterogeneity

21

measure described above, but goes further in making an additional adjustment for
different degrees of dissimilarity (as measured by linguistic distance) among the ethnic
groups in a country’s population. Desmet, Ortuño-Ortín, and Weber (2009), using a
similar measure, find that higher linguistic heterogeneity predicts a lower degree of
government income redistribution.
Our final measure of heterogeneity is similar in approach to Fearon’s, but instead
of using the language that a country’s residents speak today, we use data on the languages
spoken in the countries inhabited by their ancestors in 1500, according to our matrix.
Differences in language may directly impede mixing of people from different source
countries. In addition, linguistic closeness may well be proxying for other dimensions of
culture (such as religion) that could have similar impacts on the degree of mixing among
a country’s constituent populations and/or the openness of institutions.25 For these
reasons, historical diversity in languages of a country’s ancestors may have an impact on
inequality that lasts long after the residents of a country have come to speak the same
language. We call the variable we create historical linguistic fractionalization (Our
methodology and data are described in Appendix C).
Table 10 presents regressions of income inequality, as measured by the gini
coefficient, on our various measures of heterogeneity. The first four columns compare
the four measures of heterogeneity described above. Cultural (linguistic) diversity is
statistically insignificant. By contrast, the two variables that use the matrix to measure
historical heterogeneity, historical fractionalization and historical linguistic
fractionalization, as well as ethnic fractionalization enter very significantly with the
expected positive sign. It is notable that in each case the measure of diversity based on
historic variation performs better than the corresponding measure based on the current
variation. For example, distance among the languages spoken by people’s ancestors
predicts inequalities today far better than does distance among the languages spoken by
those people themselves. In the case of variation in language, much of the superior
predictive power is driven by Latin America which in terms of language currently spoken
does not look very heterogeneous, but does look heterogeneous in terms of historic
languages. Patterns of social differentiation which arose during the encounters of people
from different continents appear to show persistence even after extensive intermixing and
linguistic homogenization. Part of the reason for this could be that linguistic distance
between ancestral populations posed barriers to transmission of technologies within
countries of a similar kind to those which Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) posit for genetic
distance in international diffusion of technology.
The next four columns of Table 10 repeat these regressions, controlling for the
mean and standard deviation of the state history measures, as in columns 1 and 2 of Table

25

Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009) use genetic distance, a measure of the time since two populations shared a
common ancestor, as an indicator of cultural similarity between countries. They argue that genetic distance
determines the ability of countries to learn from each other, and show that it predicts income gaps among
pairs of countries. Ethnic distance and genetic distance are closely related in practice, as shown by CavalliSforza and Cavalli-Sforza (1995).

22

9.26 The somewhat surprising finding here is that variation in terms of state history
dominates the other forms of heterogeneity that we examine. None of the other four
measures of heterogeneity is statistically significant. Variation in early development
among a country’s people is far more important than more standard forms of
heterogeneity (in language or ethnicity) as an explanation for inequality. Similarly,
variation in the linguistic background of a country’s ancestors, despite its surprising
predictive power relative to that of present languages spoken, is not important once one
controls for variation in early development.

3.3

Source Country Early Development as a Determinant of Relative Income

The results in Tables 9 and 10 show that heterogeneity in the historical
background of a country’s residents is correlated with income inequality today. A
number of mechanisms could produce such a correlation. One simple theory is that when
people with high and low statehist are mixed together, the high statehist people have
some advantage which leads them to percolate up to the top of the income distribution,
and then there is enough persistence that their descendants are still there hundreds of
years later. A second theory is that situations in which high and low statehist people are
mixed together tended to occur in cases of colonialization and/or slavery, and that in
these circumstances high statehist people were able to create institutions that led groups
at the top of the income distribution to remain there. We do not propose to test these
theories against each other. Instead we test an auxiliary prediction that follows from
either of them: specifically, in countries with a high standard deviation of statehist, it is
the ethnic groups that come from high statehist countries that tend to be at the top of the
income distribution. Confirming this prediction would give us additional confidence that
the link between the standard deviations of statehist and the current level of inequality is
not spurious.
To test this prediction, we looked for accounts of socio-economic heterogeneity
by country or region of ancestral origin in the ten countries in our sample having the
highest standard deviation of statehist. It is in countries where statehist is highly variable
where we would be most likely to find differences in outcomes among nationality groups
with different values of statehist. The countries are listed in Table 11. Not surprisingly,
all are former colonies, seven of them in the Americas. Of the latter, three are in Central
America, three in South America, and one in the Caribbean. We also list in Table 11 the
United States, which has the 17th highest standard deviation of statehist in the sample,
and is of particular interest due to its size, economic importance, and good data
availability.
For each country in the table we first show the breakdown of the population in
terms of origin countries or groups of similar countries, according to the matrix. We then
26

To save space, we don’t report parallel exercises using the standard deviation of agyears. In Section 3.3,
we also focus on statehist. Tables 2, 3, and 4 show that statehist and agyears have similar explanatory
power, and we accord slight priority to statehist because of its more nuanced tracking of 1500 years of
social history (see our discussion comparing the two measures in Section 2).

23

show the weighted average value of statehist for each origin country or group. The next
three columns are based on information about the current ethnic breakdown in the
country. Ethnic groups as currently identified sometimes correspond to individual origin
groups, but are often combinations, frequently labeled mestizos, mulatto, or creole. For
each current ethnic group, we then present estimates of average statehist and the relative
value of current income, listed as high, middle and low or high, upper middle, lower
middle, and low. To estimate statehist for a mixed ethnic group we use the assumptions
underlying the matrix that relate mixed groups to source populations. For example, the
group termed “colored” in South Africa is assumed to have half of its ancestors coming
in equal proportions from five European countries (England, Portugal, and Afrikaner
source countries Netherlands, France and Germany) and the other half in unequal
proportions from South Africa itself (35%), India (10%) and Indonesia (5%). These
assumptions are reported in the region appendices describing the construction of the
matrix.
Leaving details to Appendix D, we note immediately that the ordering of statehist
values and the ordering of socio-economic status in Table 11 has at least some
correspondence in every country. For nine of the eleven countries listed—Fiji, Cape
Verde, Guyana, Paraguay, Panama, South Africa, Brazil, El Salvador and Nicaragua —
the socio-economic ordering perfectly dovetails with that of statehist values. In two
countries—Trinidad and Tobago and the United States—there are discrepancies in the
orderings of Asians and “Whites,” with Chinese and (S. Asian) Indians having lower
incomes than Whites in the first country despite having higher statehist, while Asians in
general have higher incomes than Whites in the U.S. despite lower average statehist. For
the U.S., there is a further discrepancy in that “Black” Americans have lower average
incomes than American Indians and Alaska Natives, despite having somewhat higher
average statehist values. While no statistical significance should be attached to the
counts just mentioned, since the categorizations are quite broad and require some
judgments to be made, the general pattern clearly supports the expectation.
A few patterns are noteworthy. Paraguay and El Salvador are representative of
the many Latin American countries in which the main identifiable groupings, listed in
order of both socio-economic status and of average statehist, are European, mestizo, and
Amerindian. Three of the represented countries— Panama, Nicaragua and Brazil—add a
group of largely African descent to this tri-partite pattern. In each of the latter countries,
the White group remains on top and the Amerindian group on the bottom. The Black
group, with higher statehist than the Amerindians,27 is variously found on approximate
par with the mestizos (Nicaragua) or between the mestizo and Amerindian groups
(Panama). In fact in Brazil, mestizos, Blacks, and Amerindians are classified as low
since data that discriminates more carefully between them is unavailable.
In two of the other represented countries of the Americas—Guyana and Trinidad
and Tobago—there are substantial populations of South Asian origin. In Trinidad and
27

This is due to the existence of some states in Africa before 1500 but their absence in the Americas
outside of Mexico, Guatemala and the Andes. Note that the situation is reversed in some cases, for instance
the indigenous people of South Africa have a lower statehist value than do those of Mexico and Peru.

24

Tobago, the socio-economic positioning of this group is lower than predicted by their
average statehist. This result, contradicting our general hypothesis, may be related to the
economic hard times on which South Asia itself had fallen by the 19th Century
(mentioned in Section 2.4) and the manner in which millions were brought from that
region to the Caribbean to work in indentured servitude after Britain outlawed slavery.
Consistent with the expectations based on their homelands’ state histories, however,
people of South Asian ancestry occupy middle or upper-middle socio-economic positions
in Guyana and also in two of the three non-Americas examples, South Africa and Fiji.
Of the two African countries represented in Table 11, Cape Verde began as a
Portuguese plantation economy employing slaves brought from the African mainland. At
the time of the country’s independence from Portugal, in 1975, the society was described
as being stratified along color lines, with people of darker complexion usually found in
the lower class and people of lighter complexion constituting the “bourgeoisie” (Meintel,
1984; Lobban, 1995). The correlation between complexion and socioeconomic class is
consistent with our proposed explanation of the correlation between standard deviation of
statehist and the gini coefficient seen in Tables 9 and 10. In South Africa, the major
population categories are Black African, White, “colored” (with both European and either
African, Indian, or Malay ancestors), and Indian or Asian. The socio-economic standings
of these groups today remain heavily influenced by the history of European settlement
and subordination of the local population, and partly as a result, the average incomes for
those in the four groupings are ordered exactly in accord with the ordering of average
statehist.
The only case in Table 11 not located in the Americas or Africa is Fiji, whose
population is classified by government statisticians as indigenous (55.0%), Indian
(41.0%) and other (mainly European and Chinese, 4.0%). Average household incomes
per adult in the three groups are ordered identically to average statehist values. Although
the reported income gap between the Indian and native Fijian populations is far smaller
than the difference in statehist, the government statisticians comment that the incomes of
Indo-Fijians are probably undercounted, since much of it comes from private business
activities likely to be underreported.
Turning finally to the U.S., the Census Bureau reports a breakdown of the
population into White non-Hispanic, Hispanic any race, Black, Asian, American Indian
and Alaska Native, and other small categories. These groups’ reported median incomes
have the same ordering as their average statehist values, with the exception of the higher
Asian than White income and the higher American Indian than Black income. The
simple correlation between the five statehist and the five income values (as reported in
Appendix D), with equal weighting on all observations, is 0.741.
On balance, the evidence from the ten countries with the highest internal variation
of statehist and from the seventeenth-ranking United States appears to support the idea
that correlation between within-country differences in income and corresponding
differences in the early development indicator statehist at least partially account for the
predictive power of the standard deviation of statehist in the Table 9 and 10 regressions.

25

Indeed, in this section we have found within countries (as the previous section found
between countries) that there is considerable persistence and reproduction of income
differences which appears to reflect social differences dating back up to half a
millennium. To be sure, in the majority of cases just discussed differences in societal
capabilities during the era of European expansion played themselves out to a considerable
degree in the form of outright dominance of some over others, including appropriation of
land, control of government and monopoly of armed force, and involuntary movement of
millions of people between macro-regions to meet the conquering population’s labor
demands. How persistent early differences would have proven to be in the absence of the
exercise of raw power is a question that goes beyond the scope of our paper. The point
for present purposes is that as history has in fact unfolded, such differences have been
remarkably persistent.

4. Conclusion
Conquest, colonialism, migration, slavery, and epidemic disease reshaped the
world that existed before the era of European expansion. Over the last 500 years, there
have been dramatic movements of people, institutions, cultures, and languages among the
world’s major regions. These movements clearly have implications for the course of
economic development. Existing literature has already made a good start at examining
how institutions were transferred between regions and the long lasting economic effects
of these transfers. However the human side of the story – the relationship between where
the ancestors of a country’s current population lived and current outcomes – has received
relatively little attention, in part due to the absence of suitable data. In this paper, we
introduce a “world migration matrix” to account for international movements of people
since the year 1500. We use the matrix to document some major features of world
migration history such as the bi-modality of the distribution of indigenous and nonindigenous people by country and the variations in the primary source regions for
immigrant-populated countries.
In the second part of the paper, we demonstrate the utility of the migration data by
using it to re-visit the hypothesis that early development of agrarian societies and their
sociopolitical correlates—states—conferred developmental advantages that remain
relevant today. We confirm that in a global sample, countries on whose territories
agriculture and states developed earlier have higher incomes. But we conjecture that
people who moved from one region to another carried the human capabilities built up in
that area with them. We find that re-calculating state history and agriculture measures for
each country as weighted averages by place of origin of their people’s ancestors
considerably improves the fit of these regressions. We also find that heterogeneity of
early development, holding the mean level constant, is associated with higher per capita
income. We interpret this finding as indicating that the effect of spillovers of growthpromoting characteristics between groups having different early development histories
more than compensated for any negative effect on growth of higher inequality due to
heterogeneity.

26

In Part 3, we show that the heterogeneity of a country’s population in terms of the
early development of its ancestors as of 1500 is strongly correlated with income
inequality. We also show that heterogeneity with respect to country of ancestry or with
respect to the ancestral language does a better job than does current linguistic or ethnic
heterogeneity in predicting income inequalities today. As an additional test of the theory
that early development conferred lasting advantage, we show that the rankings of ethnic
or racial groups within a country’s income distribution are strongly correlated with the
average levels of groups’ early development indicators.
The overall finding of our paper is that the origins of a country’s population –
more specifically, where the ancestors of the current population lived some 500 years ago
– matters for economic outcomes today. Having ancestors who lived in places with early
agricultural and political development is good for income today, both at the level of
country averages and in terms of an individual’s position within a country’s income
distribution. Exactly why the origins of the current population matter is a question on
which we can only speculate at this point. People who moved across borders brought
with them human capital, cultures, genes, institutions, and languages. People who came
from areas which developed early evidently brought with them versions of one or more of
these things that were conducive to higher income. Future research will have to sort out
which ones were the most significant. The fact that early development explains an ethnic
group’s position within a country’s income distribution suggests that “good institutions”
coming from regions of early development cannot be the whole story, although it does
not prove that institutions are not of enormous importance. More research is also needed
to understand how early development led to the creation of growth promoting
characteristics (whatever these turn out to be), how these characteristics were transmitted
so persistently over the centuries, as well as the process by which these characteristics are
transferred between populations of high and low early development. Our hope is that the
availability of a compilation of data on the reconfiguration of country populations since
1500 will make it easier to address such issues in future research.

27

References

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. (2001). “The colonial origins of comparative
development: An empirical investigation,” American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369–
1401.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. (2002). “Reversal of fortunes: Geography and
institutions in the makingof the modern world income distribution,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117 (4), 1231–1294.
Alesina, Alberto, Arnaud Devleeschauwer , William Easterly, Sergio Kurlat, and
Romain Wacziarg, 2003. " Fractionalization," Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 8(2),
pages 155-94, June.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded, Galor, “Human Genetic Diversity and Comparative
Economic Development,” Working Paper, Brown University, 2008.
Barro, Robert J., 2008, “Inequality and Growth Revisited,” Asian Development Bank
Working Paper Series on Regional Economic Integration no. 11, January.
Bockstette, Valerie, Areendam Chanda and Louis Putterman (2002). “States and Markets:
The Advantage of an Early Start,” Journal of Economic Growth 7: 347-69.
Burkett, John P., Catherine Humblet and Louis Putterman (1999). “Pre-Industrial and
Post-War Economic Development: Is There a Link?” Economic Development and
Cultural Change, 47 (3): 471-95.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi L., and Frencesco Cavalli-Sforza (1995), The Great Human
Diasporas. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Co.
Chanda, Areendam and Louis Putterman, 2006, “State Effectiveness, Economic Growth,
and the Age of States,” pp. 69-91 in Matthew Lange and Dietrich Rueschemeyer, eds.,
States and Development: Historical Antecedents of Stagnation and Advance Basingstoke,
England, Palgrave MacMillan, 2005.
Chanda, Areendam and Louis Putterman (2007). “Early Starts, Reversals and Catch-up in
the Process of Economic Development,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109, 387413.
Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong, “Was the Wealth of Nations
determined in 1000 BC?” NBER Working Paper No. W12657, 2006.
Comin, Diego, William Easterly, and Erick Gong, “Was the Wealth of Nations
determined in 1000 BC?” Working paper, May 2009.

28

Correlates of War Project. (2000) Direct Contiguity Data, 1816-2000. Version 3.0.
Online: http://correlatesofwar.org.
Deininger, Klaus, and Lyn Squire, “A New Data Set and Measure of Income Inequality,”
World Bank Economic Review, 10 (September) 1996, 565-591.
Desmet, Klaus, Ignacio Ortuño-Ortín, and Shlomo Weber, “Linguistic Diversity and
Redistribution,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 7:9, December 2009.
Diamond, Jared, 1997, Guns, Germs and Steel. New York: W. W. Norton and Co.
Easterly, William, “Inequality Does Cause Underdevelopment: Insights from a New
Instrument,” Journal of Development Economics, Volume 84, Issue 2, November 2007,
Pages 755-776.
Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths
of Development among New World Economies,” Economia 3.1 (2002) 41-109.
Fearon, James, D., “Ethnic Structure and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of
Economic Growth, 8:2, June 2003, 195-222.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav, “The Neolithic Origins of Contemporary Variation in Life
Expectancy,” Mimeo, November 2007.
Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?” Journal of Economic Growth, 2004, v9(3,Sep), 271303.
Hall, R., and C. Jones, (1999). “Why do some countries produce so much more output
than others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1), 83–116.
Hibbs, Douglas A., and Ola Olsson, 2004, “Geography, biogeography, and why some
countries are rich and others are poor,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
101: 3715-3720.
Johnson, Allen and Timothy Earl, 1987, The Evolution of Human Societies: From
Foraging Groups to Agrarian State. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny
(1998). “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106(6), 1113-1155.
MacNeish, Richard (1991). The Origins of Agriculture and Settled Life. Norman, OK:
University of Oklahoma Press.
McEvedy, C. and R. Jones (1978). Atlas of World Population History, Viking Press.

29

Olsson, Ola, and Douglas A. Hibbs Jr., (2005). “Biogeography and Long-Run Economic
Development,” European Economic Review, 49: 909-938.
Putterman, Louis (2004). “State Antiquity Index Version 3”, available at
http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Louis_Putterman/.
Putterman, Louis, with Cary Anne Trainor (2006). “Agricultural Transition Year Country
Data Set”, available at http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Louis_Putterman.
Smith, Bruce (1995). The Emergence of Agriculture. New York: Scientific American
Library.
Sokoloff, Kenneth and Stanley Engermann (2000). “Institutions, Factor Endowments and
Paths to Development in the New World,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14: 217232.
Spolaore, Enrico, and Romain Wacziarg, 2009, “The Diffusion of Development”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(2), May 2009, 469-527.

30

Table 1. Current population and descendants, by region.

Region
U.S. and Canada
Mexico and Central
America
The Caribbean
South America
Europe
North Africa/West and
Central Asia
South Asia
East Asia
Southeast Asia
Australia and New
Zealand
Sub Saharan Africa

Fraction
of current
population
descended
from
Population Population Population Descendants region’s
1500
2000
Growth
per person
1500
(millions) (millions) Factor
of 1500
ancestors
1.12
315
281
9.14
.0325

Fraction of
descendants
of 1500
population
that live in
same region
1.00

Number of
descendants
living
outside the
region
(millions)
0.00
15.0

5.80
0.186
7.65
77.7

137
34.4
349
680

23.6
185
45.6
8.76

16.8
17.8
10.5
16.0

.602
.0367
.227
.975

.846
.381
.988
.535

35.5
103
132
18.7

530
1,320
1,490
555

14.9
12.8
11.3
29.7

14.6
12.9
11.6
28.5

.939
.999
1.00
.946

.958
.990
.976
.988

13.2
36.7
6.50

0.200
38.3

22.9
656

114
17.1

3.68
19.5

.0322
.981

1.00
.862

0.00
103

31

2.05
0.927
578
22.0

Table 2: Historical Determinants of Current Income
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Indep. Var.
Dependent Variable: ln(GDP per capita 2000)
.892
-1.43
Statehist
(.330)
(.32)
Ancestry
2.01
3.37
Adjusted
(.38) (.41)
Statehist
.134
-.198
Agyears
(.035)
(.044)
Ancestry
.269
.461
Adjusted
(.040) (.054)
Agyears
Constant
8.17
7.61
7.51
7.87
7.05
6.96
(.14) (.17) (.16) (.21) (.23) (.22)
No. obs.
136
136
136
147
147
147
R-squared
0.060 0.219 0.271 0.080 0.240 0.293

32

Table 3: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Migration, Descent, and Language

(1)
Indep. Var.
Ancestry
Adjusted
Statehist
Ancestry
Adjusted
Agyears
“neo Europes”
adjusted
Statehist
“neo Europes”
adjusted
Agyears
Native

(2)
2.76
(.46)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Dependent Variable: ln(GDP per capita 2000)
2.09
1.48
(.38)
(.32)
.400
(.050)

1.27
(.32)

No. obs.
R-squared

(10)

(11)

(12)

2.11
(.38)
.152
(.035)

.256
(.043)

-.741
(.355)
.173 -.133
(.034) (.040)
-.867 -.744
(.265) (.270)
-.800 -.583
(.361) (.358)

Retained
Fraction
European
Descent
Fraction
European
Languages
Constant

.270
(.041)

(9)

1.82
(.16)

8.02
(.14)
136
0.122

7.55
(.17)
136
0.230

7.66
(.19)
147
0.127

7.00
(.22)
147
0.259

8.87
(.44)
129
0.286

8.07
(.43)
139
0.281

33

7.83
(.10)
138
0.458

1.63
(.16)

7.27
(.13)
138
0.572

1.58
(.17)

7.11
(.19)
138
0.526

1.31
(.21)

1.04
(.18)

1.06
(.19)

8.10
(.14)
113
0.195

7.26
(.17)
113
0.418

6.86
(.23)
113
0.393

Table 4: Historical and Geographical Determinants of Current Income

Panel A
(1)

Indep. Var.
Ancestry
Adjusted
Statehist
Absolute
Latitude
Landlocked

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable: ln(GDP per capita 2000)
2.38
1.32
2.21
1.75
1.31
1.24
(0.40)
(0.43)
(0.41)
(0.55)
(0.42)
(0.42)
0.0386
(0.0062)
-0.628
(0.272)

Eurasia

0.594
(0.286)

Climate
Constant
No. Obs.
R-squared

7.44
(0.17)
111
0.294

6.94
(0.15)
111
0.527

7.65
(0.21)
111
0.339

7.44
(0.16)
111
0.334

0.609
(0.096)
6.92
(0.17)
111
0.494

0.0337
(0.0084)
-0.558
(0.172)
-0.327
(0.247)
0.235
(0.121)
6.99
(0.20)
111
0.593

Panel B
(1)

Indep. Var.
Ancestry
Adjusted
Agyears
Absolute
Latitude
Landlocked

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable: ln(GDP per capita 2000)
0.313
0.172
0.289
0.219
0.178
0.153
(0.048)
(0.053)
(0.051)
(0.062)
(0.060)
(0.054)
0.0393
(0.0058)
-0.500
(0.236)

Eurasia

0.631
(0.250)

Climate
Constant
No. Obs.
R-squared

6.85
(0.25)
116
0.293

6.61
(0.21)
116
0.523

7.07
(0.28)
116
0.320

34

7.04
(0.26)
116
0.334

0.516
(0.101)
6.74
(0.25)
116
0.426

0.0404
(0.0087)
-0.577
(0.160)
-0.172
(0.237)
0.053
(0.133)
6.80
(0.25)
116
0.563

Table 5: Alternative Measures of Early Historical Development
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Dependent Variable: ln(GDP per capita 2000)
Indep. Var.
0.752
Geo Conditions
(0.075)
Ancestry
0.952
Adjusted Geo
(0.069)
Conditions
0.746
Bio Conditions
(0.081)
Ancestry
0.947
Adjusted Bio
(0.074)
Conditions
Technology
0.0924
Index 1 CE
(0.3758)
Ancestry
2.51
Adjusted
(0.59)
Technology
Index 1 CE
Technology
1.55
Index 1500 CE
(0.30)
Ancestry
Adjusted
Technology
Index 1500 CE
Constant
8.42
8.19
8.43
8.21
8.42
6.41
7.77
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.28)
(0.46)
(0.20)
Observations
105
105
105
105
125
125
114
R-squared
0.415
0.574
0.417
0.581
0.000
0.133
0.183

35

(8)

3.26
(0.30)
6.54
(0.21)
114
0.525

Table 6: Historical Determinants of Current Institutions

Indep. Var.
Statehist
Ancestry Adjusted
Statehist
Constant
No. obs.
R-squared

(1)
(2)
Executive
Constraints
0.158
(0.274)
0.670
(0.309)
1.95
1.71
(0.13)
(0.15)
141
141
0.002
0.033

(3)
(4)
Expropriation Risk
0.658
(0.287)

3.89
(0.13)
111
0.047

1.33
(0.33)
3.51
(0.15)
111
0.134

(5)
(6)
Government
Effectiveness
0.445
(0.271)
1.32
(0.30)
-0.180
-0.604
(0.114) (0.118)
144
144
0.019
0.123

Note: All dependent variables are normalized to have a standard deviation of one.

36

Table 7: Source Regions and Current Regions as Determinants of Current Income

Regression
number
Independent
Variables

(1)

(2)

(3)

Source
Current
Source
Current
Regions
Regions
Regions
Regions
33.7
3.03
-2,273
74.8
U.S. and Canada
(5.6)
(0.16)
(384)
(12.4)
Mexico and
0.380
1.10
1.90
-0.870
Central America
(0.495)
(0.24)
(1.25)
(0.710)
3.67
1.33
0.834
0.268
The Caribbean
(0.81)
(0.30)
(1.884)
(0.221)
0.498
1.35
1.11
-0.415
South America
(0.229)
(0.20)
(0.51)
(0.419)
2.35
2.23
2.66
-0.265
Europe
(0.16)
(0.18)
(0.47)
(0.476)
North Africa/West
1.29
1.28
0.654
0.613
and Central Asia
(0.21)
(0.21)
(1.349)
(1.248)
0.872
0.388
3.05
-2.53
South Asia
(0.265)
(0.175)
(0.39)
(0.39)
2.15
1.81
4.77
-2.81
East Asia
(0.54)
(0.56)
(0.57)
(0.87)
0.805
1.07
1.59
-0.913
Southeast Asia
(0.242)
(0.32)
(0.63)
(0.500)
Australia and New
8.09
2.72
-1.59
0.436
Zealand
(2.10)
(0.17)
(0.87)
(0.444)
Constant
7.27
7.34
7.22
(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.12)
No. obs.
152
152
152
R-squared
0.631
0.584
0.681
Note: In regression 1, the independent variables are the shares of the population in each
country originating in each region. In regression 2, the independent variables are
dummies for a country being located in a particular region. In regression 3 the
independent variables are both of the above.

37

Table 8: The Effect of Heterogeneity in Early Development on Current Income

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Indep. Var.
Dependent variable: Ln(GDP per capita 2000)
Standard Deviation of
1.40
2.02
Statehist
(0.91)
(0.78)
Ancestry Adjusted Statehist
2.08
(0.37)
Standard Deviation of
0.377
0.312
Agyears
(0.108)
(0.094)
Ancestry Adjusted Agyears
0.260
(0.037)
Standard Deviation of
Source Region Coefficients
Mean Source Region
Coefficient
Constant
8.33
7.38
8.21
6.86
(0.15)
(0.18)
(0.14)
(0.23)
No. obs.
136
136
147
147
R-squared
0.013
0.245
0.056
0.278

38

(5)

(6)

0.414
(0.064)

0.0844
(0.0636)
0.982
(0.067)
7.26
(0.09)
152
0.634

8.33
(0.11)
152
0.065

Table 9: Historical Determinants of Current Inequality

(1)
Indep. Var.
Standard Deviation of
statehist

0.456
(0.088)

Ancestry Adjusted
statehist
Standard Deviation of
agyears
Ancestry Adjusted
agyears
Standard Deviation of
Source Region
Coefficients

(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
Dependent variable: Gini Coefficient
0.408
(0.084)
-0.148
(0.036)
0.0512
0.0571
(0.0121)
(0.0108)
-0.0217
(0.0052)
0.0207

No. obs.
R-squared

0.375
(0.014)
135
0.140

0.445
(0.024)
135
0.267

0.381
(0.014)
140
0.108

0.493
(0.031)
140
0.260

39

0.0453

(0.0166)

(0.0153)

0.413
(0.011)
141
0.018

-0.0743
(0.0089)
0.498
(0.016)
141
0.365

Mean Source Region
Coefficient
Constant

(6)

Table 10: Ethnic, Linguistic, and Historical Determinants of Current Inequality

Indep. Var.
Ethnic
Fractionalization
Historical
Fractionalization
Cultural Diversity
Historical
Linguistic
Fractionalization
Standard Deviation
of Statehist

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Dependent variable: Gini Coefficient from WIID2
0.117
0.0517
(0.037)
(0.0355)
0.134
-0.0116
(0.034)
(0.0489)
0.0354
0.0126
(0.0437)
(0.0382)
0.168
0.0460
(0.039)
(0.0721)

Ancestry Adjusted
Statehist
Constant
No. obs.
R-squared

0.367
(0.019)
132
0.073

0.382
(0.014)
135
0.101

0.407
(0.017)
132
0.005

0.385
(0.013)
135
0.115

0.392
(0.085)
-0.130
(0.040)
0.415
(0.033)
132
0.276

40

0.435
(0.124)
-0.148
(0.037)
0.446
(0.025)
135
0.267

0.401
(0.086)
-0.151
(0.038)
0.441
(0.030)
132
0.275

0.310
(0.167)
-0.149
(0.036)
0.445
(0.024)
135
0.269

Table 11: Statehist and relative income for ancestry groups and current ethnic groups

#

Country

1 Fiji

Standard Gini28
Dev. of
Statehist
.346
.441

2 Cape
Verde

.301

3 Guyana

.293

4 Panama

.292

Component
groups
(region)
European
Indian
Fijian
.51 Portuguese
African

Percent
Statehist
population (average)
29

2.2
45.0
52.1
41.4
58.6

0.693
0.688
0.000
0.723
0.142

.540 Chinese
Portuguese

0.7
1.3

0.906
0.723

S. Asian
African
Guyanese
.548 Chinese
S. Asian
European

54.0
39.0
5.0
1.5
4.0
45.2

0.677
0.142
0.000
0.906
0.677
0.578

28

Component
groups
(ethnic)
Other31
Indo-Fijian
Fijian
White
Creole
Black
Chinese
Portuguese
Mixed32
East-Indian
Black
Amerindian
Chinese
White
Mestizo

Percent
Statehist
population (average)

Relative
Income

30

4
41
55
1.0
71.0
28.0
0.3
0.4
11.2
51.9
30.8
5.3
2.0
10.0
68.0

0.745
0.688
0.000
0.723
0.473
0.142
0.906
0.723
0.410
0.677
0.142
0.000
0.906
0.578
0.281

High
Middle
Low
High
Middle
Low
High
Middle
Middle
Middle
Middle
Low
High
High
Upper
Middle

Source: UN World Income Inequality Database (2007), except: Cape Verde – World Development Indicators, 2001
Computed from Matrix.
30
Based on: Fiji – Household Survey 2002-03; Cape Verde – Census 1950 (quoted in Lobban, R., “Cape Verde: Crioulo Colony to Independent Nation”, 199);
Guyana – Census 1980; Paraguay – Census 2002; Panama – Fearon, J. D. Data set described in "Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country". Journal of Economic
Growth 8, 2 (June 2003): 195-222.; South Africa – Household Survey 2005; Trinidad and Tobago - Continuous Sample Survey of Population; El Salvador – CIA
Factbook; Nicaragua – CIA Factbook; Venezuela – CIA Factbook,; United States - U.S. Census, Vintage 2004
31
Europeans, Chinese
32
½ East Indian, ½ African
29

41

African

5 Paraguay

6 South
Africa

7 Brazil

8 Trinidad
and
Tobago

33
34

.291

.289

.288

.284

13.0

Panamanian
.552 European,
non-Spanish

35.7
5.5

Spanish
Paraguayan
/ Brazilian
.565 European
Indian /
S. Asian
SouthAfrican

46.8
46.1

0.150 mixed WestIndian
(Black)
0.000 Amerindian
0.749 European
(incl.
Spanish)
0.562 Mestizo
0.000 Amerindian

18.0
3.4

0.710 White
0.670 Indian /
Asian
0.000 Colored
(mixed)33
Black
African
0.834 Asian
0.715 White
Mixed34
0.086 Black
0.000 Amerindian
0.906 Chinese

78.7

.566 Japanese
European

0.8
74.4

African
Brazilian
.402 Chinese

15.7
9.1
1.5

European

7.1

S. Asian

45.4

0.671 White /
Caucasian
0.677 Indian

.35 African, .1 S. Asian, .05 Indonesian, .1 UK, .1 Netherlands, .1 France, .1 Germany and .1 Portugal
.506 European, .239 Amerindian, .255 African

42

13.0

6.0
3.8

0.150 Lower
Middle
0.000 Low
0.575 High

94.7
1.1

0.281 Middle
0.000 Low

9.2
2.5

79.4

0.710 High
0.670 Upper
Middle
0.452 Lower
Middle
0.000 Low

0.4
53.7
38.5
6.2
0.4
0.2

0.834
0.715
0.384
0.086
0.000
0.906

8.9

0.7
40.5

High
Middle
Low
Low
Low
Upper
Middle
0.671 High
0.677 Low

African

0.166 Mixed35

46.0

African
White
Mestizo
Amerindian
White
African
(Creole)
Mestizo
Amerindian
White not
Hispanic
Asian
Hispanic of
any race

9 El
Salvador

.281

.484 Spanish
Salvadoran

50.0
50.0

0.562
0.000

10 Nicaragua

.277

.544 European
African

51.0
9.0

0.568
0.150

40.0

0.000

75.7

0.648

4.1
6.3

0.640
0.433

9.6

0.146 Black

3.2

0.000 American
Indian and
Alaska
Native

Nicaraguan
17 United
States

.232

.464 European
Asian
Central and
South
American
SubSaharan
African
NorthAmerican36

35
36

1/3 African, 1/3 S. Asian, 1/3 European.
Includes Hawaii and Alaska

43

14.9
43.5
9.0
90.0
1.0
17.0
9.0
69.0
5.0
67.4
4.2
14.1

12.8

1.0

0.504 Lower
Middle
0.166 Low
0.562 High
0.281 Middle
0.000 Low
0.568 High
0.150 Middle
0.281 Middle
0.000 Low
0.650 Upper
Middle
0.640 High
0.485 Lower
Middle
0.240 Low

0.000 Lower
Middle

44

Figure 1a Distribution of countries by
proportion of ancestors from own or
immediate neighboring country.

Figure 1b Distribution of world
population by proportion of
ancestors from own or immediate
neighboring country.

45

46

47

Appendix A: World Migration Matrix, 1500 – 2000*
The goal of the matrix is to identify where the ancestors of the permanent
residents of today’s countries were living in 1500 C.E. In this abbreviated
description, we address some major conceptual issues relevant to the
construction of the matrix and identify some of the main sources of information
consulted.
The migration matrix is a table in which both row and column headings are the
names of presently existing countries, and cell entries are estimates of the
proportion of the ancestors of those now permanently residing in the country
identified in the row heading who lived in the country identified by the column
heading in 1500. An ancestor is treated as having lived in what is now, say,
Indonesia, if the place they resided in that year is within the borders of Indonesia
today.
When ancestors could be identified only as part of an ethnic group that lived in a
region now straddling the borders of two or more present-day countries, we try to
estimate the proportion of that group living in each country and then allocate
ancestry accordingly. For example, if a given ancestor is known to have been a
“Gypsy” (Roma) but if we have no information on which country he or she lived in
during the year 1500, we apply an assumption (see Appendix B) regarding the
proportion of Gypsies who lived in Greece, Romania, Turkey, etc., as of 1500.
The Gypsy example is one of many illustrating the fact that most of our data
sources organize their information around ethnic groups rather than territory of
origin. While the use of information on ethnicity was unavoidable in the process
of constructing the matrix, it was not a focus of attention in its own right.
In cases in which ancestors are known to have migrated more than once
between 1500 and 2000, countries of intervening residence are not indicated in
the matrix. For example, an Israeli whose parents lived in Argentina but whose
grandparents arrived in Argentina from Ukraine, is listed as having had ancestors
in Ukraine.
People of mixed ancestry are common in many countries, for example people of
mixed Amerindian and Spanish ancestry in Mexico. Such individuals are treated
as having a certain proportion of their ancestry deriving from each source
country. When members of such groups are reported to account for 30% or
more of a country’s population, we searched the specialized scientific literature
on genetic admixture for the best available estimates. For smaller mixed groups
we base estimates on the stated or implicit assumptions of conventional sources
or on extrapolation from similar countries in which we had genetic estimates. Our
*

This is an abbreviated version of Appendix B, which is linked to region summaries and the data set itself.
All can be found at http://www.econ.brown.edu/fac/Louis_Putterman/ .

48

assumed breakdowns of mixed populations for each country are discussed in
Appendix B.
Because our interest is in the possible impact of its people’s origins on each
country’s economic performance, we try to identify the origins of long-term
residents only, thus leaving out guest or temporary workers. Very little data is
available about the duration of stay of most temporary workers, so we made
educated guesses as to what portion of the originally temporary residents have
become permanent, understood as having been in the country at least ten years
as of 2000.
The matrix includes entries on all countries existing in 2000 having populations of
one half million or larger. A country is included as a source country for ancestors
of the people of another country if at least 0.5% of all ancestors alive in 1500 are
estimated to have lived there. Some entries smaller than 0.5% are found in the
matrix, but these occur as a result of special decompositions applied to
populations that our sources identify by ethnic group rather than by country of
origin—e.g. Gypsies, Africans (descended from slaves, especially in the
Americas), and Ashkenazi Jews. Appendix B details the method of assigning
fractions of these populations to individual source countries.
Some of the more important sources from which data were drawn for the
construction of the matrix are listed below. See Appendix B and its regional sub
appendices for other sources and details.
Columbia Encyclopedia (online edition)
CIA World Factbook
Countriesquest.com
Encyclopædia Britannica (online edition)
Everyculture.com
Library of Congress, Federal Research Division, Country Studies
MSN Encarta Encyclopedia (online edition)
Nationsencyclopedia.com
World Christian Database (Original source for WCE)
World Christian Encyclopedia

49

