                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT MAKES THEM TICK? EMPLOYEE MOTIVES AND FIRM INNOVATION

                                            Henry Sauermann
                                            Wesley M. Cohen

                                          Working Paper 14443
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14443


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2008




We thank the participants in the Duke University's Fuqua School of Business Strategy Seminar, in
the "Workshop on Using Human Resource Data from Science Resources Statistics," and in the Sixth
Roundtable for Engineering Entrepreneurship Research, as well as participants in seminars at the NBER,
HBS, LBS, MIT, RPI, UCLA, INSEAD, the University of Michigan and the University of Bocconi
for their comments. We thank especially Jim Adams, Ashish Arora, Scott Cook, Jeff Edwards, Jon
Fjeld, Nimmi Kannankutty, Rachel Kranton, Rick Larrick, Mike Lenox, Megan MacGarvie, Will Mitchell,
Luigi Orsenigo, Mike Roach, Scott Rockart, Paula Stephan, Scott Stern, and Marie Thursby. Financial
support from the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank
the Science Resources Statistics Division of the National Science Foundation for providing the restricted-use
SESTAT database employed in our empirical analysis. However, "the use of NSF data does not imply
NSF endorsement of the research methods or conclusions contained in this report." The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Henry Sauermann and Wesley M. Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
What Makes Them Tick? Employee Motives and Firm Innovation
Henry Sauermann and Wesley M. Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 14443
October 2008
JEL No. O3,O30,O31,O32

                                              ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of individual-level motives upon innovative effort and performance in firms.
Drawing from economics and social psychology, we develop a model of the impact of individuals'
motives and incentives upon their innovative effort and performance. Using data on over 11,000 industrial
scientists and engineers (SESTAT 2003), we find that individuals' motives have significant effects
upon innovative effort and performance. These effects vary significantly, however, by the particular
kind of motive (e.g., desire for intellectual challenge vs. pay). We also find that intrinsic and extrinsic
motives affect innovative performance even when controlling for effort, suggesting that motives affect
not only the level of individual effort, but also its quality. Overall, intrinsic motives, particularly the
desire for intellectual challenge, appear to benefit innovation more than extrinsic motives such as pay.


Henry Sauermann
Georgia Institute of Technology
College of Management
800 W. Peachtree St.
Atlanta, GA 30308
henry.sauermann@mgt.gatech.edu

Wesley M. Cohen
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
wcohen@duke.edu
1   Introduction

       Dating from the 1950’s and early 1960’s, economists such as Schmookler (1962),

Griliches (1957), Nelson (1959) and Arrow (1962) have argued that the rate and direction of

technological change could be understood as the outcome of firms’ rational, profit-driven

investment in innovation. In making the case for the primacy of profit as a driving force behind

technical change, economists sensibly focused scholars’ attention on firms and their profit

incentive since firms are indeed responsible for both a good deal of innovation, and particularly

its commercialization. In doing so, they subordinated consideration of the impact of individuals

and their motives on technical advance.

       Individuals’ motives may, however, have important effects on firm innovation. Among

economists, Schumpeter (Schumpeter, 1934; 1942) suggests a critical role of individuals’

pecuniary as well as nonpecuniary incentives for entrepreneurship and innovative activity. The

R&D management literature and case studies also suggest that individuals’ various motives have

important impacts on innovative activity in firms, and that managers consider the motivation of

their personnel a key priority (Cohen & Sauermann, 2007; Katz, 2004; Kidder, 1981; Manners,

Steger, & Zimmerer, 1997; Pelz & Andrews, 1976). Recent explanations of the “paradox” of

open source software development, namely that programmers develop software code despite the

apparent absence of financial gain, have also highlighted the role of individual, and especially

nonpecuniary, incentives associated with software innovation (Lakhani & von Hippel, 2003;

Lerner & Tirole, 2005; Roberts, Hann, & Slaughter, 2006). Finally, the sociology and economics

of science literatures have long featured the importance of individual-level motives such as

intellectual challenge, curiosity and peer recognition in affecting the advance of science




                                                                                                    1
(Dasgupta & David, 1994; Merton, 1973; Stephan, 1996; Stephan & Levin, 1992; Zuckerman,

1988).1

          Although these literatures suggest an important role of individual-level motives and

incentives, there is a dearth of large sample empirical research on the importance of individual

motives and incentives—especially those which are nonpecuniary—for industrial innovation.

We address this gap in this paper. Drawing from economics and psychology, we first develop a

simple model of the impact of both pecuniary and nonpecuniary motives on innovation. In our

empirical analysis, we describe the motives of over 11,000 scientists and engineers employed in

firm R&D in a wide range of industries. Guided by our model, we then examine the relationships

between employee motives and, respectively, innovative effort and performance. To prefigure

the key results, we find that individual-level motives impact individual effort, but also innovative

performance, controlling for effort. The effects of different types of motives (e.g., income vs.

intellectual challenge) differ dramatically, however, and also depend on the particular task

environment. Overall, the nonpecuniary desire for intellectual challenge appears to have the

strongest positive association with both effort and innovative performance.

2   Employee Incentives and Innovation

          Our premise is that an individual’s motive to perform an activity depends upon the

expected pleasurable consequences—or benefits—from engaging in that activity, as well as upon

the intensity of her preferences for these benefits. We refer to benefits that are contingent upon

individuals’ employment, effort, or performance as incentives. We refer to individuals’

preferences for such contingent work benefits (incentives) as motives.
1
  Although typically not concerned with innovation per se, economic theorists have recently expanded
their consideration of individual incentives to entertain the implications of agents’ nonpecuniary motives
for institutional design and performance (Akerlof & Kranton, 2005; Besley & Ghatak, 2005; Lacetera &
Zirulia, 2008; Murdock, 2002).

                                                                                                             2
        Individuals may respond to a wide range of contingent benefits such as pay, intellectual

challenge, or peer recognition. Clearly, one might distinguish between nonpecuniary and

pecuniary benefits. The psychology literature proposes a different (though related) distinction,

classifying benefits and motives as either extrinsic or intrinsic (Amabile, 1996; Gagne & Deci,

2005; Ryan & Deci, 2000). Extrinsic benefits are provided by some environmental entity such as

a market or actor such as an employer, a superior, or a judging body, and they are typically

conditioned upon an evaluation of an individual’s effort or task outcome. Extrinsic benefits do

not result directly from engaging in the task, but are indirect task outcomes. Extrinsic benefits

are those often considered by economists, and within this class of benefits, economists typically

focus on pecuniary benefits, which would include tangible rewards such as pay raises, research

funding, or a paid vacation. In contrast, intrinsic benefits originate within the individual or the

activity itself—not the environment—and often reflect an interaction between particular

characteristics of the activity (e.g., challenge of the task) and of the individual (e.g., interest in

the task).2 Some intrinsic benefits such as task enjoyment and intellectual challenge are effort-

contingent, realized directly from the process of engaging in certain activities (Amabile, 1996;

Stephan, 1996). Others such as a feeling of achievement or mastery result from task performance

or outcomes.

        The nature of individuals’ motives and incentives may have implications for both levels

of effort as well as the quality or productivity of that effort. Assuming that R&D employees have

some discretion over how much they actually work, stronger extrinsic and intrinsic motives and



2
  This implies that many intrinsic benefits are subjective and do not exist independently from a reference
individual. A given work attribute may provide an intrinsic benefit in the eyes of one employee but not of
another; for example, working on a particular research question may appear interesting to one researcher,
thus conferring intrinsic benefits, while boring another.

                                                                                                         3
incentives should influence the level of innovative effort. The interesting question is the relative

magnitude of the effect of different motives and incentives on effort.3

        The effects of different types of motives and incentives on the quality or productivity of

effort are less obvious. Camerer and Hogarth (1999) report that pecuniary incentives in

laboratory settings improve some features of individuals’ cognition, including memory, recall

and simple problem-solving functions, with the extent of such effects depending upon the nature

of the task at hand and the capabilities of the individual. Considering the impact of the nature of

motivation on creativity, Amabile and colleagues argue that intrinsic motivation may stimulate

creativity by supporting riskier, more exploratory thinking while extrinsic rewards may undercut

creativity by focusing individuals’ attention on more expedient, more incremental approaches to

solving problems. At the same time, however, some types of extrinsic rewards may complement

intrinsic motivation by providing positive feedback (e.g., idea validation) (Amabile, 1996;

Amabile, 1993; George, 2007; Hennessey & Amabile, 1998). In addition to possible effects on

cognition, individuals’ motives may also affect research productivity by driving or inhibiting

intermediate behaviors, such as information sharing or project selection. For example, a

scientist’s preference for intellectual challenge may drive her to select more challenging, and

thus potentially more technologically significant projects. Alternatively, someone whose work is

motivated by the desire to minimize the risk of failure may select more incremental tasks with




3
 Deci and Ryan and others argue that extrinsic rewards may “crowd-out” intrinsic motivation (Deci,
Koestner, & Ryan, 1999; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Frey & Jegen, 2001), possibly reducing overall levels of
effort. While our results may reflect such a crowding out effect, crowding out is not the focus of this
paper.

                                                                                                          4
more certain outcomes, and may thus be less likely to achieve technologically significant results

(cf. Dunbar, 1995).4

        We conjecture that the productivity effects of motives may depend on the type of task.

For example, individuals’ choices over intermediate behaviors may matter primarily in upstream

basic and applied research where they have more latitude in determining how they approach their

work (cf. Fox, 1983; Holt, 1974). Similarly, the effects of motives on cognition should matter

more in upstream research activity requiring more creativity or problem-solving capabilities.

        The effects of motives and incentives on innovation have been little explored in real work

settings using large sample empirical analysis. One exception is Stern’s (2004) finding that new

biology PhDs taking jobs in industry were willing to accept, on average, 25% lower salaries if

prospective employers allowed them to pursue more academic-like science, to publish and

participate in the scientific community, suggesting that these researchers were willing to pay to

have the opportunity to pursue nonpecuniary goals. Consistent with the idea of “productivity

effects” of motives (as well as higher effort levels due to stronger motives), Gambardella et al.

(2006) observed that European inventors whose patenting was motivated by money, career, and

prestige concerns tended to produce more valuable patents.

        In this paper, we will examine the relationship between individuals’ motives and their

innovative effort and performance, using a sample of over 11,000 R&D employees spanning the

manufacturing and service sectors.




4
  Manso et al. provide a complementary perspective on the selection of research approaches. Focusing on
incentives rather than motives, they suggest that long-term financial incentives may lead individuals to
adopt more exploratory approaches to addressing technological challenges, while short-term financial
incentives may encourage individuals to adopt more incremental approaches (Ederer & Manso, 2008;
Manso, 2006).

                                                                                                       5
2.1   Model

        We assume that the utility a researcher realizes from her effort is a function of the cost of

that effort and of the m different types benefits,     , k=1…m, that result from that effort. Each

type of benefit from work can have a component that is contingent upon the quantity of effort, E,

and a component that depends upon innovative output, Q, which one can think of as some quality

adjusted number of inventions.5 Accordingly,

                                 ,                                                               (1)

where                                , and             . The variables    and     reflect the

incentives (i.e., contingent benefits) facing the researcher, and we assume that         0 and         0.

The subutility      derived from a particular type of benefit     is

                                      ,                                                 (2)

where                  .   reflects an individual’s motives—her intensity of preference for a given

benefit, and a stronger motive of a particular type, k, increases the individual’s marginal utility

derived from the associated k’th benefit. For simplicity, we assume motives and incentives to be

exogenous.

        The researcher also incurs a cost of effort,

                                                                                        (3)

where            and         .




5
  Benefits may also have a component that is contingent only upon employment in a particular job (e.g.,
fixed salary). However, since employment-contingent benefits do not affect optimal effort or performance
in our model, we focus on effort and performance contingent benefits. Also, while our model allows all
types of benefits to be contingent upon both effort and performance, any given type of benefit may be
predominantly contingent upon one of these. For example, the utility derived from intellectual challenge
is primarily effort contingent whereas peer recognition will be primarily performance contingent.

                                                                                                        6
        The researcher’s output, Q, is a function of her effort as well as her productivity (i.e.,

    . We assume innovative productivity to be a function of a vector T of industry characteristics

(e.g., technological opportunity), firm characteristics (e.g., size, resources, organizational

structure, etc.), and individual characteristics (e.g., ability). In addition to motives (I ) and

incentives        affecting the level of effort, we also allow them to affect productivity such that:

                Q = Q(E; T, I,      ),                                                  (4)

where                      and           . In Section 2 above, we suggest that the “productivity

effects” of particular motives and incentives (e.g.,       ) may be positive or negative. For

example, while desire for intellectual challenge may stimulate innovative productivity, the desire

to minimize the risk of failure may have the opposite effect. We also hypothesized that the

magnitude of the effect of motives on productivity is likely to depend upon the nature of the

task—whether it affords more discretion, or demands greater creativity.

        We will now assume that the researcher has unbiased expectations of her productivity as

well as of the effort and performance contingent benefits and chooses a utility-maximizing level

of effort, E*. Assuming that the subutilities enter additively, the total utility function is:

                U=                                                   .                  (5)

        Assuming (5) to be concave in effort over the relevant range, the optimal amount of effort

E* is implicitly defined by the first order condition:

                     =                                   = 0.                           (6)

        Applying the implicit function theorem to (6) shows, first, that optimal effort, E* ,

decreases in the marginal cost of effort,      Second, optimal effort is a positive function of




                                                                                                     7
and thus of the factors that drive innovative productivity. Third, and of particular importance for

our empirical analysis below, (6) also implies that:


                                                     .                                       (7)

          The denominator in (7), which is the second order condition, is negative by assumption.

The numerator shows that the qualitative effect of          on E* depends on the productivity effects

of motives,       , since, of all the terms in the numerator of the right hand side of equation (7),

only       can be negative. Thus, the effect of a particular motive          on optimal effort is negative

if and only if     has a sufficiently large relative negative effect on productivity. Finally, equation

(7) also shows that the effect of      on optimal effort is conditioned by the associated incentives,

    and     .6

          In addition to addressing the effects of motives on innovative effort, our model also

speaks to the determinants of innovative output, Q. It is trivial to see that effort will positively

affect output. As suggested by our discussion of equation (4), we also expect motives to affect

innovative output even controlling for effort. However, this qualitative effect of motives on

productivity may differ, depending upon the specific motive. For example, as noted above, a

desire for challenge may be associated with greater productivity, while the desire to minimize the

risk of failure may reduce it.




6
  Although we do not empirically consider the impact of incentives on effort due to data limitations, it is
easy to show, with application of the implicit function theorem to (7), that the qualitative effects of
incentives,     and     on effort depend on their productivity effects. Specifically, if a given incentive has
no negative productivity effects, then increasing it will yield higher effort. Similar to the result regarding
the effect of a given motive, if the productivity effect of an incentive is negative and sufficiently large,
then increasing that incentive will diminish effort.

                                                                                                             8
          In the following, we examine the impact of individuals’ motives on innovative effort and

performance empirically. Since we are unable to estimate the model directly given our data, we

will test its qualitative implications. Just as importantly, the model also guides our interpretation

of the results.

3      Data

          For our empirical analysis, we use restricted-use data from the 2003 Scientists and

Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT). The SESTAT database is maintained by the NSF

(National Science Foundation, 2003) and the sample population includes individuals who have a

science, engineering or related degree or who worked in a science, engineering or related

occupation at the time the data were collected. Most data were collected via a mailed

questionnaire; a smaller number of surveys were administered by computer-aided telephone

interviews, in-person interviews, and via the internet. Response rates for the three component

surveys ranged from 60-80%.7

          We focus on a sample of 11,014 SESTAT respondents who possess Bachelors, Masters,

or PhD degrees, and are employees of private for-profit firms active in a wide range of industries

(see Table A1 in appendix). A majority of our respondents—6,049, or 54.9%—work in

manufacturing, though a sizable minority—4,373 or 39.7%—work in services, with 1,496

respondents in R&D services. We include only respondents whose primary work classification is

basic research, applied research, development, design, or computer applications; the distribution

of respondents across these work types is shown in Table 1. Note that 3,649 respondents, or

33.1%, work in computer applications. Also, only 381, or 3.5% of the sample, work in basic




7
    For more information on the SESTAT data, including the survey instruments, see http://sestat.nsf.gov.

                                                                                                            9
research, a proportion which is comparable to the share of R&D firms spend on basic research in

the U.S. more generally (cf. National Science Board, 2008).

       We were able to obtain two important additional control variables—firm identities and

the school awarding the respondent’s PhD (employed below as a proxy measure for ability) —

for a subset of our respondents comprised entirely of PhDs (n=2,805). We use this subsample

(“PhD-sample”) in a series of robustness checks. Apart from the fact that the PhD-sample is

comprised entirely of PhDs, the key difference between the two samples is that the PhD-sample

has relatively fewer respondents in design and computer applications (see Table A2 in appendix).

4   Measures

       Unless otherwise indicated, all measures are taken from respondents’ survey

questionnaires and are included in the SESTAT database. As we show below, the SESTAT data

provide some unique measures reflecting a wide range of motives, as well as measures of our

two key dependent variables, innovative effort and performance. Descriptive statistics for all

measures are shown in Table 1; correlations are shown in Table A5 in the appendix.


Dependent Variables: Innovative Effort and Performance

       Quantity of effort: Respondents reported the number of hours they work on their main job

in a typical work week (continuous measure). We use this measure as a proxy for the quantity of

effort dedicated to innovation (HRSWORKED). Mean effort in our sample is 45 hours, with a

range of 35 - 96.

       Innovative Performance: Each respondent reports the number of U.S. patent applications

in which he or she was named as an inventor over the last 5 years prior to the survey (USPAPP).

The average number of U.S. patent applications per respondent over the prior five years is 1.2.

Patent application rates are considerably higher in basic research (1.44), applied research (2.53)
                                                                                                  10
and development (1.67) than in design (0.77) and computer applications (0.23). The distribution

is highly skewed with only 24% of cases reporting any applications, and only 10% reporting

more than 2 applications.

       Patent application output is an imperfect measure of innovative performance. First, not all

inventions are patented (Cohen, Nelson, & Walsh, 2000). Thus, as discussed below, we include

several industry and firm level variables to control for the likelihood of whether a given

invention is patented. Another recognized limitation is the enormous variability in the technical

importance and economic value of patented innovations. To assess the robustness of our results

to this latter limitation, we also employ the self-reported number of granted patents (mean 0.60).

Even more revealing, another alternative measure is the number of granted patents licensed or

resulting in a commercialized product (mean 0.26) because such patents would tend to reflect

more valuable inventions (see appendix).


Featured Independent Variables: Motives (Preferences for Work Benefits)

       Our measure for motives (      in our model) are respondents’ ratings of the importance of

eight work benefits in response to the following question: “When thinking about a job, how

important is each of the following factors to you . . .” The importance of each benefit was

scored on a 4-point scale anchored by 1 (very important) and 4 (not important at all); for ease of

interpretability, we reverse coded these items such that higher scores indicate higher importance.

The eight work benefits and their associated motives are: salary (IMP_SAL), fringe benefits

(IMP_BEN), job security (IMP_SEC), intellectual challenge (IMP_CHAL), independence




                                                                                                 11
(IMP_IND), opportunities for advancement (IMP_ADV), responsibility (IMP_RESP), and

contribution to society (IMP_SOC).8

        The means and standard deviations for the motive measures are reported in Table 1. The

correlations between the eight motives vary considerably, ranging from -0.01 to 0.50, with only

about a third exceeding 0.30. Relatively low mean correlations suggest that the eight measures

reflect distinct constructs and are not obviously subject to a common methods bias.9 We report

more detailed analyses of the preferences measures in the appendix, including a factor analysis

and comparisons of motives across different types of individuals.


Additional Measures

        The table below briefly describes the other variables and associated measures employed

in our analyses.

Variable Name           Measure Description

Determinants of
R&D productivity
Industry                Dummies for 28 industries (2- to 4-digit NAICS classification). Industry
classification          dummies are intended to control for differences in technological opportunity
(IND_NAICS)             and other industry-level conditions affecting R&D productivity, as well as for
                        cross-industry differences in patent propensities (Cohen et al., 2000).
Employer firm size      Respondents were asked to estimate the number of employees in their firm in
(EMSIZE)                all locations. We represent their categorical responses by a set of dummy
                        variables: EMSIZE1: 10 or fewer employees; EMSIZE2: 11-24; EMSIZE3:
                        25-99; EMSIZE4: 100-499; EMSIZE5: 500-999; EMSIZE6: 1000-4999;
                        EMSIZE7: 5000-24999; EMSIZE8: 25000+ employees.
Firm age                Dummy = 1 if firm was founded within the last five years
(NEWBUS)

8
  As discussed below, while providing rich data on researchers’ motives, the available measures are
limited. For example, our interviews have suggested two other motives that may importantly affect R&D
employees behavior—the desire to solve practical problems and the desire to contribute to a project team.
9
  Self-reported motives may be affected by social desirability bias (Moorman & Podsakoff, 1992). Such a
bias is problematic for our econometric analysis if it affects the correlations between motives and
outcome measures. While we cannot explicitly assess the presence of social desirability bias in our data,
we see no compelling reason to expect a significant bias.

                                                                                                       12
Firm fixed effects    Employer names are available for our PhD-sample. We created a set of 122
(EMPLIDCT)            dummy variables to control for firm fixed effects for each firm that had at least
                      5 individuals in our PhD-sample (EMPLIDCT5).
Primary work type     Respondents indicated on which of a list of work activities they spend the most
(WAPRI)               hours during a typical work week.
Non-R&D               Respondents indicated which of a list of 9 non-R&D work activities
activities            (accounting, employee relations, management, production, professional
(WA_NONRD)            services, sales/marketing, quality management, teaching, other) occupied more
                      than 10% of their time. We summed the number of these activities to control
                      for time spent on non-R&D activities that are not expected to result in patent
                      applications.
Highest degree        Dummy coding for Bachelors, Masters, and PhD
(DEGREE)
Ability               For our PhD-sample, we had the names of the PhD-granting institution. We
(ABILITY)             matched these institution names and the PhD field to the National Research
                      Council’s evaluation of PhD program quality (Goldberger, Flattau, & Maher,
                      1995). The particular quality measure used is a survey rating of “program
                      effectiveness in educating research scholars and scientists”. The scale ranges
                      from 0 (“not effective”) to 5 (“extremely effective”). While this measure
                      formally captures the quality of an individual’s graduate education, it is also
                      likely to reflect innate ability to the extent that high-ability individuals self-
                      select or are selected into high-quality PhD programs.
Field of highest      Dummy coding for 16 fields (biology, health/medical sciences, food sciences,
degree                chemistry, physics, earth sciences, computer science, materials science,
(HD_FIELD)            metallurgical engineering, aerospace/astronautical engineering, computer
                      engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, other engineering,
                      mathematics, other).
Experience            Time since obtaining highest degree, in years. Serves as measures of field-
(HDTENURE,            specific skills and knowledge. In addition, this measure could also capture
HDTENURE_SQ)          cohort effects (Stephan, 1996). We also have measures of individuals’ age and
                      tenure in the current job. Since both variables are highly correlated with
                      HD_TENURE, we only include the latter in our key regressions. Robustness
                      checks using age and job tenure show very similar results.
Relevance of          Extent to which the current work is related to the field of the highest degree, 3-
education             point scale; serves as measure of relevance of the skills and knowledge
(JOBDEGREE)           acquired during academic training.
Control variables
Salary               Respondents reported their current basic annual salary, not including bonuses
(LN_SALARY)          or overtime compensation. The salary distribution is highly skewed and we use
                     the natural log of this variable in our econometric analyses (LN_SALARY).
                     Since base salary is not predicted to affect effort or performance in our model,
                     we use it only as a control variable.
Research sensitivity Two dummy variables indicating whether the individual’s work was supported
(GOVT_DOD,           by a contract with / a grant from the U.S. department of defense or the NASA.
GOVT_NASA)           We expect that findings resulting from such work are less likely to be disclosed
                     in patent applications.
                                                                                                 13
Managerial status       Natural log of the number of people the respondent supervises directly.
(LN_SUPDIR)
Gender (MALE)           Dummy =1 if respondent is male
Race (RACE)             Dummies for white, Asian, black, other
US citizenship          Dummy = 1 for U.S. citizens
(USCITIZEN)
Marital status          Coded 1 for individuals who are married or living in a marriage-like
(MARRIED)               relationship. Married individuals presumably have more family obligations
                        than individuals who are not married. This variable serves as a proxy for time
                        constraints in our effort regressions.
Children                Count of children under the age of 12 living in the same household as the
(CHILDREN011)           respondent. This variable serves as a proxy for time constraints in our effort
                        regressions.



5     Specifications and Estimation

5.1    Specifications

        We estimate two sets of regressions, distinguished by the two dependent variables: 1.)

Innovative effort, measured by HRSWORKED; and 2.) innovative performance, measured by

USPAPP. In the effort regressions, we regress HRSWORKED on measures of: 1.) motives 2.)

variables affecting individuals’ average productivity, and 3.) control variables. Contrasting this

specification with our theoretical model suggests several important differences that affect the

interpretation of our results. First, we do not have measures for the incentives facing our

respondents (    and      in our model). Since incentives condition the effect of motives on

optimal effort (see equation 7 above), a lack of measures for incentives implies that estimated

coefficients of the motives ( ) reflect a compound effect of the motives and of the unobserved

incentives. Our qualitative predictions for the effects of the motives should, however, still hold

as long as the motives and associated incentives are either uncorrelated or positively correlated.

The latter can be expected in light of research suggesting that individuals self-select into

organizations offering benefits that “fit” their preferences (Cable & Edwards, 2004; Holland,

1997; Sauermann, 2005), suggesting a positive relationship between benefits and the respective
                                                                                                     14
motives, and, as a consequence, between incentives and motives. Second, our model also

predicts an interaction between the determinants of R&D productivity and individuals’ motives.

We estimated multiplicative models, but the interactive terms were never significant. Thus, we

focus on main effects alone.

       In our performance regressions, we regress patent applications (USPAPP) on measures of

1.) motives 2.) effort 3.) variables affecting individuals’ productivity and 4.) control variables.

For the full sample, we focus our discussion on additive specifications of the performance

regressions since interaction terms including effort and various productivity determinants turned

out to be insignificant. Consistent with our model, however, the interaction between effort and

ability is significant in the PhD-sample where a better measure of ability (quality of graduate

education) is available.


5.2   Estimation Issues

5.2.1 Distribution of Dependent Variables

       Our sample includes only individuals who are full-time employees, defined as working

an average of at least 35 hours per week. Since OLS can produce inconsistent results for

truncated dependent variables, we feature truncated regression in our analysis of effort.

       The number of U.S. patent applications filed over the prior five years (USPAPP) is a

discrete measure of innovative performance and, as noted above, has a skewed distribution with

only 24% of our respondents having one or more patent applications. A family of count models

that accounts for skewed count outcomes and also allows for different processes generating zero

counts are zero-inflated negative binomial (ZINB) models (Cameron & Trivedi, 1998).

Estimating a ZINB model amounts to simultaneously estimating two regression models. One

model is a logit predicting membership in an “always-0” group, where individuals are not at risk

                                                                                                      15
of patenting (e.g., because of the nature of their work or because of firm policies regarding

secrecy). The other is a negative binomial model for those cases that are not in the “always-0”

group. In our ZINB models, we excluded several individual-level variables, such as our

preference measures, HDTENURE, and LN_SUPDIR from the logit component, emphasizing

the role of firm characteristics (firm size, startup status, industry) and individuals’ type of work,

field of highest degree, and type of degree in affecting the likelihood of an individual being at

risk of patenting. In addition, the logit component includes two dummy variables indicating

whether the individual’s research was funded by a contract with or grant from the Department of

Defense or the NASA. All count models are adjusted for exposure time because some

respondents have fewer than five years work experience.


5.2.2 Endogeneity

      The cross-sectional nature of our data warrants careful consideration of endogeneity,

especially with respect to individuals’ motives. Economists routinely assume individuals’

motives and preferences to be exogenous and stable, and many social psychologists consider

preferences for work attributes to be “trait-like”—i.e., relatively stable over time (cf. Amabile,

Hill, Hennessey, & Tighe, 1994; Cable et al., 2004). It is, however, conceivable that individuals’

reported preferences change in response to realized performance and benefits. For example,

individuals may rationalize the receipt of little financial reward from their innovative efforts by

reporting that such rewards matter little to them (cf. Festinger, 1957). To investigate this

possibility with respect to the one type of preference where we have some data on the actual

level of the benefit (though not so clearly a contingent benefit), we examined the correlation




                                                                                                     16
between the importance of salary (IMP_SAL), the satisfaction with salary,10 and actual

(logarithmized) salary levels (LN_SALARY). IMP_SAL and LN_SALARY are not significantly

correlated (r=-0.01, n.s.), while the correlation between satisfaction with salary (SAT_SAL) and

LN_SALARY is positive and highly significant (r=0.19, p<0.001). These correlations suggest

that, while satisfaction with a particular benefit may depend on its level, the rated importance of

the benefit—i.e., the motive—is largely exogenous. We will consider the potential for

endogeneity of motives in more detail below.

        With innovative effort (HRSWORKED) on the right hand side of our performance

regressions, we consider the possibility that innovative effort may be endogenous with respect to

realized performance. According to our model, effort is exogenous with respect to realized

performance, but is endogenous with respect to expected performance to the extent respondents

believe future performance is associated with performance-contingent benefits. Thus,

HRSWORKED may be endogenous in these regressions if individuals’ expectations with respect

to benefits and performance are influenced by their past performance. Using CHILDREN011

and MARRIED as instruments for effort, we did not find evidence for endogeneity of

HRSWORKED in any of our performance regressions.11



10
   Our respondents reported their satisfaction with the eight work benefits in their current job. While
satisfaction will generally be a positive function of realized benefits, it is a complex psychological
construct, which is still not well understood (Cable et al., 2004; Judge, Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001).
Thus, we do not use satisfaction scores as measures of either the level of benefits or of incentives in our
empirical analysis.
11
   We tested for endogeneity by including the residual from an OLS first-stage effort regression into
different specifications of second-stage performance regressions (Wooldridge, 2001). The instruments for
effort, CHILDREN011 and MALExCHILDREN011, are jointly significant (F(2,10936)=11.31). We
estimated performance regressions using Poisson, negative binomial, and zero-inflated negative binomial
models with robust as well as bootstrapped standard errors. The first-stage residual was never significant
(Chi2(1)=1.69, p=0.19 for the NBREG case). Given this result and given the lack of an appropriate
instrument for performance, we did not estimate the effort and performance regressions simultaneously as
a system.

                                                                                                        17
6     Results

6.1    Effort

        Table 2 reports the results of our effort regressions. Column 1 shows the results of a

regression of HRSWORKED on the variables conditioning productivity and other controls. In

model 2, we add our measures of respondents’ motives. Four of the measures have significant

effects on effort. The measure of the desire for intellectual challenge (IMP_CHAL) has the

strongest positive effect, followed by the importance of responsibility and independence. What is

notable about these results is the dominance of an intrinsic motive—desire for intellectual

challenge.

        In addition to these positive effects, we observe a significant negative coefficient for the

importance of salary. According to our model, such a negative coefficient would be expected

only if the salary motive also has a strong negative effect on productivity. However, as our

performance regressions below show, the productivity effect of the salary motive is actually

positive. Thus, a more likely explanation for the negative effect of the salary motive on effort is

that the importance of salary reported by individuals reflects their opportunity cost of time,

which should have a negative effect on effort. We should, however, not make too much of this

negative coefficient because it is observed only for non- PhDs (cf. Table A6).12

        While our model does not predict an effect of basic (non-contingent) salary on

individuals’ effort, we also estimated an effort regression including LN_SALARY as an
12
   In order to address high correlations between some of the preference measures, we also estimated the
truncated regression models with one preference measure at a time. All eight measures are individually
significant, with negative effects of the importance of salary, benefits, and job security, and positive
effects of the other five measures. On the basis of the model reported in Table 2, col. 2, we also tested
various subsets of coefficients for joint significance. The measures of the importance of salary, job
security, and fringe benefits correspond to the class of extrinsic motives; these three measures are jointly
highly significant (Chi2(3)=38.94, p<0.001). Of the remaining five preference measures, the importance
of challenge, independence, and advancement map most clearly to intrinsic factors; these 3 measures are
also jointly significant (Chi2(3)=40.30, p<0.001).

                                                                                                           18
additional control (model 3). Its inclusion yields slight changes in the coefficients of the

measures of some motives, but the qualitative results remain unchanged. The negative effect of

IMP_SAL becomes even stronger. Salary itself has a large positive coefficient. However, we are

cautious in interpreting this result since we do not have adequate instruments to address potential

simultaneity between effort and salary.

       We conducted robustness checks involving different estimation methods as well as

different subsamples (see appendix). The positive effects of the importance of challenge as well

as responsibility are very robust, while the effects of the importance of independence and salary

are fragile. Also, using the limited sample of PhD respondents, we were able to include a much

better control for ability. These results show ABILITY has the expected positive effect on effort.

Most importantly, the inclusion of this measure has no noticeable effect on the estimated

coefficients for our motive variables.

       Finally, the coefficients of some of our control variables also deserve attention (Table 2,

model 2). For example, we find that the amount of time spent on the job increases with the

number of different (non-R&D) tasks the individual regularly performs (WA_NONRD). Also,

women with children between the ages of 0 and 11 work significantly fewer hours than

individuals without children. PhDs spend more time on the job than respondents with either

Masters or Bachelor’s degrees. Finally, our results suggest that effort varies significantly by firm

size and firm age. These differences in motives and effort across firm types are examined in

more detail in a companion paper (Sauermann & Cohen, 2007).




                                                                                                  19
6.2   Innovative Performance

6.2.1 Main Analyses

        Our model predicts that individuals’ motives may affect innovative output even

controlling for the quantity of effort (“productivity effects”). We examine these relationships in a

series of zero-inflated negative binomial regressions reported in Table 3. Model 1 includes only

our control variables. We observe that PhDs have a significantly larger number of patent

applications than non- PhDs and that individuals engaged in applied R&D have more patent

applications than individuals in development (omitted category). Individuals engaged in

computer applications and systems design have the lowest number of patent applications. The

number of patent applications also increases with the number of subordinates (LN_SUPDIR).

Finally, while the relevance of training (JOBDEGREE) has a small positive coefficient, time

since graduation (HDTENURE) is insignificant.13 Column 1b shows the results of the logit

component of the zero-inflated negative binomial model.14

        In model 2, we include our measures of individuals’ motives. The coefficients on these

measures reflect the “total effect” of motives and preferences on performance since the

specification does not yet include effort, which should play a mediating role. The importance of

challenge and independence as well as that of salary have significant positive effects. With a

significantly larger coefficient than that for IMP_SAL (p<0.05), a one-SD higher score on the

challenge measure, IMP_CHAL implies a 19.8% higher expected patent count, while the same

13
   We also have a measure of the respondent’s tenure in the current job, potentially reflecting the amount
of job-specific human capital (JOBTENURE). When included in addition to the (highly correlated)
measure HDTENURE, JOBTENURE has a positive effect on performance, while having a negative effect
on innovative effort.
14
   Recall that the logit regression predicts membership in the “never patenting” group, i.e., positive
coefficients indicate a lower likelihood of patenting. As expected, Masters and PhDs are more likely to
patent than are Bachelors (omitted category) and individuals in basic research, design, and computer
applications are less likely to patent than individuals in development.

                                                                                                       20
change in the preference for salary implies a 9.2 % higher expected count. Recall, however, that

these estimates are likely to reflect compound effects of both individuals' motives and of the

associated unobserved incentives. The positive effect of IMP_SAL on performance is notable

given its negative effect on effort. One interpretation is that individuals who care much about

salary find ways to use their time more efficiently, e.g., by reducing the time of “unnecessary”

tinkering and focusing on producing patentable output. Another finding is that the importance of

job security (IMP_SEC) is negatively related to performance, with a one-SD higher score on the

job security measure implying an 11.9% lower expected patent count. Note that the effect sizes

of some of the measures of motives are considerably larger than those of our measures of

experience (HDTENURE, JOBDEGREE) and, in the sample of PhDs, comparable to the effects

of ABILITY (see appendix). Although relative magnitudes of the these effects depend strongly

on the reliability and validity of measures, these results suggest that individuals’ motives may be

at least as important for performance as knowledge and experience.

        In model 3, we include only our controls and the measure of effort (HRSWORKED).

Here, HRSWORKED is positive and highly significant. According to this model, a one-standard

deviation higher level of effort (6.6 hours) implies a 12.4% higher expected count of U.S. patent

applications. Next, we estimated a model including HRSWORKED as well as the eight motive

measures (model 4). Changes in the motive coefficients compared to model 2 (without effort)

reflect the extent to which effort mediates the relationship between motives and performance.

The mediation effects are small, suggesting that most of the effect of motives on performance

occurs through what we call “productivity effects”. For example, the coefficient on the

importance of challenge remains very large and is equivalent to 18.7% higher expected patent

counts for a one SD change in the challenge measure.


                                                                                                   21
       As discussed earlier, these results could reflect impacts of motives and incentives on

cognitive processes (e.g., recall and creativity) or on intermediate outcomes such as project

choice. For example, the positive productivity effects of the importance of challenge and

independence would be consistent with positive effects of intrinsic motives on creativity.

Similarly, the negative effect of the security motive would be consistent with the argument made

above that individuals concerned with job security may also be motivated by a desire to avoid

failure in their projects, and that such risk averse individuals may gravitate towards projects and

approaches that are more incremental and certain, offer less innovative potential and are thus less

likely to result in patents (cf. Dunbar, 1995; Ederer et al., 2008).

       Even though our results suggest only a modest role of the preference for salary in

affecting innovative performance, they do not imply that actual pay and other extrinsic benefits

are not beneficial. In fact, in model 5 (Table 3), where LN_SALARY is included as an additional

control, the large, significant coefficient suggests a strong, positive effect of pay on innovative

performance. Due to the lack of suitable instruments, we are, however, unable to disentangle the

causal nature of this relationship, and salary may be endogenous to the extent that individual

performance is serially correlated and those who performed well in the past receive higher base

pay in subsequent periods. However, it is also conceivable that sufficiently high levels of pay

and financial resources more generally may be beneficial for innovation because they allow

individuals to focus on the work of innovation rather than worrying about their livelihoods.

Most important for our analysis, the inclusion of LN_SALARY yields only negligible changes in

the coefficients of motives.

       We hypothesized above that the productivity effects of motives and incentives may vary

across types of tasks, and suggested that the productivity effects of motives may be greater in


                                                                                                      22
task settings that require more creativity and provide greater autonomy. Column 6 reports

estimates for the sample of respondents engaged in basic or applied research (mean

USPAPP=2.37) and column 7 reports the estimates for those engaged in development (mean

USPAPP=1.67). Our key extrinsic motive, the importance of salary (IMP_SAL), and our key

intrinsic motive, IMP_CHAL, both have significant, positive impacts on productivity for the

respondents engaged in basic or applied research, but neither variable has a significant effect in

development. Similarly, the importance of job security has a significantly larger negative effect

in basic/applied research than in development. The importance of independence, however, has a

stronger effect in development. Our interpretation of these results is that motives generally—

whether intrinsic or extrinsic—can have stronger productivity effects in R&D work that is less

routinized, more demanding of creative solutions, and where employees have more discretion

over the approaches they follow. One surprising result is that, while highly significant in the

development subsample, HRSWORKED is insignificant in the basic/applied research subsample.

This result may reflect the notion that for research tasks demanding more problem solving and

creativity, it is not the time expended beyond the 35 hour lower threshold that has an effect as

much as the quality of the mental effort.15 Alternatively, for upstream research where individual

motives matter more, hours at the office may not accurately reflect total effort expended. For

example, individuals motivated by intellectual challenge may dedicate substantial time outside of

the office to coming up with solutions, etc., rendering a count of hours worked a very noisy

measure of the quantity of effort.




15
  Note that the different effects of motives across types of R&D also support our assumption that motives
are to a large degree exogenous to performance because any effects of performance on motives should be
similarly strong across types of R&D.

                                                                                                      23
6.2.2 Robustness Checks16

          First, we addressed the concern that our performance measure, the number of patent

applications, inaccurately measures innovative output—especially valuable innovations—by

estimating performance regressions using granted patents (USPGRT) and, most importantly,

commercialized patents (USPCOM). While the effect of effort is reduced in regressions using

USPGRT and the effect of the independence motive becomes insignificant in regressions using

USPCOM, these analyses generally strengthen our finding of significant effects of effort on

performance and of significant productivity effects of motives.

          Second, in light of the possibility that our measures of motives may be conflated with

respondent ability, we estimated key performance regressions using the PhD subsample for

which we have a better measure of ability (rankings of respondents’ graduate programs). As

expected, ABILITY has a positive association with performance. Moreover, the ABILITY-

HRSWORKED interaction is positive and significant. Most importantly, however, the inclusion

of this measure has virtually no impact on the coefficient estimates of the motives of intellectual

challenge, salary, independence and job security. Finally, to probe whether we may be observing

firm-level rather than individual-level effects, our Ph.D. subsample allowed the inclusion of firm

fixed effects firms with 5 or more individuals in our sample. The coefficients of many of the

measures of the motives are somewhat reduced, suggesting that individuals’ motives may differ

systematically across firms. However, the productivity effects of the importance of salary,

intellectual challenge, independence, and job security remain large and significant.




16
     These and other robustness checks are discussed in more detail in the appendix.

                                                                                                   24
7   Discussion

       Our results suggest that researchers’ motives matter for innovative effort and

performance. First, desires for challenging work and responsibility appear to elicit more effort in

R&D. Second, controlling for effort, preferences for challenge, independence, and, to a lesser

extent, salary are associated with superior performance, with the effect of challenge being large

and easily dominating any other. Moreover, a strong preference for job security is consistently

associated with sub-par performance. Interestingly, these productivity effects of motives appear

to be much stronger in basic and applied R&D, compared to development.

       Our key results are robust across different estimation methods and the inclusion of

controls for firm effects as well as individuals’ ability and work experience. Unfortunately, the

SESTAT data did not provide measures for a number of motives that our interviews suggest may

be quite important for those employed in R&D, including the desire to solve practical problems

(as distinct from intellectual challenge), and the motive to contribute to the work of a team.

       In addition to the desire for income playing a modest role, the two strongest, robust

relationships are the positive one between the desire for intellectual challenge and innovative

performance and the negative one between the desire for job security and performance.

Notwithstanding the psychological research that motivates a good deal of our empirical research,

we cannot identify the underlying sources of these effects. One explanation offered by the

literature is that these preferences for challenge and security may condition intermediate

behaviors, such as the kinds of projects that researchers might select. A second, and not

mutually exclusive explanation, is an impact on cognition itself. A third possibility, not

discussed above, is that these preferences may be linked to other individual traits affecting

innovation. For example, desire for intellectual challenge may indicate that a respondent has a

preference for novel experiences, and that tasks providing novelty are consequently pleasurable
                                                                                                  25
for such individuals. Work in neuroscience suggests that such pleasurable motivational states

elicit hemispheric activity that, in turn, affects individuals’ scope of attention and problem-

solving capabilities (Friedman & Foerster, 2005; Jung-Beeman et al., 2004). Similarly, those

who are concerned with job security may be predisposed to fear or anxiety, and Friedman and

Foerster (2005) observe that perceptions of threat elicit distinctive hemispheric activity that tends

to suppress creativity.

        A potential concern with our empirical results is that our measures for motives are

endogenous. We do not have instruments or time series data that would allow one to assess, no

less correct for, the possibility. Yet, our corollary analyses, while not directly addressing the

concern, tend to mitigate it. 17 Given that this is the first time these strong relationships between

individuals’ motives and innovative activity have been observed in large sample empirical

research on innovation, future study is needed to examine the underlying drivers.

        Policy and managerial implications of our findings are several. For managers, the

findings highlight the importance of intrinsic motivation for innovative performance.

Accordingly, management should consider the returns to the provision of intrinsic benefits, while

of course recognizing the associated costs and challenges. Nonpecuniary incentives can provide

leverage where pecuniary incentives tend to be less effective, such as when the link between

effort and performance is highly uncertain or when agents’ behaviors and performance are hard

to observe by principals, conditions which are often characteristic of R&D (cf. Alchian &

Demsetz, 1972; Ouchi, 1979; Prendergast, 1999). Moreover, individuals engaged in innovation

17
  For example, as noted above, while we find a strong correlation between salary levels and measures of
satisfaction with salary, there is no correlation between our measure of the preference for salary (i.e., the
salary motive) and salary levels. Moreover, if endogeneity were present, one would then expect to
observe similar relationships between motives and performance across the full range of innovative
activities, including development, but the observed relationships are largely confined to basic and applied
research.

                                                                                                           26
appear to have particularly strong preferences for nonpecuniary benefits, potentially providing

such benefits with a very high motivating “power.” The challenge of appealing to employees’

intrinsic motives is that intrinsic benefits typically cannot be provided directly. Organizations

can, however, control them indirectly to some degree, through facilitating or enabling conditions

such as task assignments, greater autonomy (Deci et al., 1985; Hackman & Oldham, 1976), or

supporting scientists’ desire to participate in professional communities (cf. Stern, 2004).

        Management also needs to recognize, however, that appealing to individuals’ motives can

occasionally detract from organizational goals. For example, there are cases where individuals

pursued research projects out of their own interest, against explicit policies of management.

While such projects have sometimes yielded high returns for the employing organization (Katz,

1993; Kidder, 1981), they can also diminish firm performance. Researchers’ pursuit of their

intrinsic or professional interests can at times detract from their firm’s interests, as when the

desire for peer recognition motivates an industrial scientist to disseminate research findings that

the employer would prefer to keep secret.

        For policy makers, our results suggest that policies that encourage educational institutions

to strengthen and reinforce intrinsic motivation, including love of challenge, curiosity, etc., may

offer social dividends. At the same time, policies that change the incentives of individuals

engaged in innovation should be evaluated in light of the complex ways in which such changes

may affect not only the rate and direction of research effort, but its productivity as well. 18




18
  A possible example of such a policy that applies to academic research is the Bayh-Dole Amendment
enabling academic institutions to hold patents to their inventions as a matter of course, and the associated
awarding of a share of licensing and other income to the academic inventors.

                                                                                                          27
                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

                               Variable               Type    Observations        Mean Std. Dev.      Min       Max
Dependent        uspapp                            count            11014           1.19    4.50          0       96
variables        uspgrt                            count            11014           0.60    2.88          0       96
                 uspcom                            count            11014           0.26    1.76          0       96
                 publication                       count            11014           0.97    3.67          0       96
                 hrsworked                         continuous       11014          45.42    6.63         35       96

Motives          Imp. intellectual challenge       4 point              11014       3.64     0.53           1      4
                 Imp. benefits                     4 point              11014       3.58     0.55           1      4
                 Imp. salary                       4 point              11014       3.56     0.53           1      4
                 Imp. job security                 4 point              11014       3.52     0.59           1      4
                 Imp. independence                 4 point              11014       3.48     0.59           1      4
                 Imp. opportunities advancement    4 point              11014       3.35     0.65           1      4
                 Imp. responsibility               4 point              11014       3.28     0.63           1      4
                 Imp. contribution to society      4 point              11014       3.11     0.73           1      4

Firm level       emsize1                           dummy                11014       0.03     0.17           0      1
indep. vars.     emsize2                           dummy                11014       0.03     0.18           0      1
                 emsize3                           dummy                11014       0.09     0.28           0      1
                 emsize4                           dummy                11014       0.11     0.31           0      1
                 emsize5                           dummy                11014       0.05     0.22           0      1
                 emsize6                           dummy                11014       0.13     0.34           0      1
                 emsize7                           dummy                11014       0.17     0.38           0      1
                 emsize8                           dummy                11014       0.38     0.48           0      1
                 newbus                            dummy                11014       0.08     0.28           0      1

Individual level basic R&D                       dummy                    11014      0.03     0.18        0       1
indep. vars      applied R&D                     dummy                    11014      0.20     0.40        0       1
                 development                     dummy                    11014      0.24     0.43        0       1
                 design                          dummy                    11014      0.19     0.39        0       1
                 computer apps                   dummy                    11014      0.33     0.47        0       1
                 wa_nonrd                        count                    11014      1.54     1.47        0       8
                 jobdegree                       3 point                  11014      2.53     0.66        1       3
                 hd_bachelor                     dummy                    11014      0.45     0.50        0       1
                 hd_master                       dummy                    11014      0.24     0.43        0       1
                 hd_phd                          dummy                    11014      0.31     0.46        0       1
                 male                            dummy                    11014      0.80     0.40        0       1
                 married                         dummy                    11014      0.75     0.43        0       1
                 children011                     count                    11014      0.66     0.97        0       9
                 hdtenure                        continuous               11014     13.27     9.55   supp.*      49
                 supervdirect                    continuous               11014      1.70     4.90   supp.*     250
                 ln_supdir                       continuous               11014      0.55     0.80   supp.*    5.53
                 govt_nasa                       dummy                    11014      0.03     0.16        0       1
                 govt_dod                        dummy                    11014      0.12     0.33        0       1
                 uscitizen                       dummy                    11014      0.85     0.36        0       1
                 asian                           dummy                    11014      0.24     0.43        0       1
                 black                           dummy                    11014      0.05     0.21        0       1
                 white                           dummy                    11014      0.71     0.45        0       1
                 race_other                      dummy                    11014      0.06     0.24        0       1
                 ability                         continuous                2805      3.42     0.77     0.42    4.75
                 salary                          continuous               11014    83951    37272    supp.* 999996
                 ln_salary                       continuous               11014     11.25     0.50     6.91 13.82
                 satisfaction salary             4 point                  11014      3.22     0.69        1       4
                 Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file
                 Note: * Suppressed due to NSF confidentiality restrictions

                                                                                                                   28
            Table 2: Effort Regressions
                                 truncreg     truncreg     truncreg
                                           1            2            3
                             hrsworked hrsworked hrsworked
                Imp. Salary                     -0.409*    -0.481**
                                                 [0.186]      [0.185]
              Imp. Benefits                       -0.154       -0.138
                                                 [0.185]      [0.184]
         Imp. Job Security                        -0.283       -0.214
                                                 [0.158]      [0.156]
            Imp. Challenge                     0.964**      0.874**
                                                 [0.180]      [0.179]
      Imp. Independence                           0.339*        0.293
                                                 [0.156]      [0.154]
       Imp. Advancement                            0.017        0.060
                                                 [0.152]      [0.150]
       Imp. Responsibility                     0.626**      0.584**
                                                 [0.158]      [0.157]
      Imp. Contr. Society                         -0.149       -0.090
                                                 [0.126]      [0.125]
              LN_SALARY                                     1.887**
                                                              [0.232]
             EMSIZE: 1-10            -0.123       -0.345        0.069
                                    [0.552]      [0.546]      [0.546]
           EMSIZE: 11-24         -1.423**     -1.544**       -1.208*
                                    [0.500]      [0.495]      [0.494]
           EMSIZE: 25-99             -0.362       -0.483       -0.279
                                    [0.338]      [0.336]      [0.334]
         EMSIZE: 100-499             -0.427       -0.449       -0.261
                                    [0.292]      [0.290]      [0.289]
         EMSIZE: 500-999           -0.856*      -0.848*        -0.700
                                    [0.367]      [0.362]      [0.359]
     EMSIZE: 1000-4999             -0.640*      -0.644*      -0.547*
                                    [0.261]      [0.258]      [0.256]
    EMSIZE: 5000-24999               -0.426       -0.406       -0.338
                                    [0.232]      [0.230]      [0.229]
                 NEWBUS           2.243**      2.204**      2.035**
                                    [0.334]      [0.330]      [0.327]
          IND_NAICS (27)                incl.        incl.        incl.
             WAPRI: basic            -0.502       -0.538       -0.430
                                    [0.483]      [0.477]      [0.474]
           WAPRI: applied             0.008       -0.027       -0.042
                                    [0.257]      [0.255]      [0.253]
           WAPRI: design             -0.066        0.000        0.023
                                    [0.247]      [0.245]      [0.242]
      WAPRI: computers           -0.848**     -0.745**     -0.658**
                                    [0.250]      [0.248]      [0.245]
              WA_NONRD            0.938**      0.896**      0.884**
                                    [0.064]      [0.064]      [0.063]
       DEGREE: masters            0.584**         0.494*        0.217
                                    [0.210]      [0.208]      [0.210]
             DEGREE: phd          2.313**      2.041**      1.519**
                                    [0.245]      [0.244]      [0.253]
           HD_FIELD (15)                incl.        incl.        incl.
               LN_SUPDIR          1.662**      1.587**      1.438**
                                    [0.114]      [0.114]      [0.114]
               HDTENURE           0.096**      0.106**          0.042
                                    [0.029]      [0.029]      [0.030]
          HDTENURE_SQ            -0.002**     -0.002**         -0.001
                                    [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.001]
             JOBDEGREE            0.467**      0.423**      0.350**
                                    [0.137]      [0.136]      [0.134]
                     MALE         0.920**      0.956**      0.802**
                                    [0.221]      [0.220]      [0.218]
           CHILDREN011           -1.159**     -1.097**     -1.098**
                                    [0.249]      [0.245]      [0.247]
  MALE x CHILDREN011              1.143**      1.099**      1.076**
                                    [0.261]      [0.257]      [0.259]
                 MARRIED             -0.183       -0.092       -0.113
                                    [0.213]      [0.211]      [0.209]
                USCITIZEN            0.630*    0.724**         0.692*
                                    [0.278]      [0.276]      [0.274]
                  RACE (3)              incl.        incl.        incl.
              Observations           11014        11014        11014
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

                                                                          29
                          Table 3: Performance Regressions
                                                          Full Sample                                       Basic/Appl. Developm.
                              zinb zinb (logit)            zinb       zinb            zinb         zinb           nbreg       nbreg
                                1a          1b                 2         3               4             5              6           7
                           uspapp                      uspapp uspapp              uspapp       uspapp         uspapp uspapp
           Imp. Salary                                   0.167*                    0.175**       0.158*        0.294**        0.007
                                                        [0.065]                    [0.064]      [0.064]         [0.099]     [0.092]
         Imp. Benefits                                   -0.042                     -0.041       -0.029          -0.110      -0.027
                                                        [0.071]                    [0.071]      [0.070]         [0.102]     [0.091]
     Imp. Job Security                                 -0.213**                   -0.200**     -0.202**       -0.332**     -0.186*
                                                        [0.059]                    [0.060]      [0.059]         [0.087]     [0.085]
       Imp. Challenge                                   0.342**                    0.325**      0.308**        0.452**        0.177
                                                        [0.066]                    [0.065]      [0.066]         [0.100]     [0.109]
  Imp. Independence                                     0.174**                    0.184**      0.178**           0.127   0.251**
                                                        [0.054]                    [0.053]      [0.054]         [0.076]     [0.088]
   Imp. Advancement                                      -0.035                     -0.039       -0.041           0.111      -0.047
                                                        [0.053]                    [0.053]      [0.053]         [0.079]     [0.089]
   Imp. Responsibility                                   -0.075                     -0.085       -0.079        -0.197*       -0.055
                                                        [0.054]                    [0.055]      [0.054]         [0.081]     [0.091]
   Imp. Contr. Society                                   -0.034                     -0.037       -0.031          -0.002      -0.043
                                                        [0.047]                    [0.047]      [0.047]         [0.064]     [0.078]
       HRSWORKED                                                  0.018**          0.015**      0.013**           0.009   0.023**
                                                                   [0.005]         [0.005]      [0.005]         [0.006]     [0.007]
         LN_SALARY                                                                              0.277**
                                                                                                [0.058]
        EMSIZE: 1-10           0.109        0.773*         0.093        0.164        0.149        0.114           -0.582       -0.209
                             [0.277]       [0.385]       [0.280]      [0.285]      [0.288]      [0.285]          [0.320]      [0.334]
       EMSIZE: 11-24          -0.208         0.575        -0.189       -0.202       -0.188       -0.222        -0.898**         0.044
                             [0.237]       [0.358]       [0.228]      [0.250]      [0.238]      [0.236]          [0.277]      [0.297]
       EMSIZE: 25-99          -0.082      0.770**         -0.134       -0.115       -0.152       -0.201        -0.823**        -0.344
                             [0.159]       [0.252]       [0.152]      [0.159]      [0.153]      [0.151]          [0.160]      [0.200]
    EMSIZE: 100-499           -0.332        0.536*        -0.285       -0.327       -0.281       -0.261        -0.520**      -0.462*
                             [0.187]       [0.261]       [0.186]      [0.184]      [0.184]      [0.187]          [0.164]      [0.191]
    EMSIZE: 500-999           -0.223         0.484        -0.276       -0.237       -0.288       -0.288        -0.841**        -0.213
                             [0.192]       [0.321]       [0.197]      [0.183]      [0.187]      [0.190]          [0.251]      [0.208]
 EMSIZE: 1000-4999         -0.321**          -0.05     -0.289**      -0.316**     -0.286**     -0.279**         -0.350*        -0.214
                             [0.106]       [0.213]       [0.106]      [0.106]      [0.107]      [0.106]          [0.143]      [0.141]
EMSIZE: 5000-24999          -0.231*           0.11      -0.223*        -0.207       -0.201       -0.186        -0.573**      -0.290*
                             [0.106]       [0.187]       [0.103]      [0.108]      [0.105]      [0.104]          [0.114]      [0.122]
             NEWBUS            0.023      -0.711*         -0.054       -0.023       -0.082       -0.026            0.020       0.364*
                             [0.166]       [0.297]       [0.156]      [0.165]      [0.158]      [0.163]          [0.160]      [0.173]
         IND_NAICS               incl.         incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.            incl.        incl.
        WAPRI: basic           0.295        0.786*         0.284       0.314*        0.299        0.292
                             [0.159]       [0.312]       [0.155]      [0.159]      [0.154]      [0.153]
      WAPRI: applied        0.273**         -0.043      0.235**       0.272**      0.234**       0.229*          0.197
                             [0.094]       [0.208]       [0.090]      [0.094]      [0.090]      [0.090]         [0.124]
       WAPRI: design          -0.107      0.605**         -0.101       -0.109       -0.101       -0.084
                             [0.126]       [0.180]       [0.126]      [0.128]      [0.128]      [0.129]
  WAPRI: computers         -0.765**       1.149**      -0.793**      -0.752**     -0.779**     -0.742**
                             [0.179]       [0.225]       [0.173]      [0.179]      [0.173]      [0.178]
         WA_NONRD             -0.009         0.041        -0.003       -0.028       -0.018       -0.022         -0.075*       -0.016
                             [0.029]       [0.041]       [0.029]      [0.029]      [0.029]      [0.029]          [0.036]     [0.034]
   DEGREE: masters             0.249     -0.466**          0.212       0.256*        0.216        0.204         0.513**      0.443**
                             [0.129]       [0.155]       [0.130]      [0.129]      [0.129]      [0.129]          [0.167]     [0.139]
        DEGREE: phd         0.875**      -2.030**       0.815**       0.855**      0.799**      0.761**         1.424**      1.581**
                             [0.122]       [0.226]       [0.122]      [0.123]      [0.121]      [0.123]          [0.138]     [0.128]
           HD_FIELD              incl.         incl.         incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.            incl.       incl.
          LN_SUPDIR         0.291**                     0.300**       0.263**      0.276**      0.261**         0.383**      0.184**
                             [0.040]                     [0.039]      [0.041]      [0.040]      [0.039]          [0.063]     [0.059]
          HDTENURE            -0.010                      -0.010       -0.012       -0.012       -0.021            0.009      -0.005
                             [0.013]                     [0.012]      [0.013]      [0.012]      [0.013]          [0.018]     [0.018]
     HDTENURE_SQ               0.000                       0.000        0.000        0.000        0.000            0.000       0.000
                             [0.000]                     [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]          [0.000]     [0.001]
        JOBDEGREE             0.136*                      0.142*       0.141*       0.144*       0.144*           -0.029      0.187*
                             [0.060]                     [0.057]      [0.059]      [0.057]      [0.057]          [0.084]     [0.080]
                 MALE       0.595**                     0.588**       0.581**      0.577**      0.556**         0.394**      0.564**
                             [0.088]                     [0.085]      [0.088]      [0.086]      [0.085]          [0.114]     [0.133]
          USCITIZEN            0.150                      0.163*        0.140        0.156        0.137           -0.093      -0.037
                             [0.084]                     [0.082]      [0.085]      [0.082]      [0.082]          [0.129]     [0.130]
            RACE (3)             incl.                       incl.        incl.        incl.        incl.            incl.       incl.
          GOVT_DOD                        0.785**
                                          [0.225]
        GOVT_NASA                           0.503
                                          [0.363]
          Observations        11014                      11014         11014        11014        11014            2586          2690
            Chi-square 459.162                         526.916       462.118      527.585      531.322         943.516       600.498
                      df          66                        74            67           75           76              72            71
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%

                                                                                                                                          30
References


Akerlof, G. A. & Kranton, R. E. 2005. Identity and the economics of organizations. Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 19(1): 9-32.
Alchian, A. A. & Demsetz, H. 1972. Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization.
       American Economic Review, 62(5): 777-792.
Amabile, T. 1996. Creativity in context. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
Amabile, T. M. 1993. Motivational synergy: Toward new conceptualizations of intrinsic and
       extrinsic motivation in the workplace. Human Resource Management Review, 3: 185-
       201.
Amabile, T. M., Hill, K. G., Hennessey, B. A., & Tighe, E. M. 1994. The Work Preference
       Inventory - Assessing Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivational Orientations. Journal of
       Personality and Social Psychology, 66(5): 950-967.
Besley, T. & Ghatak, M. 2005. Competition and incentives with motivated agents. American
       Economic Review, 95(3): 616-636.
Cable, D. M. & Edwards, J. R. 2004. Complementary and supplementary fit: A theoretical and
       empirical integration. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5): 822-834.
Camerer, C. & Hogarth, R. M. 1999. The effects of financial incentives in experiments: A review
       and capital-labor-function framework. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 19: 7-42.
Cameron, A. C. & Trivedi, P. K. 1998. Regression analysis of count data. Cambridge, UK ; New
       York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, W. M., Nelson, R. R., & Walsh, J. P. 2000. Protecting their intellectual assets:
       Appropriability conditions and why U.S. manufacturing firms patent (or not), NBER
       Working Paper.
Cohen, W. M. & Sauermann, H. 2007. Schumpeter’s Prophecy and Individual Incentives as a
       Driver of Innovation. In F. Malerba & S. Brusoni (Eds.), Perspectives on Innovation: 73-
       104: Cambridge University Press.
Dasgupta, P. & David, P. A. 1994. Toward a New Economics of Science. Research Policy,
       23(5): 487-521.
Deci, E. L. & Ryan, R. M. 1985. Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior.
       New York: Plenum.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. 1999. A meta-analytic review of experiments
       examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin,
       125(6): 627-668.
Dunbar, K. 1995. How scientists really reason: Scientific reasoning in real-world laboratories. In
       R. J. Sternberg & J. E. Davidson (Eds.), The nature of insight: 365-395. Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press.
Ederer, F. & Manso, G. 2008. Are Financial Incentives Detrimental to Innovation, Working
       Paper.
Festinger, L. 1957. Theory of Cognitive Dissonance: Stanford University Press.
Fox, M. F. 1983. Publication Productivity among Scientists: A Critical Review. Social Studies of
       Science, 13(2): 285-305.
Frey, B. S. & Jegen, R. 2001. Motivation crowding theory. Journal of Economic Surveys, 15(5):
       589-611.
                                                                                               31
Friedman, R. S. & Foerster, J. 2005. Effects of motivational cues on perceptual asymmetry:
       Implications for creativity and analytical problem solving. Journal of Personality and
       Social Psychology, 88(2): 263-275.
Gagne, M. & Deci, E. L. 2005. Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of
       Organizational Behavior, 26(4): 331-362.
Gambardella, A., Harhoff, D., & Verspagen, B. 2006. The value of patents, Working Paper.
George, J. M. 2007. Creativity in organizations. The Academy of Management Annals, 1(1):
       439-477.
Goldberger, M. L., Flattau, P., & Maher, B. A. 1995. Research-Doctorate Programs in the United
       States: Continuity and Change: National Academy Press.
Griliches, Z. 1957. Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change.
       Econometrica, 25(4): 501-522.
Hackman, J. R. & Oldham, G. R. 1976. Motivation through the design of work - Test of a theory.
       Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 16(2): 250.
Hennessey, B. A. & Amabile, T. M. 1998. Reward, intrinsic motivation, and creativity.
       American Psychologist, 53(6): 674-675.
Holland, J. L. 1997. Making vocational choices : a theory of vocational personalities and work
       environments (3rd ed.). Odessa, Fla.: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Holt, K. 1974. Work frustration in engineering departments. R & D Management, 5(1): 17-21.
Judge, T. A., Thoresen, C. J., Bono, J. E., & Patton, G. K. 2001. The job satisfaction-job
       performance relationship: A qualitative and quantitative review. Psychological Bulletin,
       127(3): 376-407.
Jung-Beeman, M., Bowden, E. M., Haberman, J., Frymiare, J. L., Arambel-Liui, S., Greenblatt,
       R., Reber, P. J., & Kounios, J. 2004. Neural activity when people solve verbal problems
       with insight. PLoS Biology, 2(4): 500-510.
Katz, R. 1993. How a Band of Technical Renegades Designed the Alpha-Chip. Research-
       Technology Management, 36(6): 13-20.
Katz, R. 2004. Motivating professionals in organizations. In R. Katz (Ed.), The human side of
       managing technological innovation: 3-20. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kidder, T. 1981. The soul of a new machine (1st ed.). Boston: Little, Brown.
Lacetera, N. & Zirulia, L. 2008. Knowledge spillovers, competition, and taste for science in a
       model of R&D incentive provision, Working Paper.
Lakhani, K. R. & von Hippel, E. 2003. How open source software works: "free" user-to-user
       assistance. Research Policy, 32(6): 923-943.
Lerner, J. & Tirole, J. 2005. The Economics of Technology Sharing: Open Source and Beyond.
       Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(2): 99.
Manners, G., Steger, J. A., & Zimmerer, T. W. 1997. Motivating your R&D staff. Research
       Technology Management, 40(6): 29-34.
Manso, G. 2006. Motivating innovation. Working Paper.
Merton, R. K. 1973. The sociology of science : Theoretical and empirical investigations.
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Moorman, R. H. & Podsakoff, P. M. 1992. A Metaanalytic Review and Empirical-Test of the
       Potential Confounding Effects of Social Desirability Response Sets in Organizational-
       Behavior Research. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 65: 131-
       149.
                                                                                            32
Murdock, K. 2002. Intrinsic motivation and optimal incentive contracts. Rand Journal of
        Economics, 33(4): 650-671.
National Science Board. 2008. Science and Engineering Indicators 2008. Arlington, VA:
        National Science Foundation.
National Science Foundation, S. R. S. 2003. Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System
        (SESTAT), restricted-use data file.
Nelson, R. R. 1959. The simple economics of basic scientific research. Journal of Political
        Economy, 67(3): 297-306.
Ouchi, W. G. 1979. Conceptual-Framework for the Design of Organizational Control
        Mechanisms. Management Science, 25(9): 833-848.
Pedhazur, E. J. & Schmelkin, L. P. 1991. Measurement, design, and analysis : an integrated
        approach. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pelz, D. C. & Andrews, F. M. 1976. Scientists in organizations : productive climates for research
        and development (Rev. ed.). Ann Arbor: Institute for Social Research, University of
        Michigan.
Prendergast, C. 1999. The provision of incentives in firms. Journal of Economic Literature,
        37(1): 7-63.
Roberts, J., Hann, I. H., & Slaughter, S. 2006. Understanding the Motivations, Participation, and
        Performance of Open Source Software Developers: A Longitudinal Study of the Apache
        Projects. Management Science, 52(7): 984-999.
Ryan, R. M. & Deci, E. L. 2000. Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new
        directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1): 54-67.
Sauermann, H. 2005. Vocational Choice: A Decision Making Perspective. Journal of Vocational
        Behavior, 66: 273-303.
Sauermann, H. & Cohen, W. 2007. Fire in the belly? Individuals' motives and innovative
        performance in startups versus established firms, Working Paper.
Schmookler, J. 1962. Economic sources of inventive activity. Journal of Economic History, 22:
        1-20.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. The theory of economic development; an inquiry into profits, capital,
        credit, interest, and the business cycle. Cambridge, Mass.,: Harvard University Press.
Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy: Harper & Brothers.
Stephan, P. E. & Levin, S. G. 1992. Striking the Mother Lode in Science: Oxford University
        Press.
Stephan, P. E. 1996. The economics of science. Journal of Economic Literature, 34(3): 1199-
        1235.
Stern, S. 2004. Do scientists pay to be scientists? Management Science, 50(6): 835-853.
Wooldridge, J. M. 2001. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data: MIT Press.
Zuckerman, H. 1988. The sociology of science. In N. J. Smelser (Ed.), The Handbook of
        Sociology: 511-574: Sage.




                                                                                               33
APPENDIX

Motives: Additional Descriptive Analyses

        Table 1 above provides summary statistics for the preference measures, ordered from

highest to lowest average importance. Note that the means for all preference measures are above

three, indicating a high to very high importance of all factors. Respondents rated intellectual

challenge as the most important work benefit, followed by fringe benefits, salary, job security,

independence, opportunities for advancement, responsibility, and contribution to society.

        An interesting question is whether the motives and preferences for job characteristics

vary across type of work (e.g., basic research vs. development), type of field, or degree. We

would expect such differences if different work settings and tasks offer different kinds of work

benefits and if individuals self-select based on their motives and preferences. To examine such

differences, we regressed the eight preference measures on three sets of dummy variables:

primary type of work (basic research is the omitted category), type of degree (Bachelors is the

omitted category), and field of highest degree (engineering fields is the omitted category). 1 The

results of these regressions (estimated using ordered probit) are shown in Table A3. All

regressions are highly significant, suggesting that there are significant differences in individuals’

preferences across degrees, fields, and types of work. With respect to differences across types of

degrees, we find that PhDs report a significantly lower importance of extrinsic benefits (salary

and fringe benefits) as well as job security than Bachelors, while reporting higher importance of

certain intrinsic benefits (challenge, contribution to society, and independence).




1
 Please refer to the measurement section for a list of all fields. For this analysis, we formed three
aggregate classes of fields: engineering (omitted), science, and other fields.

                                                                                                        34
        Comparisons of individuals’ preference across primary types of work show significant

differences with respect to some factors but not others (development is the omitted category).

We find no differences with respect to preferences for salary, and only small differences with

respect to preferences for fringe benefits. Individuals primarily engaged in design and computer

applications report significantly lower importance of intellectual challenge, independence,

opportunities for advancement, responsibility, and contribution to society than individuals in

development. Individuals in basic and applied research report a higher importance of intellectual

challenge and contribution to society than those in development.2

        A comparison of the motives of individuals with science versus engineering degrees

shows only small differences (controlling for the primary type of work). Scientists have

somewhat stronger preferences for fringe benefits, independence and job security.

        Finally, we examined the relationships among the preference measures. An exploratory

factor analysis (common factor analysis, oblique rotation with oblimin(0) criterion) revealed two

factors, as shown in Table A4. The preferences for responsibility, intellectual challenge,

independence, contribution to society, and advancement load on one factor. The preferences for

fringe benefits, salary, as well as job security load on a second factor. It is interesting to note that

the preference for opportunities for advancement does not load on the same factor as salary and

fringe benefits, indicating that the preference for opportunities for advancement may not

strictly—or even primarily—reflect a pecuniary motive. Overall, the results of this factor

analysis suggest that individuals’ preferences are correlated in systematic ways. While some


2
 In interpreting these results, we have to consider the potential for social desirability bias. For example,
PhDs could think that they are expected to care more than non- PhDs about intellectual challenge and
contribution to society, and their higher importance ratings could reflect an attempt to conform to these
expectations.

                                                                                                               35
individuals emphasize extrinsic benefits such as salary and fringe benefits as well as job security,

others emphasize intrinsic benefits. However, the correlation between the two extracted factors is

positive (r=0.23), suggesting that intrinsic and extrinsic motives are not two opposite ends of a

“motivation continuum” but two motivational orientations that can occur within the same

individual (see also Amabile et al., 1994).

       In some disciplines, it is common to use factor-based scores derived from a factor

analysis as new variables in subsequent regression analyses. This method assumes that the

component measures capture the same underlying latent construct (Pedhazur & Schmelkin,

1991). We do not make such an assumption and focus on the individual preference measures.


Effort: Additional Analyses

       The distributional characteristics of our effort measure (number of hours worked) suggest

robustness checks using alternative estimation techniques. First, a large number of respondents

(39.8%) reported HRSWORKED of 40 hours per week, while only very few individuals report

less than 40 hours. It is conceivable that some of the individuals reporting 40 hours actually work

less, but report 40 hours since this is the official work time in many organizations. In this case,

40 hours could be considered the lower limit of a censored distribution. To address this

possibility, we estimate key effort models using a Tobit regression model, with a lower limit of

40 hours. Second, many responses are clustered at “round” values such as 40 and 50 hours. To

address this issue, we divided the HRSWORKED measure into categories, each spanning 5

hours. Using the resulting measure HRSCAT5 as our new dependent variable, we also estimated

effort regressions using ordered probit. The Tobit and ordered probit regression suggests that the




                                                                                                      36
effects of the importance of challenge, responsibility, and salary are robust. However, the effects

of the preference for contribution to society and independence appear to be fragile.

        We also estimated key effort regressions without individuals who are employed in

computer systems design, which is the largest single industry in our sample (for an industry

breakdown, see Table A1), as well as on the subsample of individuals employed in

manufacturing industries. The qualitative results are similar to our benchmark regressions (Table

2), with slight changes of the coefficients of the importance of salary and job security.

        Finally, we estimated key regressions using the sample of PhDs, for which we have

additional measures. First, we constructed a measure of ability based on the ratings of the quality

of the respondent’s graduate department. Second, we obtained firm identifiers to control for firm

fixed effects. In Table A6, we examine the robustness of our results to the inclusion of these two

sets of measures. Model 1 reproduces the results from the full sample (Table 2, model 2). Model

2 is estimated using only non-PhDs. Model 3 estimates the base line model using the PhD-

sample. Comparing models 2 and 3, we observe several differences in the effects of motives on

effort. More specifically, the negative coefficient of the salary motive is confined to the non-

PhD sample, while the coefficient is positive (but insignificant) in the PhD sample. The negative

effect of the importance of job security as well as the positive effect of the importance of

challenge is larger for the PhDs. 3 In model 4, we include the ABILITY measure. Consistent with

our model, the coefficient is positive and highly significant, suggesting that individuals who

graduated from higher-ranked PhD programs expend more effort. Including this ABILITY
3
  A detailed analysis of differences in the effects of motives across degree types using interactions shows
three significant effects: For individuals with a Masters degree, the preference for contribution to society
has a stronger positive effect than for individuals with a Bachelors degree. For PhDs, the effect on effort
of the importance of salary is more positive, and the importance of job security is more negative than for
individuals with a bachelor's degree.

                                                                                                          37
measure does not significantly change the coefficients of the eight preference measures. Finally,

in model 5, we also include one dummy variable for each firm that has 5 or more individuals in

our sample. Their inclusion has little impact on the coefficients of our key independent variables.

Overall, the results of these analyses using the PhD-sample suggest that including firm identifiers

and a better measure of ability in effort regressions does not substantially affect the estimated

coefficients of individuals’ motives and preferences.


Performance: Additional Analyses

       In order to assess the robustness of our results, we re-estimated key performance

regressions using negative binomial regression (NBREG) and using different subsets of our

sample (Table A7). Models 1 and 2 are equivalent to the ZINB models 2 and 4 in Table 3 and are

estimated using the full sample. While the positive effect of effort remains strong and significant,

the estimated effect of the importance of salary is insignificant, and the effect of the importance

of independence is reduced. The effect of the preference for intellectual challenge, however, is

even stronger than in the ZINB models. In model 7, we estimate a negative binomial model using

only those cases that have at least one patent application (N=2,637). This regression thus

examines the impact of effort and individuals’ preferences for individuals who were productive

enough to have at least one patent application and who were not precluded from patenting (who

are not in the “never patent” group predicted by the logit part of the ZINB model). Compared to

the reference model (model 2), the effect of effort is reduced. The effect of the importance of

salary as well as independence increases. The effect of the importance of challenge is reduced




                                                                                                    38
but remains highly significant. The effect of the importance of job security becomes

insignificant.4

        We also estimated performance regressions using only cases from the pharmaceutical and

medical device industries (model 8). While the number of cases in this subsample is relatively

small (N=769), this analysis is particularly interesting because patents are very effective in these

industries and should more closely reflect innovative performance than in other industries

(Cohen et al., 2000). Compared to the estimates from the full sample (model 2), we find that the

effect of effort becomes insignificant, while the effects of the importance of challenge, job

security, and independence increase.


Analyses Employing the PhD Sample

        Our PhD-sample, for which we have better measures of individuals’ ability as well as

firm identifiers, allows us to examine the robustness of our results to two potentially problematic

issues. First, the relationship we observe between certain motives and performance may have

ability as a common cause. Individuals with greater ability or better training could enjoy

intellectual challenge, for example, because they are capable of meeting those challenges. In that

case, the observed relationship between desire for challenge and performance would be spurious.

To rule this out, we add an important measure of ability and training.

4
  We conducted additional analyses to probe the robustness of our results. First, there are a small number
of cases in our sample with a very high number of reported U.S. patent applications. While these cases
might be truly exceptional performers, it could also be that a very high count of USPAPP reflects
measurement error (e.g., individuals reported lifetime patents) or cases where individuals are named on
patents without having directly contributed to the invention. Given the small mean of USPAPP in our
sample, such cases could severely impact our estimation results. To assess any such effect, we dropped all
respondents reporting more than 20 U.S. patent applications in a 5-year span (77 cases, 0.7% of the full
sample). The effect of HRSWORKED is unchanged compared to the reference model. However, the
effect of the importance of salary becomes insignificant. The effect of the preference for challenge
remains large and highly significant.

                                                                                                       39
        Second, our analysis thus far could have failed to control sufficiently for firm

characteristics, and there are any number of reasons to expect the impact of motives to be at least

partly conditioned by firm effects. Among others, it is conceivable that certain firms command

higher levels of resources and also attract individuals with particular sets of motives.

Alternatively, firms may have different policies linking performance, for example, to financial

rewards, implying an impact of firm effects if there is indeed a correlation between the

preference for a given type of benefits and the degree to which that benefit is contingent upon

effort or performance within a firm.5

        Table A8 reports the results of a set of negative binomial regressions using the PhD-

sample. Model 1 reproduces the results from model 1 in Table A7 (regression using the full

sample), while model 2 estimates the model using only the PhD sample. Comparing the two

regressions, we observe that the importance of salary and the importance of independence appear

to have a somewhat stronger positive effect in this PhD-sample, while the importance of job

security and intellectual challenge have a somewhat smaller effect.6 In model 3, we add our

measure of ability (quality of graduate department). This measures has a significant and

economically meaningful positive effect (a one-SD higher ability score translates into a 9.1%

higher expected patent count), but its addition to the model has virtually no effect on the

preference measures. In model 6, we additionally include our effort measure (HRSWORKED) as

well as the interaction between ABILITY and HRSWORKED. As predicted, the interaction term


5
  Also, firms may differ in their propensity to patent, i.e., in the likelihood that a given invention is
actually patented. While it is not clear that the latter effect would systematically affect our estimates of
the impact of motives on performance, controlling for such effects is certainly desirable.
6
  Regressions examining these differences using interaction terms show that the effect of the preference
for contribution to society is significantly smaller for PhDs than for Bachelors (negative interaction),
while the effects of the importance of independence are significantly larger (positive interaction).

                                                                                                               40
is significant at the 5% level, suggesting that the productivity of innovative effort increases with

the ability of the individual. In model 7, we add a dummy variable for every firm that has 5 or

more individuals in our sample. The firm effects are jointly significant and their inclusion also

changes the coefficients of some preference measures. More specifically, the coefficients of

importance of salary, importance of challenge, and importance of independence are somewhat

reduced. Once the firm fixed effects are included, the main effects of effort and ability are

insignificant, but the interaction term is highly significant.

       Overall, our analyses using the PhD-sample show that, first, ability and effort affect

performance interactively, as suggested by our formal model. Second, the effects of individuals’

motives and preferences for job characteristics are largely independent of ability, ruling out an

important alternative explanation for our results. Third, the significant impacts of individuals’

motives and preferences for job characteristics persist even with controls for firm fixed effects.

At the same time, however, the coefficients of some preference measures change once we control

for firm effects, suggesting that firms may differ with respect to the motives and preferences of

their employees, which in turn could impact firms’ relative innovative performance. We examine

this interplay between individual and firm-level effects in more detail in related work

(Sauermann et al., 2007).


Alternative Performance Measures

       Finally, in addition to using U.S. patent applications, we also estimated performance

regressions using alternative measures of innovative performance (Table A9). The most

important alternative measure is the number of patents granted over a 5-year span that were

licensed or commercialized (USPCOM). The virtue of this measure is that it provides a rough

                                                                                                     41
sense of the number of economically important inventions that were patented, thus providing a

crude quality threshold for our performance measure, as opposed to the number of patent

applications or patents granted, the majority of which are not economically important. As noted

above, one reason that we do not feature this measure is that strategic considerations other than

value may condition the firm’s decision to commercialize an invention. Second, the

commercialization introduces a substantial and highly variable time lag between the R&D

activity and the observed outcome. Notwithstanding these latter concerns, a number of our

results are robust. First, our measure of effort, HRSWORKED, continues to have a positive,

significant coefficient. The qualitative results for our featured independent variables also remain

robust. Preference for intellectual challenge importantly affects performance. The preference for

salary remains positive but is no longer significant. Finally, the effect of the preference for job

security remains negative and significant.

       Table A9 also shows the results of regressions using peer reviewed publications as

dependent variables. The results of models 7 and 8 suggest that effort has a strong positive

impact on publication output and that the importance of intellectual challenge continues to have a

significant and large positive effect. Interestingly, the importance of job security and the

importance of independence do not have significant effects. This analysis is purely exploratory

since publications are likely to measure a different kind of innovative performance than patents

do, and many firms may have policies that discourage the publication of research findings. More

work is needed to understand the drivers of patenting and publishing in industry, and it would be

particularly interesting to examine similarities and differences with academic settings.




                                                                                                      42
Appendix: Tables



                                         Table A1: Sample Composition

                     Industry (IND_NAICS)                        Basic    Applied Develop-   Design Computer
                                                                Research Research  ment              Apps.
     21x Mining,Oil,Gas                                              ≤5*        57      49        33      36
     22x Utilities                                                     8        37      31       107      91
     23x Construction                                                ≤5*        17      15        74      28
     311-312 Manufacturing:Food,Bev,Tobacco                            8        51      47        26      30
     313-316 Manufacturing:Textiles                                  ≤5*         7      16       ≤5*      14
     3211,337 Manufacturing:Wood,Furniture                           ≤5*       ≤5*      10      ≤20*      13
     322-323 Manufacturing:Paper,Printing                            ≤5*        23      32        20      34
     324 Manufacturing:Petroleum                                     ≤5*        21      10        22      20
     325 Manufacturing:Chemicals ex Pharma                            21       206     213        76      55
     3254 Pharma                                                      49       239     152        27      71
     326 Manufacturing:Plastics,Rubber                               ≤5*        19      33        27      16
     327 Manufacturing:NonmetalMinerals                              ≤5*         7      23        21      11
     331 Manufacturing:PrimaryMetal                                  ≤5*         7      17        26      16
     332 Manufacturing:FabricatedMetal                               ≤5*        10      50        60      19
     333 Manufacturing:Machinery                                     ≤5*        43     106       159     101
     3341 Manufacturing:Computers                                      8        51     144        67     156
     3342-3343 Manufacturing:Communications,Audio, Video             ≤5*        40      89        79     107
     3344 Manufacturing:Semiconductors,Electronics                    11        90     327       190     263
     3345 Manufacturing:Instruments                                  ≤5*        39      96       102     105
     335 Manufacturing:HouseholdAppliances,Lighting                  ≤5*        24      60        41      43
     3361-3363 Manufacturing:Auto                                      8        54     129       140      80
     3364 Manufacturing:Aircraft,Aerospace                             9        94     210       284     202
     3365-3369 Manufacturing:TransportationEquipment                 ≤5*       ≤5*      17        25      18
     3391 Manufacturing:MedicalEquipment                               6        50      91        50      34
     3399 Manufacturing:Misc.                                        ≤5*         5      23        21      23
     517 Telecom Services                                             16        54      83       103     282
     5415 Computer Systems Design                                     38       145     306       205   1,645
     5417 Scientific R&D Services                                    160       805     311        84     136
     Total                                                           381     2,205   2,690     2,089   3,649
     Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file
     *Counts suppressed due to NSF confidentiality restrictions



                             Table A2: Comparison of Full Sample and PhD-Sample


                                                             Full Sample           Ph.D.-Sample
              Primary work activity (WAPRI)                 Freq.     Percent      Freq. Percent

              Basic research                                  381      3.46             116     4.14
              Applied research                              2,205    20.02            1,092    38.93
              Development                                   2,690    24.42              933    33.26
              Design                                        2,089    18.97              261       9.3
              Computer Apps./Programming                    3,649    33.13              403    14.37
              Total                                        11,014        100           2805      100
              DEGREE
              Bachelor                                      4,977    45.19                0        0
              Master                                        2,666    24.21                0        0
              PhD                                           3,371    30.61             2805      100
              Total                                        11,014        100           2805      100
              Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file

                                                                                                               43
                                 Table A3: Differences in Preference Ratings
                               1            2        3         4         5          6         7         8
                           oprobit      oprobit   oprobit   oprobit   oprobit   oprobit    oprobit   oprobit
                         IMP_SAL IMP_BEN IMP_SEC IMP_CHAL IMP_IND IMP_ADV IMP_RESP IMP_SOC
       Basic Research        -0.038         0.115  0.182**     0.149*    0.069   0.180**       0.098  0.248**
                            [0.068]       [0.071]  [0.069]    [0.074]  [0.065]    [0.063]    [0.065]  [0.066]
     Applied Research         0.012      0.096**     0.032    0.133**   0.089*      0.023      0.015  0.112**
                            [0.036]       [0.035]  [0.035]    [0.039]  [0.036]    [0.034]    [0.034]  [0.033]
                 Design      -0.045         0.002   -0.023   -0.098** -0.111** -0.195**     -0.131** -0.102**
                            [0.037]       [0.037]  [0.036]    [0.038]  [0.035]    [0.035]    [0.035]  [0.034]
      Computer Apps.          0.001      -0.068*    -0.059   -0.120** -0.112** -0.174**     -0.220** -0.160**
                            [0.033]       [0.033]  [0.032]    [0.033]  [0.031]    [0.031]    [0.031]  [0.029]
                Masters      -0.029 -0.118** -0.141**         0.080**      0.02       0.05   0.081**  0.118**
                            [0.030]       [0.030]  [0.029]    [0.030]  [0.028]    [0.028]    [0.028]  [0.027]
                   PhD -0.311** -0.408** -0.362**             0.230**  0.094**     -0.011     0.058*  0.243**
                            [0.031]       [0.031]  [0.030]    [0.032]  [0.030]    [0.029]    [0.029]  [0.028]
         Field: Science       0.015        0.059*    0.043      0.026   0.055*     -0.047     -0.043   0.054*
                            [0.027]       [0.027]  [0.027]    [0.028]  [0.026]    [0.026]    [0.026]  [0.025]
           Field: Other       0.054      0.118**     0.035     -0.024  0.125**   -0.079*      -0.009    0.009
                            [0.037]       [0.037]  [0.035]    [0.036]  [0.035]    [0.033]    [0.033]  [0.033]
          Observations       11014         11014    11014      11014    11014      11014      11014    11014
            Chi-square 144.792 209.691 165.321               192.998   99.981     97.677    113.875 313.853
                      df           8            8         8         8         8          8         8         8
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Robust standard errors in brackets
Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file



                             Table A4: Factor Loadings of Preference Measures


                     Preference measure          Factor 1 Factor 2 Uniqueness
            Importance responsibility                 0.69      0.02      0.51
            Importance intellectual challenge         0.62     -0.08      0.64
            Importance independence                   0.57     -0.04      0.68
            Importance contribution society           0.51     -0.01      0.75
            Importance opportunities advancement      0.49      0.21      0.67
            Importance benefits                       0.01      0.68      0.54
            Importance salary                        -0.04      0.61      0.63
            Importance job security                   0.04      0.51      0.73
            Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file




                                                                                                                 44
                                                                                         Table A5: Correlations



                                               1           2         3          4          5          6          7          8          9         10         11         12         13         14         15
         1               USPAPP                1
         2              USPGRT          0.7958*            1
         3             USPCOM           0.5951*      0.7831*          1
         4       HRSWORKED              0.1039*      0.0713*    0.0517*          1
         5              IMP_SAL         -0.0206 -0.0308*        -0.0126   -0.0444*          1
         6             IMP_BEN         -0.0380* -0.0397*         -0.023   -0.0339*    0.4990*          1
         7             IMP_SEC         -0.0553* -0.0388*       -0.0345*   -0.0549*    0.2879*    0.4206*          1
         8           IMP_CHAL           0.0682*      0.0489*    0.0322*    0.1151*    -0.0005    0.0600*    0.0334*          1
         9               IMP_IND        0.0491*      0.0398*     0.0229    0.0828*    0.0357*    0.0875*    0.0593*    0.3768*          1
        10             IMP_ADV           0.0187      -0.0086    -0.0074    0.0447*    0.2006*    0.2004*    0.2052*    0.3336*    0.2278*          1
        11           IMP_RESP           0.0282*       0.0117     0.0104    0.1060*    0.1039*    0.1098*    0.1026*    0.4342*    0.4391*    0.4506*          1
        12             IMP_SOC          0.0285*       0.0106    -0.0019    0.0466*    -0.0139    0.0987*    0.1143*    0.3173*    0.3064*    0.2668*    0.3550*          1
        13              EMSIZE1         -0.0010       0.0005    -0.0008    0.0425*   -0.0388*   -0.0810*   -0.0731*     0.0172    0.0296*    -0.0133     0.0074     0.0001          1
        14              EMSIZE8         0.0350*      0.0272*     0.0056     0.0015     0.0101    0.0494*    0.0415*    -0.0007    -0.0079    -0.0084    -0.0051     0.0086   -0.1389*          1
        15             NEWBUS            0.0148      -0.0084    -0.0042    0.0795*   -0.0319*   -0.0640*   -0.0926*     0.0211     0.0062    0.0328*     0.0140     0.0022    0.2458*   -0.1935*          1
        16         WAPRI: basic          0.0107       0.0094    -0.0125    -0.0090    -0.0084     0.0119    0.0258*    0.0273*     0.0197    0.0403*    0.0293*    0.0499*     0.0093   -0.0315*     0.0064
        17      WAPRI: applied          0.1488*      0.1070*    0.0422*    0.0609*   -0.0286*    -0.0033    -0.0178    0.0838*    0.0642*    0.0405*    0.0470*    0.0984*     0.0078     0.0201     0.0147
        18     WAPRI: develop.          0.0610*      0.0590*    0.0655*    0.0566*    -0.0118    -0.0218    -0.0128     0.0244     0.0192    0.0427*    0.0481*    0.0334*    -0.0159     0.0122     0.0106
        19       WAPRI: design         -0.0445* -0.0280*        -0.0120    -0.0090     0.0016     0.0188     0.0117   -0.0416*   -0.0406*   -0.0399*    -0.0155   -0.0478*   -0.0368*     0.0023   -0.0628*
        20   WAPRI: comp. apps         -0.1492* -0.1251*       -0.0808*   -0.0925*    0.0370*     0.0024     0.0070   -0.0695*   -0.0459*   -0.0558*   -0.0824*   -0.0937*    0.0350*    -0.0179    0.0277*
        21          WA_NONRD             0.0162      0.0273*    0.0262*    0.2223*     0.0216    0.0349*     0.0126    0.0506*    0.0695*    0.1114*    0.1390*    0.0772*    0.0468*   -0.0606*     0.0126
        22         JOBDEGREE            0.0337*       0.0209     0.0207    0.0346*    0.0321*    0.0323*    0.0404*    0.0569*    0.0337*    0.0687*    0.0718*    0.0691*     0.0147     0.0053    -0.0122
        23          HD: bachelor       -0.1712* -0.1349*       -0.0758*   -0.0852*    0.0736*    0.0998*    0.0985*   -0.0855*   -0.0442*   -0.0274*   -0.0488*   -0.1127*    -0.0091   -0.0501*   -0.0465*
        24           HD: master        -0.0773* -0.0596*       -0.0256*   -0.0337*    0.0347*     0.0150    -0.0002    -0.0107    -0.0115     0.0112     0.0137    -0.0033    -0.0114    0.0311*     0.0006
        25              HD: PHD         0.2568*      0.2010*    0.1056*    0.1234*   -0.1117*   -0.1217*   -0.1062*    0.1023*    0.0584*     0.0192    0.0400*    0.1248*     0.0204    0.0252*    0.0497*
        26          HDTENURE             0.0208      0.0656*    0.0465*    0.0283*   -0.0530*    -0.0120   -0.0382*   -0.0592*     0.0160   -0.2777*   -0.0949*    -0.0237      0.018      0.008   -0.0697*
        27          LN_SUPDIR           0.1149*      0.0994*    0.0770*    0.2517*    -0.0151    -0.0014   -0.0361*    0.0742*    0.0511*    0.0699*    0.1156*    0.0759*     0.0155    -0.0195     0.0069
        28          LN_SALARY           0.1469*      0.1360*    0.0919*    0.1695*    -0.0085   -0.0379*   -0.0830*    0.0566*    0.0487*   -0.0802*     0.0175    -0.0164   -0.0288*    0.0844*     0.0129
        29    Satisfaction Salary        0.0177       0.0110     0.0008     0.0082    -0.0019    0.0369*    0.0347*    0.0758*    0.0593*   -0.0693*    0.0346*    0.0350*    -0.0217    0.0757*   -0.0297*
        30                ABILITY       0.0589*       0.0293    -0.0090    0.0726*   -0.0507*    -0.0455   -0.0759*     0.0340    -0.0318    -0.0396    -0.0442   -0.0581*   -0.0510*    -0.0144     0.0199
        31                  MALE        0.0644*      0.0601*    0.0437*    0.0653*    -0.0143   -0.0519*   -0.0590*    -0.0221   -0.0459*   -0.0510*   -0.0399*   -0.0852*    0.0359*   -0.0372*     0.0231
        32            MARRIED           0.0451*      0.0434*    0.0277*     0.0165     0.0203    0.0470*    0.0264*   -0.0368*    -0.0206   -0.0439*    -0.0121     0.0156    -0.0185    -0.0027   -0.0314*
5




        33       CHILDREN011            0.0325*      0.0269*     0.0220     0.0056    0.0410*    0.0501*    0.0255*    -0.0171    -0.0176    0.0258*     0.0021     0.0160    -0.0059    -0.0174     0.0165
                                    * significant at 1%
    4
                                          16        17         18         19         20         21         22          23          24          25         26        27        28        29         30        31        32
     16             WAPRI: basic           1
     17          WAPRI: applied     -0.0947*          1
     18         WAPRI: develop.     -0.1076*   -0.2844*          1
     19           WAPRI: design     -0.0916*   -0.2421*   -0.2750*          1
     20     WAPRI: comp. apps       -0.1332*   -0.3522*   -0.4001*   -0.3405*          1
     21              WA_NONRD         -0.007    0.0389*    0.0629*    0.0385*   -0.1199*          1
     22             JOBDEGREE        0.0247*    0.0825*    0.0537*    0.0288*   -0.1528*     0.0104          1
     23              HD: bachelor    -0.0181   -0.2172*   -0.1068*    0.1396*    0.1729*    0.0578*    -0.0124          1
     24               HD: master     -0.0177   -0.0963*    -0.0055     0.0126    0.0832*    -0.0129    0.0744*   -0.5131*           1
     25                  HD: PHD     0.0360*    0.3240*    0.1205*   -0.1625*   -0.2640*   -0.0505*   -0.0558*   -0.6030*    -0.3753*           1
     26              HDTENURE       -0.0297*    -0.0219    -0.0039    0.0530*    -0.0104     0.0133   -0.1052*    0.0870*    -0.0715*    -0.0276*           1
     27              LN_SUPDIR       -0.0058    0.0817*    0.0564*     0.0091   -0.1263*    0.3966*    0.0504*   -0.0962*    -0.0352*     0.1366*     0.0836*         1
     28              LN_SALARY      -0.0412*    0.0540*    0.0477*   -0.0277*   -0.0504*    0.0287*    0.0403*   -0.2017*     0.0326*     0.1875*     0.2613*   0.1927*         1
     29       Satisfaction Salary    -0.0077    0.0340*    -0.0064    -0.0202    -0.0032     -0.023    0.0403*     0.0033      -0.011      0.0067     0.0650*   0.0520*   0.1925*         1
     30                   ABILITY     0.0172     0.0413     0.0041    -0.0231   -0.0536*    -0.0227    -0.0453           .           .           .     0.0328   -0.0139   0.0849*   0.0540*          1
     31                     MALE    -0.0495*   -0.0530*    0.0329*    0.0663*     -0.021     0.0063    0.0269*    -0.0077    -0.0297*     0.0359*     0.1294*   0.0723*   0.1382*    -0.021    -0.0215         1
     32                 MARRIED     -0.0368*      0.016     0.0202    -0.0013    -0.0168     0.0225     0.0217   -0.1086*     0.0330*     0.0866*     0.1944*   0.0836*   0.1279*    0.0225   -0.0675*   0.1260*         1
     33            CHILDREN011       -0.0081     -0.019     0.0131    -0.0105      0.016     0.0241     0.0154   -0.0338*     -0.0022     0.0386*    -0.1285*   0.0645*   0.0480*   -0.0055     0.0033   0.0646*   0.3395*
          * significant at 1%
46
             Table A6: Effort Regressions ( PhD – Sample)
                             Full Sample       PHD=0                    Phd-Sample
                                 truncreg     truncreg     truncreg        truncreg     truncreg
                                           1            2            3               4            5
                             hrsworked hrsworked hrsworked hrsworked hrsworked
                Imp. Salary        -0.409*    -0.662**          0.400           0.408        0.569
                                    [0.186]      [0.211]      [0.391]         [0.389]      [0.382]
              Imp. Benefits          -0.154       -0.227       -0.187          -0.175       -0.294
                                    [0.185]      [0.210]      [0.369]         [0.368]      [0.360]
         Imp. Job Security           -0.283       -0.021     -0.688*         -0.640*      -0.668*
                                    [0.158]      [0.180]      [0.315]         [0.314]      [0.300]
            Imp. Challenge        0.964**      0.773**      1.546**         1.470**      1.550**
                                    [0.180]      [0.203]      [0.378]         [0.377]      [0.366]
      Imp. Independence              0.339*       0.363*        0.149           0.178        0.070
                                    [0.156]      [0.175]      [0.339]         [0.337]      [0.323]
       Imp. Advancement               0.017        0.081        0.028           0.028        0.099
                                    [0.152]      [0.169]      [0.315]         [0.314]      [0.306]
       Imp. Responsibility        0.626**      0.525**          0.566           0.593        0.450
                                    [0.158]      [0.180]      [0.325]         [0.323]      [0.310]
      Imp. Contr. Society            -0.149       -0.143        0.012           0.045        0.020
                                    [0.126]      [0.143]      [0.264]         [0.263]      [0.249]
                   ABILITY                                                  0.704**      0.645**
                                                                              [0.217]      [0.208]
       EMPLIDCT5 (122)                                                                         incl.
             EMSIZE: 1-10            -0.345       -0.618        0.237           0.445        1.940
                                    [0.546]      [0.633]      [1.122]         [1.121]      [1.184]
           EMSIZE: 11-24         -1.544**     -1.931**         -0.756          -0.766        0.839
                                    [0.495]      [0.583]      [0.933]         [0.933]      [1.023]
           EMSIZE: 25-99             -0.483       -0.742        0.252           0.229       1.702*
                                    [0.336]      [0.387]      [0.679]         [0.677]      [0.819]
         EMSIZE: 100-499             -0.449       -0.564       -0.616          -0.617        0.794
                                    [0.290]      [0.344]      [0.576]         [0.578]      [0.753]
         EMSIZE: 500-999           -0.848*      -0.839*        -0.518          -0.431        1.659
                                    [0.362]      [0.415]      [0.833]         [0.832]      [0.948]
     EMSIZE: 1000-4999             -0.644*      -0.661*        -0.792          -0.843        0.607
                                    [0.258]      [0.296]      [0.518]         [0.517]      [0.670]
    EMSIZE: 5000-24999               -0.406       -0.440       -0.454          -0.437        0.616
                                    [0.230]      [0.264]      [0.480]         [0.478]      [0.540]
                 NEWBUS           2.204**      1.967**      2.815**         2.766**      2.664**
                                    [0.330]      [0.400]      [0.634]         [0.635]      [0.637]
          IND_NAICS (27)                incl.        incl.        incl.           incl.        incl.
             WAPRI: basic            -0.538     -1.440*         1.495           1.448        1.735
                                    [0.477]      [0.580]      [0.912]         [0.912]      [0.901]
           WAPRI: applied            -0.027        0.001        0.044           0.008       -0.076
                                    [0.255]      [0.357]      [0.404]         [0.403]      [0.388]
           WAPRI: design              0.000       -0.083       -0.239          -0.193       -0.230
                                    [0.245]      [0.275]      [0.590]         [0.590]      [0.582]
      WAPRI: computers           -0.745**     -0.733**         -0.988          -0.919       -0.900
                                    [0.248]      [0.274]      [0.620]         [0.615]      [0.571]
              WA_NONRD            0.896**      0.834**      1.006**         1.011**      1.001**
                                    [0.064]      [0.074]      [0.125]         [0.124]      [0.122]
       DEGREE: masters               0.494*       0.471*
                                    [0.208]      [0.208]
             DEGREE: phd          2.041**
                                    [0.244]
           HD_FIELD (15)                incl.        incl.        incl.           incl.        incl.
               LN_SUPDIR          1.587**      1.365**      1.915**         1.928**      1.924**
                                    [0.114]      [0.132]      [0.229]         [0.229]      [0.221]
               HDTENURE           0.106**         0.074*       0.180*          0.174*       0.169*
                                    [0.029]      [0.032]      [0.072]         [0.072]      [0.070]
          HDTENURE_SQ            -0.002**       -0.002*      -0.004*         -0.004*      -0.004*
                                    [0.001]      [0.001]      [0.002]         [0.002]      [0.002]
             JOBDEGREE            0.423**         0.408*        0.253           0.297        0.115
                                    [0.136]      [0.162]      [0.280]         [0.280]      [0.272]
                     MALE         0.956**      0.922**          0.574           0.625        0.781
                                    [0.220]      [0.241]      [0.506]         [0.502]      [0.471]
           CHILDREN011           -1.097**       -0.530*    -2.833**        -2.875**     -3.019**
                                    [0.245]      [0.255]      [0.544]         [0.544]      [0.532]
  MALE x CHILDREN011              1.099**      0.709**      2.506**         2.529**      2.634**
                                    [0.257]      [0.271]      [0.572]         [0.571]      [0.558]
                 MARRIED             -0.092       -0.017       -0.248          -0.151        0.014
                                    [0.211]      [0.237]      [0.460]         [0.457]      [0.431]
                USCITIZEN         0.724**      1.078**         -0.153          -0.219       -0.247
                                    [0.276]      [0.350]      [0.523]         [0.522]      [0.499]
                  RACE (3)              incl.        incl.        incl.           incl.        incl.
              Observations           11014          7643         2805            2805         2805
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file


                                                                                                       47
                     Table A7: Performance Regressions: Auxiliary Analyses
                                 Full Sample        Basic/Appl. Developm.        Design Compapp. uspapp>0 Pharmed
                                 nbreg      nbreg         nbreg       nbreg         nbreg      nbreg       nbreg      nbreg
                                      1          2             3           4             5          6           7          8
                            uspapp uspapp             uspapp uspapp             uspapp uspapp uspapp uspapp
             Imp. Salary         0.088      0.102      0.294**        0.007         0.169     -0.193    0.137**       0.204
                               [0.073]    [0.072]       [0.099]     [0.092]       [0.144]    [0.165]     [0.053]    [0.176]
           Imp. Benefits        -0.022     -0.019        -0.110      -0.027        -0.065      0.238      -0.010     -0.226
                               [0.075]    [0.074]       [0.102]     [0.091]       [0.151]    [0.156]     [0.057]    [0.177]
      Imp. Job Security -0.268** -0.255**             -0.332**     -0.186*      -0.460** -0.393**         -0.090   -0.298*
                               [0.059]    [0.059]       [0.087]     [0.085]       [0.130]    [0.133]     [0.054]    [0.145]
         Imp. Challenge       0.394**    0.373**       0.452**        0.177         0.173   0.852**     0.152**    0.585**
                               [0.070]    [0.069]       [0.100]     [0.109]       [0.146]    [0.173]     [0.053]    [0.190]
    Imp. Independence           0.114*     0.123*         0.127   0.251**          -0.087      0.106    0.167**      0.338*
                               [0.058]    [0.057]       [0.076]     [0.088]       [0.135]    [0.147]     [0.045]    [0.155]
     Imp. Advancement           -0.041     -0.048         0.111      -0.047        -0.097     -0.018       0.012     -0.159
                               [0.057]    [0.056]       [0.079]     [0.089]       [0.123]    [0.140]     [0.045]    [0.153]
     Imp. Responsibility        -0.071     -0.085      -0.197*       -0.055         0.097     -0.214      -0.057   -0.327*
                               [0.058]    [0.058]       [0.081]     [0.091]       [0.131]    [0.140]     [0.048]    [0.166]
    Imp. Contr. Society          0.019      0.019        -0.002      -0.043         0.128     -0.152      -0.049      0.165
                               [0.049]    [0.050]       [0.064]     [0.078]       [0.097]    [0.104]     [0.043]    [0.120]
         HRSWORKED                       0.019**          0.009   0.023**          0.026*     0.025*      0.009*     -0.006
                                          [0.005]       [0.006]     [0.007]       [0.011]    [0.011]     [0.004]    [0.011]
          EMSIZE: 1-10          -0.321     -0.283        -0.582      -0.209         0.099     -0.451       0.031      0.493
                               [0.203]    [0.202]       [0.320]     [0.334]       [0.531]    [0.417]     [0.200]    [0.499]
         EMSIZE: 11-24 -0.533**          -0.509*      -0.898**        0.044         0.156 -1.810**        -0.152      0.030
                               [0.197]    [0.202]       [0.277]     [0.297]       [0.402]    [0.429]     [0.200]    [0.522]
         EMSIZE: 25-99 -0.523** -0.526**              -0.823**       -0.344        -0.368   -0.550*       -0.148      0.583
                               [0.124]    [0.124]       [0.160]     [0.200]       [0.274]    [0.270]     [0.102]    [0.316]
      EMSIZE: 100-499 -0.571** -0.561**               -0.520**     -0.462*       -0.582* -1.408**         -0.197     -0.370
                               [0.132]    [0.130]       [0.164]     [0.191]       [0.239]    [0.268]     [0.116]    [0.283]
      EMSIZE: 500-999 -0.439** -0.433**               -0.841**       -0.213        -0.452     -0.381      -0.193      0.006
                               [0.142]    [0.139]       [0.251]     [0.208]       [0.309]    [0.310]     [0.142]    [0.353]
   EMSIZE: 1000-4999 -0.269** -0.256**                 -0.350*       -0.214        -0.154     -0.380    -0.169*       0.152
                               [0.092]    [0.092]       [0.143]     [0.141]       [0.202]    [0.213]     [0.075]    [0.243]
 EMSIZE: 5000-24999           -0.210*      -0.191     -0.573**     -0.290*         0.440*     -0.134      -0.141     -0.396
                               [0.104]    [0.105]       [0.114]     [0.122]       [0.210]    [0.238]     [0.072]    [0.223]
               NEWBUS           0.287*      0.239         0.020      0.364*         0.395     0.572*      -0.012      0.185
                               [0.122]    [0.123]       [0.160]     [0.173]       [0.287]    [0.285]     [0.102]    [0.275]
            IND_NAICS              incl.      incl.         incl.       incl.         incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.
          WAPRI: basic          -0.106     -0.085                                                          0.148     0.854*
                               [0.139]    [0.138]                                                        [0.115]    [0.333]
        WAPRI: applied          0.201*     0.201*         0.197                                         0.187**    0.609**
                               [0.081]    [0.080]       [0.124]                                          [0.064]    [0.201]
         WAPRI: design -0.352** -0.346**                                                                  -0.027     -0.381
                               [0.106]    [0.106]                                                        [0.090]    [0.319]
    WAPRI: computers -1.300** -1.286**                                                                 -0.417** -1.713**
                               [0.109]    [0.109]                                                        [0.097]    [0.349]
           WA_NONRD             -0.045   -0.060*       -0.075*       -0.016     -0.204**      -0.011       0.009     -0.102
                               [0.024]    [0.025]       [0.036]     [0.034]       [0.059]    [0.060]     [0.021]    [0.068]
     DEGREE: masters          0.469**    0.471**       0.513**    0.443**        0.794**       0.246       0.128      0.160
                               [0.097]    [0.097]       [0.167]     [0.139]       [0.178]    [0.167]     [0.082]    [0.257]
          DEGREE: phd         1.580**    1.560**       1.424**    1.581**        1.912**    2.002**     0.455**    0.912**
                               [0.084]    [0.085]       [0.138]     [0.128]       [0.199]    [0.198]     [0.068]    [0.234]
              HD_FIELD             incl.      incl.         incl.       incl.         incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.
            LN_SUPDIR         0.298**    0.272**       0.383**    0.184**        0.374**       0.093    0.116**    0.474**
                               [0.041]    [0.041]       [0.063]     [0.059]       [0.082]    [0.099]     [0.033]    [0.126]
            HDTENURE            -0.006     -0.008         0.009      -0.005         0.007     -0.050 -0.036**        0.074*
                               [0.013]    [0.013]       [0.018]     [0.018]       [0.024]    [0.028]     [0.011]    [0.033]
       HDTENURE_SQ               0.000      0.000         0.000       0.000         0.000      0.001    0.001**    -0.002*
                               [0.000]    [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.001]       [0.001]    [0.001]     [0.000]    [0.001]
          JOBDEGREE           0.215**    0.214**         -0.029      0.187*      0.434**    0.391**        0.006     -0.121
                               [0.058]    [0.057]       [0.084]     [0.080]       [0.112]    [0.133]     [0.047]    [0.135]
                   MALE       0.664**    0.651**       0.394**    0.564**        1.016**    1.030**     0.267**    0.781**
                               [0.084]    [0.085]       [0.114]     [0.133]       [0.231]    [0.220]     [0.074]    [0.196]
             USCITIZEN           0.146      0.140        -0.093      -0.037         0.272   0.662**        0.132     -0.013
                               [0.091]    [0.090]       [0.129]     [0.130]       [0.222]    [0.232]     [0.074]    [0.249]
               RACE (3)            incl.      incl.         incl.       incl.         incl.      incl.       incl.      incl.
           Observations         11014      11014           2586        2690          2089       3649        2637        769
              Chi-square 2672.705 2732.524            943.516 600.498           850.215 20956.11 524.884
                       df            74         75            72          71            71         71          75         48
                alphaest         4.014      3.991         2.568       3.269         5.503      7.966       0.656      2.695
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file

                                                                                                                                48
                Table A8: Performance Regressions ( PhD-Sample)
                         Full Sample                               PhD Sample
                                 nbreg       nbreg       nbreg     nbreg     nbreg         nbreg       nbreg
                                     1           2           3         4         5             6            7
                             uspapp      uspapp      uspapp      uspapp uspapp         uspapp      uspapp
           Imp. Salary           0.088   0.263**     0.266**              0.257**      0.257**        0.180*
                               [0.073]     [0.080]     [0.080]             [0.080]       [0.080]     [0.078]
         Imp. Benefits          -0.022      -0.074      -0.080              -0.070        -0.076      -0.043
                               [0.075]     [0.085]     [0.085]             [0.084]       [0.084]     [0.082]
     Imp. Job Security       -0.268**     -0.198*     -0.184*             -0.185*       -0.167*     -0.185*
                               [0.059]     [0.079]     [0.079]             [0.081]       [0.080]     [0.074]
       Imp. Challenge         0.394**    0.288**     0.281**              0.273**      0.271**      0.227**
                               [0.070]     [0.083]     [0.083]             [0.083]       [0.083]     [0.079]
   Imp. Independence            0.114*   0.319**     0.322**              0.326**      0.326**      0.292**
                               [0.058]     [0.067]     [0.068]             [0.067]       [0.068]     [0.066]
   Imp. Advancement             -0.041       0.013       0.019               0.023         0.031       0.062
                               [0.057]     [0.068]     [0.068]             [0.067]       [0.067]     [0.063]
   Imp. Responsibility          -0.071      -0.117      -0.110              -0.131        -0.132      -0.115
                               [0.058]     [0.069]     [0.069]             [0.070]       [0.070]     [0.064]
   Imp. Contr. Society           0.019    -0.126*     -0.126*             -0.133*       -0.126*       -0.088
                               [0.049]     [0.059]     [0.061]             [0.060]       [0.060]     [0.056]
       HRSWORKED                                                 0.016**  0.014**         0.011*       0.006
                                                                  [0.005]  [0.005]       [0.005]     [0.005]
              ABILITY                                  0.114*                             0.106*       0.075
                                                      [0.052]                            [0.052]     [0.047]
       HRS x ABILITY                                                                      0.014*    0.017**
                                                                                         [0.006]     [0.006]
        Employer ID's                                                                                    incl.
        EMSIZE: 1-10              -0.321      0.093      0.145      0.113      0.132      0.161        0.351
                                 [0.203]    [0.323]    [0.326]    [0.305]    [0.330]    [0.325]      [0.334]
         EMSIZE: 11-24         -0.533**      -0.178     -0.181     -0.103     -0.152     -0.147        0.057
                                 [0.197]    [0.272]    [0.266]    [0.293]    [0.281]    [0.273]      [0.284]
         EMSIZE: 25-99         -0.523**      -0.247     -0.251     -0.198     -0.255     -0.265       -0.071
                                 [0.124]    [0.136]    [0.136]    [0.144]    [0.137]    [0.138]      [0.176]
      EMSIZE: 100-499          -0.571**      -0.257     -0.252     -0.245     -0.246     -0.240       -0.104
                                 [0.132]    [0.160]    [0.161]    [0.169]    [0.159]    [0.161]      [0.189]
      EMSIZE: 500-999          -0.439**      -0.455     -0.446     -0.435   -0.479*    -0.463*        -0.105
                                 [0.142]    [0.236]    [0.236]    [0.223]    [0.218]    [0.221]      [0.209]
   EMSIZE: 1000-4999           -0.269**      -0.196     -0.211     -0.169     -0.188     -0.191       -0.116
                                 [0.092]    [0.121]    [0.121]    [0.125]    [0.121]    [0.121]      [0.140]
 EMSIZE: 5000-24999             -0.210*    -0.222*    -0.233*    -0.220*    -0.216*    -0.227*        -0.074
                                 [0.104]    [0.098]    [0.098]    [0.101]    [0.099]    [0.098]      [0.119]
               NEWBUS             0.287*      0.171      0.157      0.191      0.128      0.118        0.122
                                 [0.122]    [0.157]    [0.156]    [0.169]    [0.157]    [0.155]      [0.153]
            IND_NAICS                incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.        incl.
          WAPRI: basic            -0.106      0.202      0.180      0.180      0.206      0.192       0.346*
                                 [0.139]    [0.170]    [0.168]    [0.173]    [0.171]    [0.170]      [0.171]
        WAPRI: applied            0.201*   0.243**      0.225*   0.304**    0.239**      0.227*     0.284**
                                 [0.081]    [0.092]    [0.092]    [0.098]    [0.092]    [0.092]      [0.089]
         WAPRI: design         -0.352**      -0.229     -0.234     -0.176     -0.222     -0.219       -0.092
                                 [0.106]    [0.146]    [0.146]    [0.154]    [0.147]    [0.146]      [0.136]
    WAPRI: computers           -1.300** -1.129** -1.129** -1.075** -1.101** -1.106**               -1.001**
                                 [0.109]    [0.150]    [0.149]    [0.157]    [0.151]    [0.151]      [0.135]
           WA_NONRD               -0.045      0.005      0.001      0.001     -0.008     -0.009        0.006
                                 [0.024]    [0.035]    [0.034]    [0.036]    [0.035]    [0.035]      [0.035]
     DEGREE: masters            0.469**
                                 [0.097]
          DEGREE: phd           1.580**
                                 [0.084]
              HD_FIELD               incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.     incl.
           LN_SUPDIR            0.298**    0.275**    0.277**    0.233**    0.250**    0.258**    0.289**
                                 [0.041]    [0.052]    [0.052]    [0.054]    [0.051]    [0.051]   [0.050]
           HDTENURE               -0.006     -0.009     -0.010     -0.010     -0.010     -0.010     0.003
                                 [0.013]    [0.017]    [0.017]    [0.019]    [0.017]    [0.018]   [0.016]
       HDTENURE_SQ                 0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000
                                 [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]   [0.000]
          JOBDEGREE             0.215**       0.013      0.021     -0.007      0.012      0.020     0.040
                                 [0.058]    [0.063]    [0.064]    [0.068]    [0.064]    [0.064]   [0.063]
                   MALE         0.664**    0.392**    0.399**    0.387**    0.380**    0.385**    0.400**
                                 [0.084]    [0.100]    [0.100]    [0.106]    [0.100]    [0.101]   [0.102]
            USCITIZEN              0.146      0.149      0.138      0.124      0.142      0.124     0.043
                                 [0.091]    [0.108]    [0.108]    [0.118]    [0.109]    [0.109]   [0.106]
               RACE (3)              incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.     incl.
           Observations           11014        2805       2805       2805       2805       2805      2805
             Chi-square      2672.705 1669.722 1657.054 1575.238 1683.641 1768.159 9122.042
                       df              74         71         72         64         72         74      196
                alphaest           4.014      2.434      2.425      2.518        2.42     2.404     2.053
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file

                                                                                                                 49
                             Table A9: Alternative Performance Measures
                               nbreg        nbreg      nbreg      nbreg      nbreg      nbreg        nbreg        nbreg
                                   1             2          3          4          5          6            7            8
                            uspapp      uspapp      uspgrt     uspgrt uspcom uspcom publication publication
             Imp. Salary       0.088        0.102      0.047      0.051      0.094      0.104       -0.052       -0.025
                             [0.073]      [0.072]    [0.069]    [0.069]    [0.085]    [0.085]      [0.073]      [0.072]
           Imp. Benefits      -0.022       -0.019      0.010      0.012      0.032      0.030     -0.178*      -0.196*
                             [0.075]      [0.074]    [0.069]    [0.069]    [0.089]    [0.089]      [0.083]      [0.085]
       Imp. Job Security    -0.268**    -0.255** -0.238** -0.231** -0.291** -0.282**                 0.038        0.063
                             [0.059]      [0.059]    [0.062]    [0.063]    [0.079]    [0.080]      [0.062]      [0.061]
         Imp. Challenge      0.394**     0.373**    0.349**    0.339**    0.401**    0.382**      0.277**      0.254**
                             [0.070]      [0.069]    [0.080]    [0.080]    [0.106]    [0.106]      [0.082]      [0.081]
     Imp. Independence        0.114*       0.123*   0.211**    0.214**      0.173*     0.179*        0.001        0.012
                             [0.058]      [0.057]    [0.067]    [0.066]    [0.086]    [0.086]      [0.083]      [0.079]
      Imp. Advancement        -0.041       -0.048 -0.165** -0.165** -0.197**         -0.193*        -0.032       -0.053
                             [0.057]      [0.056]    [0.061]    [0.061]    [0.076]    [0.076]      [0.063]      [0.063]
      Imp. Responsibility     -0.071       -0.085     -0.126   -0.131*      -0.049     -0.056       -0.035       -0.050
                             [0.058]      [0.058]    [0.065]    [0.065]    [0.082]    [0.082]      [0.068]      [0.070]
     Imp. Contr. Society       0.019        0.019     -0.012     -0.016     -0.023     -0.032        0.015        0.020
                             [0.049]      [0.050]    [0.056]    [0.056]    [0.074]    [0.075]      [0.058]      [0.059]
         HRSWORKED                       0.019**                 0.011*              0.017**                   0.029**
                                          [0.005]               [0.005]               [0.006]                   [0.006]
          EMSIZE: 1-10             -0.321  -0.283     -0.197     -0.181     -0.095     -0.070        0.576        0.521
                                  [0.203] [0.202]    [0.194]    [0.194]    [0.232]    [0.237]      [0.371]      [0.337]
           EMSIZE: 11-24 -0.533**        -0.509*      -0.368     -0.345     -0.233     -0.223        0.125        0.168
                                  [0.197] [0.202]    [0.238]    [0.242]    [0.229]    [0.229]      [0.178]      [0.176]
           EMSIZE: 25-99 -0.523**       -0.526** -0.427** -0.420**          -0.231     -0.221     -0.280*      -0.268*
                                  [0.124] [0.124]    [0.147]    [0.147]    [0.181]    [0.182]      [0.128]      [0.126]
         EMSIZE: 100-499 -0.571**       -0.561** -0.535** -0.522**        -0.311*      -0.285    -0.407**     -0.362**
                                  [0.132] [0.130]    [0.119]    [0.119]    [0.149]    [0.149]      [0.102]      [0.104]
         EMSIZE: 500-999 -0.439**       -0.433**    -0.397*    -0.387*      -0.188     -0.183       -0.142       -0.108
                                  [0.142] [0.139]    [0.163]    [0.163]    [0.189]    [0.187]      [0.157]      [0.153]
     EMSIZE: 1000-4999 -0.269**         -0.256**    -0.262*    -0.255*      -0.072     -0.064       -0.109       -0.081
                                  [0.092] [0.092]    [0.105]    [0.105]    [0.137]    [0.137]      [0.106]      [0.107]
    EMSIZE: 5000-24999           -0.210*   -0.191   -0.241*    -0.233*      -0.074     -0.060        0.104        0.141
                                  [0.104] [0.105]    [0.097]    [0.097]    [0.127]    [0.128]      [0.151]      [0.153]
                  NEWBUS           0.287*   0.239      0.028      0.003     -0.054     -0.099        0.104        0.049
                                  [0.122] [0.123]    [0.131]    [0.132]    [0.166]    [0.170]      [0.131]      [0.128]
               IND_NAICS              incl.   incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.        incl.        incl.
             WAPRI: basic          -0.106  -0.085      0.014      0.027 -0.772** -0.754**         0.761**      0.778**
                                  [0.139] [0.138]    [0.163]    [0.164]    [0.241]    [0.247]      [0.149]      [0.152]
           WAPRI: applied          0.201*  0.201*      0.147      0.148     -0.115     -0.118     0.423**      0.419**
                                  [0.081] [0.080]    [0.088]    [0.088]    [0.116]    [0.117]      [0.078]      [0.079]
           WAPRI: design -0.352**       -0.346** -0.424** -0.425** -0.594** -0.605**              -0.239*      -0.246*
                                  [0.106] [0.106]    [0.107]    [0.107]    [0.125]    [0.126]      [0.117]      [0.116]
       WAPRI: computers -1.300**        -1.286** -1.408** -1.403** -1.373** -1.369**             -0.787**     -0.752**
                                  [0.109] [0.109]    [0.130]    [0.129]    [0.157]    [0.154]      [0.136]      [0.134]
              WA_NONRD             -0.045-0.060*      -0.007     -0.016      0.021      0.007        0.031        0.002
                                  [0.024] [0.025]    [0.026]    [0.026]    [0.031]    [0.031]      [0.028]      [0.028]
       DEGREE: masters          0.469**  0.471**    0.523**    0.520**    0.398**    0.392**      0.446**      0.433**
                                  [0.097] [0.097]    [0.109]    [0.108]    [0.135]    [0.134]      [0.131]      [0.134]
            DEGREE: phd         1.580**  1.560**    1.600**    1.586**    1.302**    1.282**      1.774**      1.724**
                                  [0.084] [0.085]    [0.100]    [0.101]    [0.125]    [0.127]      [0.111]      [0.111]
                 HD_FIELD             incl.   incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.        incl.        incl.
              LN_SUPDIR         0.298**  0.272**    0.326**    0.310**    0.378**    0.349**      0.279**      0.241**
                                  [0.041] [0.041]    [0.046]    [0.046]    [0.057]    [0.057]      [0.050]      [0.051]
              HDTENURE             -0.006  -0.008   0.092**    0.091**    0.115**    0.114**     -0.145**     -0.148**
                                  [0.013] [0.013]    [0.015]    [0.015]    [0.019]    [0.019]      [0.011]      [0.011]
          HDTENURE_SQ               0.000   0.000 -0.002** -0.002** -0.002** -0.002**             0.003**      0.003**
                                  [0.000] [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]
             JOBDEGREE          0.215**  0.214**    0.202**    0.201**    0.239**    0.235**      0.341**      0.332**
                                  [0.058] [0.057]    [0.062]    [0.062]    [0.079]    [0.078]      [0.057]      [0.058]
                      MALE      0.664**  0.651**    0.770**    0.764**    0.711**    0.702**        0.210*        0.188
                                  [0.084] [0.085]    [0.095]    [0.096]    [0.126]    [0.127]      [0.095]      [0.097]
               USCITIZEN            0.146   0.140      0.082      0.078      0.043      0.029    -0.709**     -0.715**
                                  [0.091] [0.090]    [0.110]    [0.109]    [0.143]    [0.145]      [0.122]      [0.122]
                  RACE (3)            incl.   incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.      incl.        incl.        incl.
              Observations         11014   11014      11014      11014      11014      11014        11014        11014
                Chi-square 2672.705    2732.524 1987.484 2012.722 1081.814 1107.347             3023.609     3204.696
                          df            74      75         74         75         74         75           74           75
                   alphaest         4.014   3.991      4.499      4.491      6.841      6.811        3.431        3.362
Robust standard errors in brackets
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Source: Based on NSF (2003): SESTAT restricted-use data file

                                                                                                                            50
