                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  SUDDEN STOPS, FINANCIAL CRISES AND LEVERAGE:
                       A FISHERIAN DEFLATION OF TOBIN'S Q

                                        Enrique G. Mendoza

                                        Working Paper 14444
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14444


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




I am grateful to Guillermo Calvo, Dave Cook, Mick Devereux, Gita Gopinath, Tim Kehoe, Nobuhiro
Kiyotaki, Narayana Kocherlakota, Juan Pablo Nicolini, Marcelo Oviedo, Helene Rey, Vincenzo Quadrini,
Alvaro Riascos, Lars Svensson, Linda Tesar and Martin Uribe for helpful comments. I also acknowledge
comments by participants at the 2006 Texas Monetary Conference, 2005 Meeting of the Society for
Economic Dynamics, the Fall 2004 IFM Program Meeting of the NBER, and seminars at the ECB,
BIS, Bank of Portugal, Cornell, Duke, Georgetown, IDB, IMF, Harvard, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary
Research, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Johns Hopkins, Michigan, Oregon, Princeton,
UCLA, USC, Western Ontario and Yale. Many thanks also to Guillermo Calvo, Alejandro Izquierdo,
Rudy Loo-Kung and Ernesto Talvi for allowing me to use their classification of Sudden Stop events.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Enrique G. Mendoza. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin's Q
Enrique G. Mendoza
NBER Working Paper No. 14444
October 2008
JEL No. D52,E32,E44,F32,F41

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper shows that the quantitative predictions of a DSGE model with an endogenous collateral
constraint are consistent with key features of the emerging markets' Sudden Stops. Business cycle
dynamics produce periods of expansion during which the ratio of debt to asset values raises enough
to trigger the constraint. This sets in motion a deflation of Tobin’s Q driven by Irving Fisher’s debt-deflation
mechanism, which causes a spiraling decline in credit access and in the price and quantity of collateral
assets. Output and factor allocations decline because the collateral constraint limits access to working
capital financing. This credit constraint induces significant amplification and asymmetry in the responses
of macro-aggregates to shocks. Because of precautionary saving, Sudden Stops are low probability
events nested within normal cycles in the long run.


Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
     “A story is a string of actions occurring over time, and debt happens as a result of actions
     occurring over time. Therefore, any debt involves a plot line: how you got into debt, what you
     did, said and thought while you were there, and then—depending on whether the ending is to be
     happy or sad—how you got out of debt, or else how you go further and further into it until you
     became overwhelmed by it, and sank from view.” (Margaret Atwood, “Debtor’s Prism,” Wall
     Street Journal, 09/20/2008, p. W1)

1.       Introduction

    The Great Depression showed that market economies can experience deep recessions
that differ markedly from typical business cycle downturns. The recessions that hit emerging
economies in the aftermath of the financial crises of the late 1990s illustrated the same fact.
In contrast with the Great Depression, however, the loss of access to world capital markets
played a key role in emerging markets crises. That is, these crises featured the phenomenon
now commonly referred to as a “Sudden Stop.”

     Three striking macroeconomic regularities characterize Sudden Stops: (1) reversals of
international capital flows, reflected in sudden increases in net exports and the current
account, (2) declines in domestic production and absorption, and (3) corrections in asset
prices. Figure 1 illustrates these facts using five-year event windows, centered on Sudden
Stop events occurring at date t. The dating and location of Sudden Stops follows Calvo,
Izquierdo and Talvi’s (2006) classification.1 The charts show event dynamics for output
(GDP), consumption (C), investment (I), the net exports-GDP ratio (NXY) and Tobin’s Q.
Data for GDP, C, I, and NXY are from World Development Indicators. Q is estimated for
each country as the median across firm-level estimates computed for listed corporations
using Worldscope data. Firm-level Q is the ratio of market value of equity plus debt
outstanding to book value of equity. The observations in the event windows correspond to
cross-country medians of deviations from Hodrick-Prescott trends estimated using 1970-2006
data for each country, except for Q which is not detrended because the data starts in 1994.2

    As Figure 1 shows, Sudden Stops are preceded by expansions, with domestic absorption
and production above trend, the trade balance below trend, and high asset prices. The
median Sudden Stop displays a reversal in the cyclical component of NXY of about 3
percentage points of GDP, from a deficit of about 2 percent of GDP at t-1 to a surplus of 1
percent of GDP at t, and this surplus persists at t+1 and t+2. GDP and C are about 4
percentage points below trend at date t, and I collapses almost 20 percentage points below
trend. The economies recover somewhat afterwards, but GDP, C and I remain below trend
two years after the Sudden Stops hit. Q reaches a through at date t about 13 percentage
points below the pre-Sudden-Stop peak, and it recovers about 2/3rds of its value by t+2.

1
  Calvo et al. identified 33 Sudden Stop events with large and mild output collapses in a sample
including the 31 countries that JP Morgan defines as emerging markets. Their paper provides further
details. Calvo and Reinhart (1999), Calvo, Izquierdo and Loo-Kung (2006), and Milesi-Ferretti and
Razin (2000) use other definitions of Sudden Stops, but the actual listings of events are very similar.
2
  Note two differences with the event analysis in Calvo et al. First, they study event windows with
cross-country averages of country-specific cumulative growth rates. We use medians instead of
averages because of substantial cross-country dispersion in cyclical components, and deviations from
trend instead of cumulative growth to remove low-frequency dynamics. Second, Calvo et al. focus
mainly on Sudden Stops with large output collapses. Here we include all Sudden Stop events.


                                                   1
     In addition to the stylized facts illustrated in Figure 1, Sudden Stops are characterized
by three important features: First, Sudden Stops are nested within typical business cycles.
They are rare events in each country by construction, because a key criterion to identify
them is that a country’s international capital flows are significantly below their mean (see
Calvo et al. (2006)). Second, they represent business cycle asymmetries (i.e., symmetric
episodes of sudden large drops in trade surpluses accompanied by surges in output and
absorption are not observed). Third, standard growth accounting shows that a large drop in
the Solow residual accounts for a Sudden Stops’ initial output collapse. Part of this is due to
factors that bias the Solow residual as a measure of “true” total factor productivity (TFP),
such as changes in imported inputs, capacity utilization, and labor hoarding (see Bergoeing
et. al. (2002), Mendoza (2006), and Meza and Quintin (2006)). For instance, Mendoza shows
that in Mexico’s 1995 Sudden Stop, a large drop in imported inputs accounts for 3.1
percentage points of the 8.5 percent fall in output per worker between the 94:Q3 and 95:Q2.

     The characteristics that define Sudden Stops suggest that a dynamic stochastic general
equilibrium (DSGE) model aiming to explain this phenomenon should support a stochastic
steady state in which infrequent Sudden Stops are nested together with normal business
cycles. In addition, the model should display amplification and asymmetry of economic
fluctuations during Sudden Stop episodes: Typical realizations of the same underlying
exogenous shocks that produce normal business cycles in non-Sudden Stop states should
result in reversals of capital flows, economic recessions and declines in asset prices during
Sudden Stops. Moreover, Sudden Stops should feature endogenous declines in variables that
affect Solow residuals, and these should play a role in the output drop. This paper proposes
a model with these properties, and shows that it can deliver quantitative predictions
consistent with actual Sudden Stops.

     Explaining Sudden Stops is a challenge for a large class of DSGE small open economy
(SOE) models, including frictionless real business cycle models and models with nominal
rigidities. This is because these models typically assume perfect world credit markets that
act as an efficient vehicle for consumption smoothing and investment financing. For
example, in response to a large output drop, households formulate optimal plans to smooth
the effect on consumption by borrowing from abroad, while in the data the opposite is
observed (the external accounts rise sharply precisely when consumption and output
collapse). In contrast, the literature on Sudden Stops emphasizes the role of credit frictions.
Several studies propose models that predict adjustments in production, absorption and the
external accounts as a result of the adverse effects of these frictions (e.g. Auenhaimer and
Garcia (2000), Izquierdo (2000), Calvo (1998), Gopinath (2003), Cook and Choi (2003),
Cook and Devereux (2006a, 2006b), Martin and Rey (2006), and Gertler, Gilchrist and
Natalucci (2007)). The model proposed in this paper follows on a similar path, but it differs
in its focus on the amplification and asymmetry of macroeconomic fluctuations that Irving
Fisher’s (1933) classic debt-deflation transmission mechanism produces.

    The model introduces an endogenous collateral constraint with the debt-deflation
mechanism into a DSGE-SOE model driven by three standard exogenous shocks affecting
TFP, the foreign interest rate, and the price of imported intermediate goods. The collateral
constraint limits total debt, including both standard intertemporal debt and atemporal
working capital loans, not to exceed a fraction of the market value of the physical capital
that serves as collateral. Thus, the constraint imposes an upper bound on the aggregate




                                              2
leverage ratio of the economy. The emphasis is on studying the quantitative significance of
this credit friction, along the lines of the growing literature on the macroeconomic
implications of credit constraints (as in Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Bernanke, Gertler and
Gilchrist (1998), Aiyagari and Gertler (1999), Kocherlakota (2000), Cooley, Miramon and
Quadrini (2004), Jermann and Quadrini (2005), and Gertler, et al. (2007)).

     Standard DSGE-SOE models cannot produce Sudden Stops even if working capital
and/or imported inputs are added. Agents in these models still have unrestricted access to a
perfect international credit market. Negative shocks to TFP and/or the world price of
imported inputs induce standard consumption-smoothing and investment-reducing effects.
Large shocks could trigger large output collapses driven in part by cuts in imported inputs,
but this would still fail to explain the current account reversal and the collapse in
consumption (since households would borrow from abroad to smooth consumption). Adding
large shocks to the world interest rate or access to external financing can alter these results,
but such a theory of Sudden Stops would hinge entirely on unexplained “large and
unexpected” shocks. Large, because by definition they need to induce recessions larger than
the normal non-Sudden-Stop recessions, and unexpected (i.e. outside the set realizations
agents consider possible), because otherwise agents would self-insure to undo their real
effects. Paradoxically, large, unexpected shocks often drive reversals of capital flows in the
models proposed in the Sudden Stops literature (e.g. Calvo (1988)). In contrast, this paper
shows that a debt-deflation-style collateral constraint can provide an explanation for Sudden
Stops that does not hinge on large, unexpected shocks.

    The debt-deflation collateral constraint adds three important elements to the model’s
business cycle transmission mechanism that are crucial for the quantitative results:

(1) The constraint is occasionally binding, because it only binds when the leverage ratio is
sufficiently high. When this happens, the economy responds to typical realizations of the
exogenous shocks by displaying Sudden Stops. Moreover, if the constraint does not bind, the
shocks yield similar macroeconomic responses as in a typical DSGE-SOE model with
working capital and perfect credit markets. As a result, the economy displays “normal”
business cycle patterns when the collateral constraint does not bind.

(2) The loss of credit market access is endogenous. In particular, the high leverage ratios at
which the collateral constraint binds are reached after sequences of realizations of the
exogenous shocks lead the endogenous business cycle dynamics of the economy to states with
sufficiently high leverage. Since net exports are countercyclical in the model, these high-
leverage states are preceded by economic expansions, as observed in emerging economies.
However, Sudden Stops have a low long-run probability of occurring, because agents
accumulate precautionary savings to reduce the likelihood of large consumption drops.
Hence, Sudden Stops are rare events nested within typical business cycles.

(3) Sudden Stops are driven by two “credit channel” effects that induce amplification,
asymmetry and persistence in the effects of exogenous shocks. The first is an endogenous
financing premium that affects one-period debt, working capital loans, and the return on
equity because the effective cost of borrowing rises when the collateral constraint binds. The
second is the debt-deflation mechanism: When the collateral constraint binds, agents
liquidate capital in order to meet “margin calls.” This fire-sale of assets reduces the price of




                                               3
capital and tightens further the constraint, setting off a spiraling collapse of asset prices.
Consumption, investment and the trade deficit suffer contemporaneous reversals as a result,
and future capital, output, and factor allocations fall in response to the initial investment
decline. In addition, the restricted access to working capital induces contemporaneous
declines in production and factor demands.

     The quantitative analysis of the model is conducted using a baseline calibration based
on a detailed analysis of Mexican data, but the focus is on exploring the model’s ability to
match the Sudden Stop features observed across countries. The upper bound on leverage is
calibrated so that the model’s stochastic stationary equilibrium matches the observed
frequency of Sudden Stops in the dataset of Calvo et al. (2006), which is about 3.3 percent.
The long-run probability of observing Sudden Stops is reduced by precautionary savings,
and hence the model requires an upper bound on the leverage ratio of about 1/5 in order to
match the 3.3 percent Sudden Stops probability.

     The results show that model economies with and without the collateral constraint
exhibit largely the same long-run business cycle co-movements, but the economy with the
collateral constraint displays significant amplification and asymmetry in the responses of
macroeconomic aggregates to one-standard-deviation shocks. Amplification is reflected in
significantly larger average responses conditional on positive-probability states in which the
collateral constraint binds. Asymmetry is shown in that the responses to shocks of the same
magnitude, but conditional on states in which the collateral constraint does not bind, are
about the same in the economies with and without the credit friction.

     The ability of the model to replicate observed Sudden Stops is evaluated by conducting
stochastic simulations and constructing event analysis windows with the simulated data that
are comparable with those shown in Figure 1. The results indicate that the model matches
the behavior of output, consumption, investment and net exports, including the collapse
when Sudden Stops hit, the periods of economic expansion that precede them, and the
pattern of the recovery that follows. The model also replicates the observed dynamics of
Tobin’s Q qualitatively, but quantitatively it underestimates the collapse of asset prices.
Moreover, in the model’s Sudden Stop events, the Solow residual overestimates the true
estate of TFP by about 30 percent.

     Sensitivity analysis shows that the loss of access to working capital financing plays a
key role in the model’s ability to produce amplification and asymmetry in the responses of
GDP and factor allocations, in yielding Sudden Stop dynamics consistent with those
observed in the data, and in producing a gap between true TFP and the Solow residual.
Increasing the share of imported inputs in production increases the amplitude of the Sudden
Stop-induced fluctuations in GDP, factor allocations and working capital, and it also
increases the bias between the Solow residual and true TFP (with the former overstating the
latter by about 50 percent). The opposite results are obtained if instead of increasing the
share of imported inputs in production we lower the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.

    The collateral constraint used in this paper is similar to the margin constraint used by
Mendoza and Smith (2006) in their extension of the Aiyagari-Gertler (1999) setup to an
environment of global asset trading. The model studied here is significantly different,
because it is a full-blown equilibrium business cycle model with endogenous capital




                                              4
accumulation and dividend payments that vary in response to the collateral constraint, and
the constraint limits access to working capital financing. In contrast, Mendoza and Smith
study a setup in which production and dividend payments are unaffected by the credit
constraint, abstract from modeling capital accumulation, and consider a credit constraint
that limits only the access to household debt.

     This paper is also closely related to two important strands of the literature that study
the quantitative implications of financial constraints for emerging markets business cycles.
One is the strand that studies the effects of working capital financing on long-run business
cycle co-movements (see Neumeyer and Perri (2005), Uribe and Yue (2006) and Oviedo
(2004)). The model of this paper differs in one key respect: Working capital loans require
collateral, so that when the collateral constraint binds, the cutoff in working capital loans
contributes to the amplification and asymmetry observed in the Sudden Stop responses of
output and factor demands to shocks. Moreover, the model is parameterized so that only a
small fraction of factor costs needs to be paid in advance. As result, in the absence of the
collateral constraint, working capital makes little difference for business cycle dynamics
(relative to a frictionless economy).

     The second strand of the quantitative business cycles literature related to this paper is
the one that introduced the Bernanke-Gertler financial accelerator into DSGE-SOE models
with nominal rigidities. Notably, Gertler et al. (2007) calibrated a model of this class to
Korean data, and studied its ability to account for the 1997-1998 Korean crash as a response
to a large exogenous shock to the real foreign interest rate. In addition, Gertler et al.
introduced a mechanism to drive the output collapse together with a decline in productivity
as measured by the Solow residual by modeling variable capital utilization. This paper
introduces a different financial accelerator mechanism, based on an occasionally binding
collateral constraint, and uses imported intermediate goods to produce a decline in the Solow
residual.3 The qualitative interpretation of the feedback between asset prices and debt is
similar to the one in Gertler et al., but the debt-deflation mechanism yields endogenous
Sudden Stops that do not require large, unexpected shocks, co-exist with regular business
cycles, and produce asymmetric effects that amplify business cycle downturns. On the other
hand, since solving the model requires non-linear global solution methods for DSGE-SOE
models with incomplete markets, the model is much less flexible than the framework of
Gertler et al. for studying the interaction of the financial accelerator with nominal rigidities
and monetary and exchange rate policy.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model and characterizes its
competitive equilibrium. Sections 3 and 4 focus on calibrating the model and conducting the
quantitative analysis. Section 5 concludes.

2.   A Model of Sudden Stops and Business Cycles with Collateral Constraints

    The model economy is a variation of the standard DSGE-SOE model with incomplete
insurance markets, capital adjustment costs, and working capital financing (e.g. Mendoza
(1991), Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006)). Two important

3
  A previous version of this paper used both imported inputs and variable utilization (see Mendoza
(2006)). The latter was harder to calibrate and its contribution was quantitatively smaller.




                                                5
modifications are introduced here. First, we introduce an endogenous collateral constraint.
Second, the supply-side of the model is modified to introduce imported inputs.

2.1 Optimization problem

    The economy is inhabited by an infinitely-lived, self-employed representative firm-
household.4 The preferences of this agent are defined over stochastic sequences of
consumption ct and labor supply Lt, for t=0,…,∞ . Preferences are modeled using Epstein’s
(1983) Stationary Cardinal Utility (SCU) function, which features an endogenous rate of
time preference, so as to obtain a unique, invariant limiting distribution of foreign assets.5

    The preference specification is:
                              ⎡ ∞     ⎧ t −1
                                      ⎪                        ⎪⎫                    ⎤
                          E 0 ⎢ ∑ exp ⎪
                                      ⎨ − ∑ ρ ( cτ − N (Lτ ) )⎪⎬ u ( ct − N (Lt ) ) ⎥⎥           (1)
                              ⎢ t =0  ⎪                         ⎪
                              ⎣       ⎪
                                      ⎩ τ =0                    ⎪⎭                   ⎦

In this expression, u(.) is a standard twice-continuously-differentiable and concave period
utility function and ρ(.) is an increasing, concave and twice-continuously-differentiable time
preference function. Following Greenwood et al. (1988), utility is defined in terms of the
excess of consumption relative to the disutility of labor, with the latter given by the twice-
continuously-differentiable, convex function N(.). This assumption eliminates the wealth
effect on labor supply by making the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
labor independent of consumption.

     There are other approaches in addition to using Epstein’s SCU that yield well-defined
stochastic stationary equilibria in DSGE-SOE models (see Arellano and Mendoza (2003) and
Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2002) for details).6 In models with credit constraints, SCU has the
advantage that it can support stationary equilibria in which the constraints can bind
permanently. This is because a binding credit constraint drives a wedge between the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution in consumption and the rate of interest. In a
stationary state with a binding credit constraint, the rate of time preference adjusts
endogenously to accommodate this wedge. In contrast, in models with an exogenous discount
factor, credit constraints never bind in the long run (if the rate of time preference is greater



4
  Mendoza (2006) presents a different decentralization of a similar setup where firms and households
are modeled as separate agents, and face separate collateral constraints. The setup with a self-
employed representative firm-household yields very similar predictions and is much simpler to
describe and solve (I am grateful to an anonymous referee for suggesting this approach).
5
  Since agents face non-insurable income shocks and the interest rate is exogenous, precautionary
saving leads foreign assets to diverge to infinity with the standard assumption of a constant rate of
time preference equal to the interest rate.
6
  Epstein showed that SCU requires weaker preference axioms than those behind the standard utility
function with exogenous discounting. Standard preferences require preferences over stochastic future
allocations to be risk-independent from past allocations, and past allocations to be risk-independent
from future allocations, while SCU only requires the latter. He also proved that a preference order
consistent with the weaker axioms can be expressed as a time-recursive utility function if and only if
it takes the form of the SCU. Hence, other ad-hoc formulations of endogenous discounting can deliver
stationary net foreign asset positions, but they violate the preference axioms.




                                                        6
or equal to the world interest rate) or always bind at steady state (if the rate of time
preference is fixed below the interest rate).

     The economy operates a constant-returns-to-scale technology, exp(εtA)F(kt,Lt,vt), that
requires capital, kt, labor and imported inputs vt, to produce a tradable good sold at a world-
determined price (normalized to unity without loss of generality). TFP is subject to a
random shock εtA with exponential support. Net investment, zt = kt+1 - kt, incurs unitary
investment costs determined by the function Ψ(zt/kt), which is linearly homogeneous in zt
and kt. 7 Working capital loans from foreign lenders are needed to pay for a fraction φ of the
cost of imported inputs and labor in advance of sales. The gross interest rate on these loans
is the world real interest rate Rt=Rexp(εtR ), where εtR is an interest rate shock around a
mean value R. As in Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue (2006), working capital
loans are provided at the beginning of each period and repaid at the end. Imported inputs
are purchased at an exogenous relative price in terms of the world’s numeraire pt=pexp(εtP),
where p is the mean price and εtP is a shock to the world price of imported inputs (i.e., a
terms-of-trade shock from the perspective of the SOE). The shocks εtA, εtR and εtP follow a
joint first-order Markov process to be specified in more detail later.

     The representative agent chooses sequences of consumption, labor, investment, and
holdings of real, one-period international bonds, bt+1, so as to maximize SCU subject to the
following period budget constraint:

                ct + it + ptvt = exp(εtA )F (kt , Lt , vt ) − φ ( Rt − 1 )( wt Lt + pt vt )− qtbbt +1 + bt   (2)

                                   ⎡        ⎛ kt +1 − kt   ⎞⎤
                                                            ⎟⎟ ⎥ is gross investment. The agent also faces the
where it = δkt + (kt +1 − kt ) ⎢⎢ 1 + Ψ ⎜⎜⎜                  ⎟
                                   ⎣       ⎝⎜      kt      ⎠⎟ ⎥⎦
following collateral constraint:

                                       qtbbt +1 − φRt ( wt Lt + ptvt ) ≥ −κqtkt +1                           (3)

     In the constraints (2) and (3), wt is the wage rate, qtb is the price of bonds and qt is the
price of domestic capital. The price of bonds is exogenous and satisfies qtb = 1 / Rt , while wt
and qt are endogenous prices that are taken as given by the representative agent and satisfy
standard market optimality conditions: The price of capital equals the marginal cost of
investment, qt = ∂it (kt +1, kt ) / ∂(kt +1 ) , and the wage rate equals the marginal disutility of
labor, wt = ∂N (Lt ) / ∂Lt , where variables with bars are “market averages” taken as given by
the representative agent but equal to the representative agent’s choices at equilibrium.

    The collateral constraint (3) implies that credit markets are imperfect. In particular,
lenders impose a credit constraint in the form of the margin requirement proposed by
Aiyagari and Gertler (1999): The economy’s total debt, including both debt in one-period
bonds and in within-period working capital loans, cannot exceed a fraction κ of the
“marked-to-market” value of capital (i.e. κ imposes an upper bound on the leverage ratio).
Both interest and principal on working capital loans enter in the constraint because these

7
 Specifying the capital adjustment cost in terms of net investment, instead of gross investment, yields
a more tractable recursive formulation of the economy’s optimization problem that preserves
Hayashi’s (1982) results regarding the conditions that equate marginal and average Tobin Q.




                                                               7
are within-period loans, and thus lenders consider that the market value of the assets offered
as collateral must cover both components.

     The collateral constraint is not derived here from an optimal credit contract. Instead,
the constraint is imposed directly as in the models with endogenous credit constraints
examined by Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Aiyagari and Gertler (1999), and Kocherlakota
(2000). Still, a credit relationship with a constraint like (3) could result, for example, from
an environment in which limited enforcement prevents lenders to collect more than a
fraction κ of the value of a defaulting debtor’s assets. As we explain below, in states of
nature in which (3) binds, the model produces endogenous premia over the world interest
rate at which borrowers would agree to contracts which satisfy (3).

2.2 Competitive Equilibrium & Credit Channels

     A competitive equilibrium for the small open economy is defined by stochastic sequences
                                                     ∞                          ∞
of allocations ⎡⎣ ct , Lt , kt +1, bt +1, vt , it ⎤⎦ 0 and prices ⎡⎣ qt , wt ⎤⎦ 0 such that: (a) the representative firm-
household maximizes SCU subject to (2) and (3), taking as given wages, the price of capital,
the world interest rate, and the initial conditions (k0,b0), (b) wages and the price of capital
satisfy qt = ∂it (kt +1, kt ) / ∂(kt +1 ) and wt = ∂N (Lt ) / ∂Lt and (c) the representative agent’s
choices satisfy kt = kt and Lt = Lt .

     In the absence of credit constraints, the competitive equilibrium is the same as in a
standard DSGE-SOE model. In fact, removing also imported inputs, the model collapses into
a model nearly identical to the models of Numeyer and Perri (2005) or Uribe and Yue
(2006). The credit constraints distort the equilibrium by introducing two credit-channel
effects. One of these effects is reflected in external financing premia affecting the cost of
borrowing in bonds and working capital and the equity premium, and the second is the
debt-deflation process. These credit-channel effects can be analyzed using the optimality
conditions of the competitive equilibrium.

    The optimality conditions of the representative agent’s problem yield the following
Euler equation for bt+1:

                                    0 < 1 − (μt λt ) = Et ⎡⎢ (λt +1 λt )Rt +1 ⎤⎥ ≤ 1                               (4)
                                                           ⎣                   ⎦

where λt is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier on the date-t budget constraint (2), which
equals also the lifetime marginal utility of ct, and μt is the non-negative Lagrange multiplier
on the collateral constraint (3). It follows from (4) that, when the collateral constraint binds,
the economy faces an endogenous external financing premium on the effective real interest
rate at which it borrows ( Rth+1 ) relative to the world interest rate. This expected external
financing premium on debt (EFPD) is given by:

                                                 μ + cov(λt +1, εtR+1 )               λt
                         Et ⎡⎢ Rth+1 − Rt +1 ⎤⎥ = t                     , Rth+1 ≡                                  (5)
                             ⎣                ⎦         ⎡       ⎤
                                                     Et ⎣ λt +1 ⎦                 Et ⎣ λt +1 ⎤⎦
                                                                                     ⎡

This premium can be viewed as the premium at which the SOE would choose debt amounts
that satisfy the collateral constraint with equality in a credit market in which the constraint
is not imposed directly.



                                                            8
     In the canonical DSGE-SOE model, international bonds are a risk-free asset and μt=0
for all t, so there is no premium. In the model examined here, if the collateral constraint
binds, there is a direct effect by which the multiplier μt increases EFPD. In addition, there is
an indirect effect that pushes in the same direction because a binding credit constraint
makes it harder to smooth consumption, and hence the covariance between marginal utility
and the world interest rate is likely to increase.

    The effects of the EFPD on asset pricing can be derived from the Euler equation for
capital. Solving forward this equation, taking into account that at equilibrium qt equals the
marginal cost of investment, yields the following:
                                               ⎡ ∞ ⎛ j ⎛ 1 ⎞⎟ ⎞⎟                       ⎤
                                                       ⎜ ⎜
                                      qt = Et ⎢⎢ ∑ ⎜⎜ ∏ ⎜⎜              ⎟⎟ ⎟⎟( d     ) ⎥
                                                                        ⎟⎟ ⎟⎟ t +1+ j ⎥ ,                                                      (6)
                                                       ⎜      ⎜ 
                                                                R t +i
                                               ⎣⎢ j =0 ⎝ i =0 ⎝ t +i +1 ⎠ ⎠            ⎦⎥

           ( λt +i − κμt +i )                                                                                    ⎛z           ⎞⎟2 ⎛ zt +1+ j         ⎞⎟
 t +i ≡
Rt +i +1                        ,   dt +1+ j ≡   exp(εtA+1+ j )F1(kt +1+ j , Lt +1+ j , vt +1+ j ) −        δ + ⎜⎜⎜ t +1+ j             ⎜
                                                                                                                               ⎟⎟⎟ Ψ ′ ⎜⎜             ⎟⎟⎟
                λt +i +1                                                                                        ⎝⎜ kt +1+ j   ⎠⎟       ⎝⎜ kt +1+ j   ⎠⎟

Thus, the price of capital equals the expected present discounted value of future dividends
(d), discounted at a rate that reflects the effect of the collateral constraint.

     The above asset pricing formula can be simplified further by combining the Euler
equations for bonds and capital to obtain the following expression for the equity premium
(the expected excess return on capital, Rtq+1 ≡ ( dt +1 + qt +1 ) / qt , relative to Rt+1):
                                                                                                            q
                                                                        μ κ + COVt (λt +1, Rt +1 )
                       Et ⎡⎢ Rtq+1 − Rt +1 ⎤⎥ = Et ⎡⎢ Rth+1 − Rt +1 ⎤⎥ − t                                                                     (7)
                           ⎣                ⎦       ⎣                ⎦         E [λ ]          t     t +1

This expression collapses to the standard equity premium if the collateral constraint does
not bind and the world interest rate is deterministic. As Mendoza and Smith (2006)
explained, when the collateral constraint binds it induces direct and indirect effects on the
equity premium similar to those affecting EFPD. The two premia are not the same,
however, because in the equity premium the direct effect of the binding collateral constraint
on EFPD is reduced by the term μt κ Et ⎡⎣ λt +1 ⎤⎦ , which measures the marginal benefit of being
able to borrow more by holding an additional unit of capital. There is also a new element in
the indirect effect that is not present in the EFPD, and is implicit in the covariance between
λt+1 and Rtq+1 : A binding collateral constraint makes it harder for agents to smooth
consumption and self-insure, and hence this covariance term is likely to become more
negative when the constraint binds, thereby increasing the equity premium.

    Given the result in (7), the asset pricing condition (6) can be re-written as:
                                                 ⎛ ∞ ⎡ j ⎛              1        ⎞⎤            ⎞
                                      qt = Et ⎜⎜⎜ ∑ ⎢ ∏ ⎜⎜
                                                        ⎢       ⎜       q        ⎟⎟⎟ ⎥⎥dt +1+i ⎟⎟⎟                                             (8)
                                                ⎝⎜ j =0 ⎣ i = 0 ⎝ Et [ Rt +1+i ] ⎠ ⎦           ⎠⎟

It follows then from (7) and (8) that, as Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) showed, higher
expected returns when the collateral constraint binds at present, or is expected to bind in
the future, increase the discount rate of dividends and lower asset prices in the present.




                                                                    9
    The external financing premium on working capital financing is easy to identify in the
optimality conditions for factor demands:

                           exp(εtA )F2 (kt , Lt , vt ) = wt ⎡⎢ 1 + φ(rt +
                                                             ⎣              ( ) R ) ⎤⎥⎦
                                                                             μt
                                                                             λt    t         (9)

                           exp(εtA )F3 (kt , Lt , vt ) = pt ⎡⎢ 1 + φ(rt +
                                                             ⎣              ( ) R ) ⎤⎥⎦
                                                                             μt
                                                                             λt    t        (10)

These are standard conditions equating marginal products with marginal costs. In the right-
                                              ( )
hand-side of (9) and (10), the term μλt Rt reflects the increase in the effective marginal
                                          t
financing cost of working capital caused by a binding collateral constraint. This external
financing premium on working capital represents the excess over the world interest rate at
which domestic agents in a competitive world market of working capital loans would find it
optimal to agree to contracts that satisfy constraint (3) voluntarily.

      The second credit channel present in the model, the debt-deflation mechanism, is harder
to illustrate than the external financing premia because of the lack of closed-form solutions,
but it can be described intuitively: When the collateral constraint binds, agents respond to
“margin calls” from lenders by fire-selling capital (i.e., by reducing their demand for equity).
However, when they do this, they face an upward-sloping supply of equity because of
Tobin’s Q. Thus, at equilibrium it is optimal to lower investment given the reduced demand
for equity and higher discounting of future dividends, and hence equilibrium equity prices
fall. If the credit constraint was set as an exogenous fixed amount, these would be the main
adjustments. But with the endogenous collateral constraint, if the constraint was binding at
the initial (notional) levels of the price of capital and investment, it must be more binding at
lower prices and investment levels, so another round of margin calls takes place and Fisher’s
debt-deflation mechanism is set in motion. Moreover, the Fisherian deflation causes a sudden
increase in the financing cost of working capital, lowering factor allocations and output.

     Interestingly, the effects of the debt-deflation mechanism are non-monotonic, because
they are weaker at the extremes in which the SOE can collateralize all of its assets (κ=1) or
cannot borrow at all (κ=0) than in the cases in between. When κ=0 there can be no debt-
deflation, since the constraint does not respond to asset values (i.e., it becomes an exogenous
credit limit). On the other hand, when κ=1 there is no direct effect from the collateral
constraint on the equity premium, which leaves only the indirect covariance effects to distort
investment and the price of capital relative to the equilibrium with perfect credit markets.
In the limiting case without uncertainty, the indirect effects vanish, and κ=1 removes all
distortions on investment and the price of capital, and hence there is no debt-deflation
mechanism again. Consumption and debt still adjust, but they do so as they would with an
exogenous credit constraint. Hence, for the debt-deflation mechanism to operate, credit
markets must allow borrowers to leverage their assets but only to some degree.

     Mendoza (2006) illustrates the above arguments using a simple numerical example
based on a deterministic version of the model. This example is comparable to the one
conducted by Kocherlakota (2000). Mendoza found large amplification effects of the
collateral constraint on output and asset prices. In contrast, Kocherlakota found small
amplification effects, using a borrowing constraint of the form bt +1 ≥ qt x t , where xt can be a
fixed factor (e.g., land) or physical capital. The two sets of results are consistent, however,



                                                       10
because the case with land prevents declines in xt from compounding with the decline in
asset prices in the debt-deflation dynamics, and with capital, the constraint bt +1 ≥ qt x t
implies κ=1 (which under perfect foresight removes the debt-deflation mechanism).

     It is also important to note that a variety of actual contractual arrangements can
produce debt-deflation dynamics. The collateral constraint (3) resembles most directly a
contract with a margin clause. This clause requires borrowers to surrender the control of
collateral assets when the contract is entered, and gives creditors the right to sell them when
their market value falls below the contract value. Other widely used arrangements that can
trigger debt-deflation dynamics without explicit margin clauses include value-at-risk
strategies of portfolio management used by investment banks, and mark-to-market capital
requirements imposed by regulators. For example, if an aggregate shock hits capital markets,
value-at-risk estimates increase and lead investment banks to reduce their exposure, but
since the shock is aggregate, the resulting sale of assets increases price volatility and leads
value-at-risk models to require further portfolio adjustments. Mechanisms like these played a
central role in the Russian/LTCM crisis of 1998 and the U.S. credit crisis of 2007-2008.

3. Functional Forms and Calibration

3.1 Functional Forms and Numerical Solution

    The quantitative analysis uses a benchmark calibration based on Mexican data. The
functional forms of preferences and technology are the following:
                                              ⎡     Lω ⎤1−σ
                                              ⎢ ct − t ⎥    −1
                                              ⎢      ω ⎦⎥
                            u(ct − N (Lt )) = ⎣                ,                    σ, ω > 1,     (11)
                                                    1−σ

                                             ⎡ ⎛             Lω ⎞⎤
                         v(ct − N (Lt )) = γ ⎢ Ln ⎜⎜ 1 + ct − t ⎟⎟⎟ ⎥ ,              0 < γ ≤ σ,   (12)
                                             ⎢⎣ ⎝             ω ⎠ ⎥⎦


               F ( kt , Lt , vt ) = Aktβ Lαt vtη ,       0 ≤ α, β, η ≤ 1, α + β + η = 1, A > 0,   (13)

                                                ⎛z      ⎞⎟ a ⎛ zt     ⎞⎟
                                              Ψ ⎜⎜ t       = ⎜            ,   a≥0                 (14)
                                                 ⎝ kt   ⎠⎟⎟ 2 ⎝⎜ kt   ⎠⎟⎟

The utility and time preference functions in (11) and (12) are standard from DSGE-SOE
models. The parameter σ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, ω determines the wage
elasticity of labor supply, which is given by 1/(ω -1), and γ is the semi-elasticity of the rate
of time preference with respect to composite good c-N(L). The restriction γ ≤ σ is a
condition required to ensure that SCU supports a unique, invariant limiting distribution of
bonds and capital (see Epstein (1983)). The Cobb-Douglas technology (13) is the production
function for gross output. Equation (14) is the net investment adjustment cost function.
Following Hayashi (1982), the production and adjustment cost functions are set to be
linearly homogeneous in their arguments.




                                                                11
     The model is solved numerically by representing the equilibrium in recursive form and
using a non-linear global solution method with the collateral constraint imposed as an
occasionally binding inequality constraint (see Mendoza and Smith (2006) and Arellano and
Mendoza (2003) for details on algorithms for solving DSEG-SOE models with incomplete
markets and collateral constraints). The endogenous state variables are k and b. These are
chosen from discrete grids of NK non-negative values of the capital stock, K={k1<k2 <…<
kNK}, and NB values of bond positions, B={b1<b2 <…< bNB}. The exogenous states are the
realizations of shocks in the triple e=(ε A,ε R,ε P). The shocks follow a joint Markov process,
which defines the set E of all triples of possible realizations of the shocks and their one-step
transition probability matrix π. Hence, the state space of the problem is defined by all
triples (k,b,e) in the set K×B×E. In the numerical solutions reported in Section 4, we set
NK=60 and NB=80, with both grids evenly spaced. Also, we use 2 realizations for each
Markov shock, so there are 8 triples of realizations of shocks. Hence, the discrete state space
of the model has 60×80×8 coordinates.

3.2 Calibration

    The values assigned to the model’s parameters are listed in Table 1. This calibration is
set so that the deterministic stationary equilibrium matches key averages from Mexican
data. We adopt three assumptions to make the calibration easier to compare with typical
DSGE-SOE calibrations: (1) φ=0 in the deterministic steady state (otherwise working
capital payments distort factor shares), (2) the collateral coefficient does not bind at the
deterministic steady state, and (3) the CRRA coefficient is set to σ=2.

    The measure of gross output (y) in Mexican data that is consistent with the one in the
model is the sum of GDP plus imported inputs. The data for these variables are available
quarterly (at annual rates) starting in 1993. Using data for the period 1993:Q1-2005:Q2, the
annualized average ratio of GDP to gross output (gdp/y) is 0.896 and the ratio of imported
inputs to GDP (pv/gdp) is 0.114. The average share of imported inputs in gross output is
0.102, hence η=0.102. This factor share, combined with the 0.66 labor share on GDP from
Garcia (2005) implies the following factor shares for the production function (13):
      ⎛      0.66       ⎞⎟
α = ⎜⎜⎜                  ⎟ =0.592 and β=1-α-η=0.306.
                                                     8
      ⎝ 1 + (pv / gdp ) ⎠⎟

     We also use Garcia’s (2005) estimates of Mexico’s capital stock, together with our
measure of y, to construct an estimate of the capital-gross output ratio (k/y) and to set the
value of the depreciation rate. He used annual National Accounts investment data for the
period 1950-2000 and the perpetual inventories method to construct a time series of the
capital-GDP ratio. The average capital-GDP ratio for the 1980-2000 period is 1.88 with a
1980 point estimate of 1.56. Using these annual benchmarks, we constructed a quarterly
capital stock series compatible with the quarterly gross output estimates (starting in 1980
because quarterly investment data, again at annual rates, are available as of 1980:Q1). The
annualized quarterly capital stock estimates match Garcia’s annual benchmarks by setting

8
 The actual share of labor income in GDP is about 1/3 in National Accounts data but Garcia showed
that there are measurement problems in separating capital and labor incomes in the National
Accounts. Estimating factor shares using household survey data he estimated the labor share at about
2/3rds, which is in line with the usual estimates for the U.S. and other countries.



                                                   12
the initial capital-GDP ratio to 1.45 and the depreciation rate to 8.8 percent per year. The
1980:Q1-2005:Q2 average of k/y is 1.758. Combined with the 0.088 depreciation rate, this
value of k/y yields an average investment-gross output ratio (i/y) of 15.5 percent.

     In the deterministic stationary state, imported input prices and the real interest rate
take their mean values p and R. The value of p is set equal to the ratio of the averages of
the ratios of imported inputs to gross output at current and constant prices, which is 1.028.
The mean value of the annual gross real interest rate is derived by imposing the values of β,
(i/y), and δ on the Euler equation for capital evaluated at steady state and solving for R.
The resulting expression yields R=1+[δ(β-(i/y))]/(i/y)=1.086. A real interest rate of 8.6
percent is relatively high, but in this calibration it represents the implied real interest rate
that, given the values of δ and β, supports Mexico’s average investment-gross output ratio
as a feature of the deterministic steady state of a standard SOE model. Note also that with
this calibration strategy the deterministic steady state also matches Mexico’s average
investment-GDP ratio of 17.2 percent.

     The model’s optimality condition for labor supply equates the marginal disutility of
labor with the real wage, which at equilibrium is equal to the marginal product of labor.
This condition reduces to: Ltω = α exp(εtA )F (⋅) . Using the logarithm of this expression, our
estimate of gross output, and Mexican data on employment growth, the implied value of the
exponent of labor supply in utility is ω = 1.846. This value is similar to those typically used
in DSGE-SOE models (e.g. Mendoza (1991), Uribe and Yue (2006)).

     Since aggregate demand in the data includes government expenditures, the model needs
an adjustment to consider these purchases in order for the deterministic steady state to
match the actual average private consumption-GDP ratio of 0.65. This adjustment is done
by setting the deterministic steady state to match the observed average ratio of government
purchases to GDP (0.11), assuming that these government purchases are unproductive and
paid out of a time-invariant, ad-valorem consumption tax. The tax is equal to the ratio of
the GDP shares of government and private consumption, 0.11/0.65=0.168, which is very
close to the statutory value-added tax rate in Mexico. Since this tax is time invariant, it
does not distort the intertemporal decision margins and any distortion on the consumption-
leisure margin does not vary over the business cycle.

     Given the preference and technology parameters set in the previous paragraphs, the
optimality conditions for L and v and the steady-state Euler equation for capital are solved
as a nonlinear simultaneous equation system to determine the steady state levels of k, L, and
v. Given these, the levels of gross output and GDP are computed using the production
function and the definition of GDP, and the level of consumption is determined by
multiplying GDP times the average consumption-GDP ratio in the data. The value of γ
follows then from the steady-state consumption Euler equation, which yields
            ln(R )
γ =                      = 0.0166 . As is typical in calibration exercises with SCU preferences
      ln(1 + c − ω−1Lω )
(see Mendoza (1991)), the value of the time preference coefficient is very low, suggesting
that the “impatience effects” introduced by the endogenous rate of time preference have
negligible quantitative implications on business cycle dynamics. Finally, the steady-state
foreign asset position follows from the budget constraint (eq. (2)) evaluated at steady state.
This implies a ratio of net foreign assets to GDP of about -0.86.



                                              13
     Next we calibrate the stochastic process of the exogenous shocks and compute Mexico’s
business cycle moments. Table 2 summarizes key features of Mexico’s business cycles and
the Sudden Stop of 1995. The Table provides indicators of business cycle variability, co-
movement and persistence of macroeconomic time series using the Hodrick-Prescott filter to
detrend the data. The Table also reports moments for estimates of the model’s three
exogenous shocks. TFP shocks are measured as the cyclical component of a TFP estimate
constructed using the production function (13), together with the capital stock and gross
output estimates discussed earlier, the calibrated factor shares, and observed data on L and
v (see Mendoza (2006) for details). The price shocks are deviations from trend of the relative
price of imported inputs, defined as the deflator of imported inputs divided by the exports
deflator (so as to remove effects from changes in the nominal exchange rate or in
nontradables prices). Interest rate shocks are the cyclical component of Uribe and Yue’s
(2006) measure of Mexico’s real interest rate in world capital markets.

     The business cycle moments reported in Table 2 are in line with well-known business
cycle facts for emerging economies: Investment is more variable than GDP, private
consumption is also more variable than GDP (although nondurables consumption is less
variable than GDP), all variables exhibit positive first-order autocorrelations, consumption
and investment are positively correlated with GDP and the external accounts are negatively
correlated with GDP. In addition, the Table shows that both imported inputs and equity
prices are significantly more variable than GDP and procyclical.

     The model’s exogenous shocks follow a joint Markov process that approximates their
time-series processes in the data. In the data, εA, εR and εP follow stationary AR(1) processes
nearly independent of each other, except for a statistically significant, negative correlation
between εR and εP. Table 2 lists the standard deviations and first-order autocorrelations of
the shocks. The correlation between interest rate and TFP shocks is -0.669. Note that the
1995 Sudden Stop coincided with sizable shocks, but we will show below that Sudden Stops
are possible in the model even with one-standard-deviation shocks. Also, typical endogeneity
caveats apply to our estimates of εR, because of the link between country risk and business
cycles, and εA, because of factors that affect measured TFP in addition to imported inputs,
such as capacity utilization and factor hoarding. As a result, the “large” TFP and interest
rate shocks reported for the 1995 Sudden Stop probably overestimate the true exogenous
shocks that occurred that year.

     The joint Markov process is a parsimonious chain with two-point realization vectors for
each shock. Each realization is set equal to plus/minus one-standard deviation of the
corresponding shock. The Markov transition probability matrix is constructed following the
simple persistence rule. This imposes the condition that the first-order autocorrelation of the
two correlated shocks (εA and εR) be the same, which is very much in line with the data
since ρ(ε R)=0.572 and ρ(ε A)=0.537.

     Two parameter values remain to be determined: the adjustment cost coefficient a and
the working capital coefficient φ. We set these using the Simulated Method of Moments
(SMM) so that the model matches the observed ratio of the standard deviation of Mexico’s
gross investment relative to GDP (3.6) and a mean ratio of working capital to GDP of 1/5,
in a simulation where the collateral constraint does not bind. This yields the values a=2.75
and φ=0.26. This is a reasonable approach to calibrate a because this parameter does not



                                              14
affect the deterministic steady state, but it affects the variability of investment. The working
capital-GDP target of 20 percent is an approximation to actual data. Data on working
capital financing for Mexico are not available, but the 1994:Q1-2005:Q1 average of total
credit to private nonfinancial firms as a share of GDP was 24.4 percent. Note, however, that
this measure includes financing at all maturities and for all uses, so it overestimates actual
working capital financing. On the other hand, these data include the 1995-2002 period in
which Mexican banks were being re-capitalized after the 1994 crisis, and credit declined
sharply for “abnormal” reasons that bias the average credit-output ratio downwards.

     It is also important to note that φ=0.26 is significantly lower than the working capital
coefficients used in the DSGE-SOE models of Neumeyer and Perri (2005) and Uribe and Yue
(2006). As Oviedo (2004) showed, with low working capital coefficients, the working capital
channel has very weak effects on business cycle moments. Hence, the role of working capital
in this model is limited to the amplification and asymmetry that it contributes to when the
collateral constraint binds. Its effect on regular business cycle volatility is negligible.

4.    Results of the Quantitative Analysis

     This section reports the results of a quantitative analysis that evaluates the model’s
ability to account for the stylized facts of Sudden Stops, and the magnitude of the
amplification and asymmetry in the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to shocks
induced by the collateral constraint.

4.1 Long Run Business Cycle Moments

    The first result we establish is that long-run business cycle moments are largely
unaffected by the collateral constraint. To make this point, we compare in Table 3 the
business cycle moments of a frictionless economy without collateral constraints (Panel I)
with those from two scenarios with different values of κ in which the constraint binds in
some states of nature (Panels II with κ=0.3 and III with κ=0.2). These moments are
computed using the model’s limiting distribution of k, b, and e in each scenario. The value of
κ=0.2 was chosen to match the observed frequency of Sudden Stops (see 4.2 below), and
κ=0.3 is shown for comparison.

     The moments listed in Panel I show that the model does well at accounting for Mexico’s
key business cycle regularities. The model overestimates the variability of GDP (3.9 percent
in the model v. 2.7 percent in the data), but scaling by the variability of output the model
does a fair job at matching the variability of the other macro aggregates, and the GDP-
correlations and first-order autocorrelations are generally in line with the data. Note in
particular that the model does well at accounting for three moments that the RBC-SOE
literature emphasizes: consumption is more variable than GDP, the interest rate and GDP
are negatively correlated, and net exports are countercyclical. Moreover, in contrast with the
findings of Garcia, Pancrazi and Uribe (2006), the model does not yield near-unit-root
behavior in the net exports-GDP ratio. In fact, it nearly matches the actual first-order
autocorrelation of this variable (0. 769 in the model v. 0.797 in the data).

    Panels II and III show that long-run business cycles in economies with collateral
constraints are very similar to those observed in the frictionless economy of Panel I. The



                                              15
credit friction only has large effects on the moments directly influenced by it: the leverage
ratio, the ratio of foreign assets to GDP and the net exports-GDP ratio. The means of the
leverage ratio and the foreign assets ratio rise, and the mean of the net exports-GDP ratio
falls, the variability of the three declines, and all three become more countercyclical.

     A key feature of the model behind the result that long-run business cycle moments in
Panels II and III do not differ much from those of the frictionless economy in Panel I is the
precautionary savings motive. The high-leverage states at which the credit constraint binds
are reached after cyclical dynamics in response to sequences of realizations of the shocks lead
the leverage ratio to approach its ceiling. Because of the curvature of the constant-relative-
risk-aversion period utility function, agents accumulate precautionary savings to self insure
against the risk of large consumption collapses in these scenarios. Note that precautionary
savings are present even without the collateral constraint, because even with perfect credit
markets this DSGE-SOE model has incomplete markets. Hence the average b/gdp ratio with
perfect credit markets at about -33 percent is almost 53 percentage points higher than in the
deterministic steady state. With the collateral constraint at κ=0.2, the average b/gdp ratio
climbs to -10 percent

4.2 Amplification & Asymmetry with the Collateral Constraint

     The second result we demonstrate is that the collateral constraint produces significant
amplification and asymmetry in the responses of macro-economic aggregates to shocks. To
show this result, Table 4 reports amplification coefficients for model simulations with the
collateral constraint. The amplification coefficients correspond to differences in the response
of each variable in the economy with the collateral constraint relative to the economy with
perfect credit markets, in percent of the latter, for a common (k, b, e) triple. Since there is
an amplification coefficient for each triple (k, b, e) in the state space, we report averages
computed using the model’s ergodic distribution. The Table shows a set of coefficients for
Sudden Stop (SS) states, defined in a manner analogous to those used in the empirical
literature (e.g. Calvo et al. (2006)). In particular, SS states are those in which the collateral
constraint binds (with positive long-run probability) and the net exports-GDP ratio is at
least two percentage points above the mean. Non-SS states include all triples in the state
space outside the SS set. The long-run probability of hitting SS states and the average debt
ratio at which this happens are shown in the last two rows of the Table.

      Panel (1) of the Table reports amplification coefficients for the baseline case with
κ=0.2. With this upper bound on leverage, the probability of Sudden Stops is 3.3 percent,
which matches the frequency of Sudden Stops in the cross-country panel dataset of Calvo et
al. (2006). The SS column shows that when the economy hits a Sudden Stop, the collateral
constraint amplifies significantly the response of all macroeconomic aggregates to shocks,
relative to what is observed in the same (k, b, e) states in the economy without credit
frictions. The increased responsiveness of the aggregates ranges from a decline in GDP below
trend that is about 1.1 percent larger to a collapse in investment that is almost 12
percentage points larger. Scaling by the cyclical variability of each aggregate listed in Panel
III of Table 3, these excess responses imply business cycles that are larger than typical cycles
by factors of about 1/3 for GDP to 1.4 for the net exports-GDP ratio.




                                               16
     The model’s baseline amplification coefficients in Panel (1) of Table 4 are significantly
larger than those computed by Kocherlakota (2000). He found that, varying the share of
capital from 0.1 to 0.3, the amplification coefficients were small, ranging from 0.15 to 0.35
for output (v. 1.13 in the model) and 0.004 to 0.008 for asset prices (v. 2.9 in the model). As
explained earlier, Kocherlakota’s experiments produce weak amplification because they focus
in cases in which either the collateral asset is in fixed supply (which weakens the debt-
deflation mechanism), or capital can be pledged as collateral up to 100 percent of its value
(which under perfect foresight removes the debt-deflation mechanism completely).

     The asymmetry of the amplification effects is illustrated by the stark comparison of the
amplification coefficients across SS and non-SS columns. In non-SS states, the responses of
macro-aggregates are about the same with the collateral constraint as with perfect credit
markets, and scaling by the variability of each aggregate the difference across the two
economies is negligible. Since Sudden Stop events are low probability events in the long-run,
the business cycle moments shown in Table 3 reflect mainly these non-SS states in which
there is no amplification due to the credit constraint, and this is consistent with the previous
finding showing that the model with the collateral constraint displays business cycle
moments very similar to those of the frictionless economy. A corollary of this result is that
relatively rare Sudden Stops coexist with the more frequent, normal business cycles
summarized in the moments of Table 3. It is also worth noting that the responses in the SS
and non-SS columns are produced by shocks that are at most one-standard-deviation in size
(as defined in the vector of realizations of the Markov chain), and that the exogenous shocks
hitting the economies with and without the collateral constraint in each of the two columns
are identical. Thus, the model displays significant amplification and asymmetry in response
to shocks that are relatively small, and it has the feature that symmetric shocks produce
asymmetric responses, the extreme case of which is a Sudden Stop.

     Panels (2) to (5) of Table 4 show that the result indicating that the collateral constraint
induces significant amplification and asymmetry in the macroeconomic effects of exogenous
shocks is robust to several parameter changes. Panels (2) and (3) report results for κ=0.3
and κ=0.15 respectively. Panel (4) lowers the net exports-GDP threshold ratio used to
define Sudden Stops from an increase of two percentage points above the mean to zero.
Panel (5) removes working capital financing by setting φ=0.

     Increasing (reducing) κ has small effects on the amplification coefficients, but it reduces
(increases) the amplification effect on the leverage ratio and the probability of Sudden Stops.
Lowering the net exports-GDP threshold to zero weakens the amplification coefficients
somewhat, but again the largest effect is on the probability of Sudden Stops, which rises
sharply when the threshold used to define them is lowered significantly. Still, in all these
scenarios there is significant amplification and asymmetry. In the scenario without working
capital, however, the model cannot generate any amplification in GDP and factor
allocations, and the probability of Sudden Stops (keeping κ=0.2) is very low. This is because
without working capital, factor allocations and output are not affected contemporaneously
by the collateral constraint (capital is predetermined and the external financing premium on
optimal factor demands is not present, so labor and intermediate goods are not affected by
the collateral constraint). The rest of the macro-aggregates continue to display significant
amplification and asymmetry, although the amplification coefficients are smaller than in the
scenarios shown in the other panels. Thus, these results highlight the importance of the



                                              17
collateral constraint limiting access to working capital for the model’s ability to produce
significant amplification and asymmetry.

4.3   Can the Model Explain Observed Sudden Stop Dynamics?

     The numerical simulations can also be used to evaluate the model’s ability to account
for the actual dynamics of Sudden Stop events in Figure 1 reviewed in the Introduction. To
this end, we conduct a 10,000-period stochastic time series simulation of the model, and use
the resulting artificial data to construct five-year event windows centered on SS events.
Figure 2 shows the SS windows for GDP, C, I, Tobin’s Q, and NXY. To match the
methodology used in Figure 1, each window includes the median across the SS events
identified in the 10,000 period simulation. We also include for comparison + and – one-
standard-deviation bands, the actual event window observations from Figure 1, and the
observations from Mexico’s 1995 Sudden Stop. To be consistent with Calvo et al.’s (2006)
definition of systemic SS events with mild and large output collapses, a Sudden Stop event is
identified as a situation in which the collateral constraint binds, output is at least one
standard deviation below trend, and the net exports-GDP ratio is at least one standard
deviation above trend.

     The event windows in Figure 2 show that the model replicates most of the key features
of the dynamics of actual SS events, except for the magnitude of the decline in asset prices.
The model predicts that Sudden Stops are preceded by periods of economic expansion, with
GDP, C and I above trend and NXY running deficits at t-2 and t-1. In the date of the SS
events (date t), the model matches very closely the magnitude of the declines in GDP, C,
and I. The reversal in NXY between t-1 and t is also very similar to the one in the data, but
the levels in the model overestimate those in the data. The model is also consistent with the
data in predicting a slow recovery in dates t+1 and t+2. With regard to Tobin’s Q, the
model’s dynamics are qualitatively correct, but quantitatively the decline in asset prices is
about 40 percent the size of the actual decline. Relative to the Mexican SS event, the model
again matches very well the magnitude of the declines in GDP and C at date t, but it
underestimates the pre-Sudden Stop boom and the size of the reversal in NXY.

     Figure 3 shows event windows for true TFP (i.e. the productivity shock εA) and for the
model’s Solow residual, defined as s ≡ gdp / (k β /(1−η )Lα /(1−η ) ) . In the baseline scenario with
κ=0.2, the two are very similar except on the date of SS events. When Sudden Stops occur,
the Solow residual falls more than true TFP. Thus, the model is also consistent with the
data in predicting that part of the decline in GDP observed during SS events cannot be
accounted for by changes in measured capital and labor, and that this decline in the Solow
residual overestimates actual TFP (albeit the difference is not large). However, it is also
important to acknowledge that true TFP still has to fall for the output decline to be
realistic, and the reason why TFP would fall like this when a Sudden Stop hits remains an
open question beyond the scope of this paper.

     In summary, the model with the collateral constraint accounts for several key features
of Sudden Stops. Large and infrequent recessions take place in response to shocks of
standard magnitude when the economy is highly leveraged, and Sudden Stops are nested
within normal business cycles. The economy arrives at these high-leverage states with
positive long-run probability, and in these states binding collateral constraints cause large



                                                 18
amplification, asymmetry and persistence in macroeconomic responses to shocks. One
weakness, however, is that the decline in asset prices is smaller than the observed collapse,
but it is worth recalling that this, as well as all the other Sudden Stop effects studied in this
paper, are in response to one-standard-deviation shocks. Larger shocks would trigger larger
responses. Moreover, even at ½ the size of the actual price drop, the model generates
significantly more asset price amplification than in previous studies (e.g. Kocherlakota
(2000)).

4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

     Figure 4 compares Sudden Stop event windows for the baseline economy (with κ=0.2)
with those of three alternative specifications: (1) the scenario without working capital (φ=0),
(2) a simulation with a higher share of imported inputs in production (η=0.2 v. 0.1 in the
baseline), and (3) a scenario with a higher value of ω (3 instead of 1.85), which implies a
lower labor supply elasticity (0.5 instead of 1.2). The event dynamics observed in actual
data are also included for comparison in Figure 4, and Figure 3 includes event windows
comparing Solow residuals with true TFP in each of the three sensitivity analysis scenarios.
Note that we consider relatively small changes in parameters because otherwise the
economies differ sharply in debt and leverage dynamics, and this requires recalibrating κ in
order to study the effects of the occasionally binding collateral constraint. In contrast, with
the parameter changes we study here, the value of κ remains at 20 percent in all scenarios.

     The simulation without working capital performs much worse than the baseline and the
other alternatives in terms of its ability to account for observed Sudden Stop dynamics.
Without working capital, the amplitude of the fluctuations observed in SS events is
significantly smaller, but more significantly, the model fails to produce periods of economic
expansion preceding Sudden Stops, as GDP, C and I are already below trend, and NXY is
above trend, before the Sudden Stop hits. This occurs because SS events without working
capital are preceded by periods of low and declining productivity (see Figure 3), instead of
periods of high and increasing productivity as in the baseline. The expectation of declining
productivity leads to a substantial decline in I at almost 15 percentage points below trend
and drops in C and I of about 2 percentage points below trend by t-1, and this results in a
sharp increase in the trade surplus to about 2.5 percentage points of GDP by the same date.
For the same reason, labor and imported inputs fall sharply (instead of risinig) before the
Sudden Stop hits, although again because the absence of working capital reduces the
amplitude of the economy’s business cycle, the declines in labor and imported inputs at date
t are much smaller than in the baseline. The output decline is not smaller at date t because
the large decline in I at t-1 reduces the capital stock at t and this enlarges the size of the
output drop, which otherwise would be much smaller than in the baseline (in the baseline, I
rises at t-1 so the higher capital stock at t contributes to offset the contractionary effect of
the declines in labor and imported inputs). Thus, these results reaffirm the previous finding
indicating that the collateral constraint limiting access to working capital financing plays a
very important role in the model’s performance.

    The scenarios with higher imported inputs share and lower labor supply elasticity show
that these parameters also play important roles. The shape of the SS dynamics is roughly
the same as in the baseline, so the model’s overall performance does not worsen as in the
scenario without working capital, but the amplitude of the fluctuations changes. A higher



                                               19
share of imported inputs strengthens the production effects of all three shocks present in the
model. As a result the declines in GDP, C, working capital, labor, and imported inputs are
larger with the higher share of imported inputs, while the dynamics of I and Q are about the
same as in the baseline. The fit with the data improves as the drops in output and
consumption at date t are nearly a perfect match to those observed in actual SS events. In
addition, the simulation with the higher imported inputs share creates a much larger wedge
between the Solow residual and true TFP (see Figure 3). An average decline of about 1.2
percent in true TFP when Sudden Stops hit translates into an average decline in the Solow
residual that is almost twice as large. Thus, a higher share of imported inputs improves the
model’s ability to match observed Sudden Stop dynamics, with larger declines in production,
consumption and factor allocations, and with a larger fraction of the output drop accounted
for by the Solow residual.

     The above results for higher η are important because the baseline calibration value of
η=0.1 is probably conservative. Evidence from other countries suggests that imported inputs
can have much higher shares. Goldberg and Campa (2006) report ratios of imported inputs
to total intermediate goods for 17 industrial countries that vary from 14 to 49 percent, with
a median of 23 percent (the ratio for Mexico is about ¼). Moreover, to the extent that
domestically produced inputs are substitutes for imported inputs, and purchases of these
domestic inputs require working capital financing, the scenario with the higher η is likely to
be closer to the one that is empirically relevant, because domestic inputs would respond to a
similar amplification mechanism as the one affecting imported inputs.9

      The model simulation with lower labor supply elasticity retains the same overall
qualitative features of the Sudden Stop events of the baseline simulation: The simulation
still produces SS events preceded by periods of expansion and followed by gradual recoveries.
With the weakened response of labor supply, however, the amplitude of the fluctuations is
smaller, and the gap between true TFP and the Solow residual when the Sudden Stop hits is
narrower, so the model does not do as well as the baseline in terms of matching the
dynamics observed in actual data. In contrast with what we observed in the exercise that
changed the share of imported inputs, lowering the labor supply elasticity does affect the
behavior of investment and asset prices, both of which exhibit smaller declines than in the
baseline scenario. Thus, these results show that labor supply elasticity of about 1.2, as in the
baseline, or higher, is important for the model’s ability to explain observed SS dynamics.

5.      Conclusions

     This paper shows that the quantitative predictions of an equilibrium business cycle
model with an endogenous collateral constraint are consistent with key features of the
Sudden Stop phenomenon. The constraint imposes an upper bound on the economy’s
leverage ratio by limiting total debt, including working capital loans, not to exceed a
fraction of the market value of collateral assets. This constraint only binds in states of

9
  Extending the model to include domestic inputs, however, is a challenging task because it requires
modeling supply and demand of these inputs with and endogenous price. The model can be modified
following Mendoza and Yue (2008) to introduce the two inputs using an Armington aggregator, but
the solution algorithm for the setup with occasionally binding, endogenous collateral constraints is
harder to solve and runs against the curse of dimensionality.



                                                20
nature in which the leverage ratio is sufficiently high, and in turn these high-leverage states
are an endogenous outcome of the model’s business cycle dynamics.

     The model’s collateral constraint introduces a credit channel with two important
distortions: one is in the form of external financing premia affecting the cost of borrowing in
one-period debt and within-period working capital loans, and the second is Fisher’s debt-
deflation mechanism. This mechanism plays a key role in the ability of the model to explain
Sudden Stops. When the leverage ratio is sufficiently high, shocks of standard magnitude
that result in RBC-like responses under perfect credit markets trigger the collateral
constraint. This causes a fall in investment and equity prices which tightens further the
constraint and leads to a spiraling collapse of credit, asset prices and investment, a decline
in consumption and a surge in the external accounts. Moreover, the binding credit limit
hampers access to working capital, causing a contemporaneous decline in output and factor
allocations.

     This paper’s quantitative analysis show that the long-run business cycle moments of
economies with and without the collateral constraint differ marginally, while the mean
responses to one-standard-deviation shocks conditional on Sudden Stop states with positive
long-run probability differ sharply across the two economies. Thus, in contrast with findings
of previous studies, the collateral constraint produces significant amplification and
asymmetry in the responses of macroeconomic aggregates to shocks of standard magnitudes
on the same exogenous factors that drive normal business cycles (TFP, interest rates and
imported input prices). In addition, because of precautionary saving, Sudden Stops are
infrequent events nested within normal business cycles in the stochastic stationary
equilibrium. Thus, the model proposed here provides an explanation of Sudden Stops that
does not rely on large, unexpected shocks, and integrates a theory of business cycles with a
theory of Sudden Stops within the same DSGE framework.

     A comparative event analysis of Sudden Stops in the data and in the model shows that
the model matches key features of actual Sudden Stops. In particular, Sudden Stops in the
model are preceded by periods of economic expansion and external deficits, followed by large
recessions and reversals in the external accounts when Sudden Stops hit, and then followed
by gradual recovery. Moreover, Solow residuals exaggerate the contribution of true TFP to
the Sudden Stops’ output drop. These results are robust to variations in the labor supply
elasticity and the share of imported inputs in production. In contrast, the assumption that
the collateral constraint limits access to working capital financing plays an important role.

     An interesting extension of this framework would be to study a setup with “liability
dollarization,” in which foreign debt is denominated in a hard currency (i.e. tradable goods)
but largely leveraged on assets and/or incomes in domestic currency and generated by non-
tradables industries. This is important to consider because Sudden Stops also featured large
drops in the relative price of nontradables, and in many cases large nominal devaluations
(with exceptions like Hong Kong 1998 and Argentina 1995). A large, exogenous devaluation
can be viewed as the cause of a Sudden Stop in this situation, but an alternative is to model
a debt-deflation mechanism operating through a fall in the relative price of nontradables.
Durdu, Mendoza and Terrones (2008) study a model with this feature in a setup without
capital accumulation and where the debt limit is a function of income rather than the value
of capital.




                                              21
     The findings of this paper suggest that the key to reducing the probability of Sudden
Stops is in promoting the attainment of levels of financial development that weaken the
contractual frictions behind collateral constraints. In contrast, taking as given the underlying
uncertainty in the form of aggregate shocks to TFP, world interest rates and relative prices,
tighter “marked-to-market” capital requirements or “value-at-risk” targets, designed to
manage exposure to idiosyncratic risk, can be counterproductive and raise the probability of
observing Sudden Stops. Other policy conclusions derived from this analysis relate to
financial contagion and the desirability of holding large stocks of foreign reserves. In the
setup of this paper, an economy can have solid domestic policies and competitive, open
markets, and still reach a point of high leverage at which a Sudden Stop is caused by a
relatively small foreign or domestic shock. If waiting for financial development to eliminate
this problem seems naïve, and since tighter credit limits can make things worse, self
insurance in the form of a sufficiently large stock of reserves can be a useful way of lowering
the probability of Sudden Stops. The analysis by Durdu et al. (2008) provides evidence in
favor of this argument.




                                              22
References

Aiyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler (1999), “Overreaction of Asset Prices in General
    Equilibrium,” Review of Economic Dynamics.
Arellano, Cristina (2005), “Default Risk and Aggregate Fluctuations in Emerging
    Economies,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Auenhaimer, Leonardo and Roberto Garcia-Saltos (2000), “International Debt and the Price
    of Domestic Assets, ” IMF Working Paper 00/177.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a
    Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in J. Taylor and M. Woodford eds. Handbook
    of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, ed. by, North-Holland.
Calvo, Guillermo A., (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple
    Economics of Sudden Stops,” Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.
       , and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999), “When Capital Inflows come to a Sudden Stop:
    Consequences and Policy Options,” mimeo, University of Maryland.
       , Alejandro Izquierdo, and Rudy Loo-Kung (2006), “Relative Price Volatility under
    Sudden Stops: The Relevance of Balance-Sheet Effects,”Journal of International
    Economics, v. 69, pp. 231-254.
       , Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi (2006), “Phoenix Miracles in Emerging
    Markets: Recovering without Credit from Systemic Financial Crises,” Working Paper
    No. 570, Research Department, Inter-American Development Bank.
Choi, Woon Gyu and David Cook (2003), “Liability Dollarization and the Bank Balance
    Sheet Channel,” Journal of International Economics.
Cooley, Thomas, Ramon Marimon and Vincenzo Quadrini (2004), “Aggregate Consequences
    of Limited Contract Enforceability,” Journal of Pol. Economy, 111(4).
Cook, David and Devereux, Michael B., (2006a), “External Currency Pricing and the East
    Asian Crisis,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, pp. 37-63.
Cook, David and Devereux, Michael B., (2006b), “Accounting for the East Asian Crisis: A
    Quantitative Model of Capital Outflows in a Small Open Economies,” Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Dunbar, Nicholas, (2000) Inventing Money: The Story of Long-Term Capital Management
    and the Legends Behind it, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex: England.
Durdu, C. Bora, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco Terrones, (2008), “Precautionary Demand
    for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New
    Mercantilism,” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
Epstein Larry G. (1983), “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under
    Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 31, 133-152.
Fisher, Irving (1933), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 1,
    337-57.
Gertler, Mark, Simon Gilchrist and Fabio M. Natalucci (2007), “External Constraints on
    Monetary Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, v. 39, No. 2-3, pp.295-330.
Garcia Cicco, Javier, Pancrazi, Roberto and Martin Uribe (2006), “Real Business Cycles in
    Emerging Countries?,” NBER Working Paper No. W12629.
Garcia-Verdu, Rodrigo (2005), “Factor Shares from Household Survey Data,” mimeo,
    Research Department, Banco de Mexico.
Goldberg, Linda S. and Jose Manuel Campa (2006), “Distribution Margins, Imported
    Inputs, and the Insensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates,” mimeo, Research
    Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.



                                           23
Gopinath, Gita (2003), “Lending Booms, Sharp Reversals and Real Exchange Rate
     Dynamics,” Journal of International Economics.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Huffman (1988), “Investment, Capacity
     Utilization & the Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, June.
Izquierdo, Alejandro (2000) “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of Asset
     Prices and Output under External Shocks,” mimeo, The World Bank. June.
Jermann, Urban and Vincenzo Quadrini (2005), “Financial Innovations and Macroeconomic
     Volatility,” mimeo, Wharton School of Business.
Hayashi, Fumio (1982), “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation,”
     Econometrica, v. 50, no. 1, 213-224.
International Monetary Fund (2002), World Economic Outlook, September.
Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy,
     v.105, 211-248.
Kocherlakota, Narayana (2000) “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,”
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, v. 24, no. 3, Summer, 2-10.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, (2001), “The External Wealth of Nations:
     Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Countries,”
     Journal of International Economics, 55, 263-294.
Martin, Phillippe and Helene Rey, (2006), “Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or
     Without Crash?,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Mendoza, Enrique G. (2006), “Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with
     Collateral Constraints: A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin's Q.” NBER WP No. 12564
        , (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop.” In
     Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeffrey and Sebastian
     Edwards eds. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
        , (1995), “The Terms of Trade, The Real Exchange Rate and Economic
     Fluctuations,” International Economic Review, v. 36, 101-137, February.
        , (1991), “Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy,” American Economic
     Review, v. 81, 797-818, September.
      , and Katherine A. Smith (2006), “Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deflation
     Theory of Sudden Stops & Asset Prices,” Journal of Int. Econ.
      , and Vivian Z. Yue (2008), “A Solution to the Default Risk-Business Cycle
     Disconnect,” NBER Working Paper no. 13861.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin (2000), “Current Account Reversals and
     Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.” In Currency Crises, Paul Krugram ed.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Neumeyer, P. Andres and Fabrizio Perri (2005), “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies:
     The Role of Interest Rates,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
Oviedo, P. Marcelo (2004), “Intermediation of Capital Inflows: The Macroeconomic
     Implications of Neoclassical Banks &Working Capital,” mimeo, Iowa State University.
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2002), “Closing Small Open Economy Models,”
     Journal of International Economics.
Uribe, Martin and Zhanwei Vivian Yue, (2006), “Country Spreads and Emerging Countries:
     Who Drives Whom?,” Journal of International Economics, v. 69, 6-36.




                                           24
                          Table 1: Calibrated Parameter Values
Paramaters set with ratios from data and deterministic steady state conditions
     α            0.592     labor share set to yield 0.66 share in GDP as        α/(1−η)
      β           0.306     capital share set to yield 0.33 share in GDP as      β/(1−η)
      δ           0.088     depreciation rate from perpetual inventories method
      R          1.0857     implied by s.s.optimal investment rule
      w           1.846     regression estimate using labor supply optimality condition
      γ          0.0166     implied by s.s. consumption Euler eq.
    b/gdp         -0.86     implied by s.s. budget constraint
Average ratios from Mexican data (1993-2005)

  η= pv/y         0.102     imported inputs/gross output ratio

     k/y          1.758     capital/gross output ratio

   pv/gdp         0.114     imported inputs/gdp ratio
    gdp/y         0.896     gdp/gross output ratio
    c/gdp          0.65     consumption/gdp ratio
    g/gdp         0.110     gov. purchases/gdp ratio
    i/gdp         0.172     investment/gdp ratio
     g/c          0.168     ratio of public to private consumption
Parameters set with SMM
      a            2.75     targeted to match ratio of s.d. of investment to s.d. of gdp
      φ          0.2579     targeted to yield a mean working capital/gdp ratio of 0.2
                      Table 2. Mexico: Business Cycle Statistics and the Sudden Stop of 1995

                                       standard           standard dev.           correlation         first-order         Sudden Stop
variable                               deviation         relative to GDP             with           autocorrelation     (date in brackets)
                                                                                     GDP

GDP                                      2.723                 1.000                 1.000               0.749                -8.315
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
intermediate goods imports               7.850                 2.882                 0.905               0.759               -27.229
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
private consumption
  total                                  3.397                 1.247                 0.895               0.701                -8.175
                                                                                                                             (1995:3)
  non durables & services                2.490                 0.914                 0.893               0.676                -5.649
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
investment                               9.767                 3.586                 0.944               0.816               -30.074
                                                                                                                             (1995:3)
net exports-GDP ratio                    2.109                 0.775                -0.688               0.797                 4.898
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
current account-GDP ratio                1.560                 0.573                -0.754               0.720                 3.838
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
equity prices                           14.648                 5.379                 0.570               0.640               -27.397
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
intermediate goods prices                3.345                 1.228                -0.377               0.737                 5.915
                                                                                                                             (1995:1)
world real interest rate                 1.958                 0.719                -0.590               0.572                 6.752
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)
total factor productivity                1.340                 0.492                 0.519               0.537                -5.082
                                                                                                                             (1995:2)

Note: The data were expressed in per capita terms, logged and detrended with the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Equity prices are in
units of the GDP deflator. Intermediate goods prices are defined as the ratio of the deflator of imported intermediated goods
divided by the exports deflator. "Sudden Stop" corresponds to the lowest deviation from trend observed in the corresponding
variable (for variables in GDP ratios it is the largest change in percentage points observed in two consecutive quarters).
The world real real interest rate is the sum of the return on 3-month U.S. T bills plus the EMBI+ spread for Mexican sovereign debt
minus a measure of expected U.S. CPI inflation (see Uribe and Yue (2005) for details). Total factor productivity is measured
using a production function for gross output that includes capital, labor and imported intermediate goods. The data are for the
period 1993:1-2005:2, except the Uribe-Yue real interest rate, which is for the period 1994:1-2004:1.
                               Table 3. Long-Run Business Cycle Moments
                                               Standard        Standard       correlation     first-order
variable                     mean              deviation        deviation        with       autocorrelation
                                             (in percent)   relative to GDP      GDP
I. Economy without Collateral Constraint
       gdp                390.135               3.90%           1.000           1.000           0.822
           c                263.152             4.21%           1.080           0.861           0.817
           i                 66.203            13.85%           3.552           0.616           0.493
     nx/gdp                  0.042              3.00%           0.769           -0.191          0.549
           k                752.270             4.39%           1.125           0.756           0.962
      b/gdp                  -0.326            17.57%           4.505           -0.023          0.175
           q                 1.000              3.33%           0.854           0.379           0.440
  leverage ratio             -0.266             8.32%           2.133           0.001           0.083
           v                 42.247             5.85%           1.501           0.830           0.776
 working capital             75.993             4.32%           1.107           0.995           0.801
                   Savings-investment correlation               0.539
                   GDP-world interest rate correlation          -0.665
                   GDP-int. goods price correlation             -0.168

II. Economy with 30% Collateral Coefficient (κ = 0.30)

       gdp                  389.512             3.96%           1.000           1.000           0.818
           c                264.581             4.07%           1.030           0.909           0.792
           i                 66.093            13.66%           3.453           0.628           0.492
     nx/gdp                  0.036              2.76%           0.697           -0.213          0.490
           k                751.015             4.39%           1.109           0.751           0.963
      b/gdp                  -0.257            12.57%           3.177           -0.071          0.124
           q                 1.000              3.28%           0.828           0.390           0.438
  leverage ratio             -0.232             5.86%           1.482           -0.043          0.058
           v                 42.128             6.02%           1.523           0.836           0.770
 working capital             75.777             4.51%           1.139           0.990           0.785
                   Savings-investment correlation               0.512
                   GDP-world interest rate correlation          -0.657
                   GDP-int. goods price correlation             -0.173


III. Economy with 20% Collateral Coefficient (κ = 0.2)

       gdp                  388.339             3.85%           1.000           1.000           0.815
           c                267.857             3.69%           0.959           0.931           0.766
           i                 65.802            13.45%           3.496           0.641           0.483
     nx/gdp                  0.024              2.58%           0.671           -0.184          0.447
           k                747.709             4.31%           1.120           0.744           0.963
      b/gdp                  -0.104             8.90%           2.313           -0.298          0.087
           q                 1.000              3.23%           0.839           0.406           0.428
  leverage ratio             -0.159             4.07%           1.057           -0.258          0.040
           v                 41.949             5.84%           1.517           0.823           0.764
 working capital             75.455             4.26%           1.107           0.987           0.777
                   Savings-investment correlation               0.391
                   GDP-world interest rate correlation          -0.645
                   GDP-int. goods price correlation             -0.180
                                              Table 4. Amplification and Asymmetry Features of Sudden Stop Events
                                       (mean differences relative to frictionless economy in percent of frictionless averages)
                                        (1)                       (2)                            (3)                       (4)                                                             (5)
                                baseline economy      lower collateral coefficient  higher collateral coefficient   zero net exports
                                     κ=0.20                     κ=0.30                        κ=0.15                   threshold                                              no working capital
                                  S.S.       non S.S.              S.S.           non S.S.                S.S.            non S.S.             S.S          non S.S             S.S              non S.S
                                 states       states              states           states                states            states             states         states            states             states
       gdp                       -1.13        -0.11               -1.18            -0.06                 -1.21             -0.14              -0.86          -0.06              0.00               0.00
         c                        -3.25           -0.31            -3.17            -0.14                -3.15             -0.42               -2.12           -0.23           -1.54              -0.34
         i                       -11.84           -0.61           -10.73            -0.18                -12.35            -0.91               -7.48           -0.30           -9.71              -1.25
         q                        -2.88           -0.15            -2.64            -0.04                -2.99             -0.22               -1.81           -0.07           -2.53              -0.31

     nx/gdp                       3.56            0.25             3.32              0.08                 3.47              0.34               2.13            0.17             3.11              0.49

      b/gdp                       3.57            0.25             3.00              0.06                 3.60              0.36               2.11            0.18             3.31              0.53

    lev. ratio                    1.31            0.12             0.89              0.04                 1.47              0.18               0.83            0.09             0.90              0.17
         L                        -1.71           -0.16            -1.79            -0.09                -1.83             -0.22               -1.29           -0.10            0.00              0.00
         v                        -3.10           -0.29            -3.21            -0.16                -3.31             -0.40               -2.36           -0.18            0.00              0.00

     w. cap.                      -3.12           -0.29            -3.25            -0.16                -3.34             -0.40               -2.37           -0.18             na                na

         R                        0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00                 0.00              0.00               0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00

         p                        0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00                 0.00              0.00               0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00

        tfp                       0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00                 0.00              0.00               0.00            0.00             0.00              0.00

  prob. of SS events                     3.32%                             1.07%                                  3.92%                                9.54%                           0.07%

 b/gdp in SS events                       -0.21                             -0.44                                 -0.17                                -0.20                           -0.40


Note: Sudden Stop states are defined as states in which the collateral constraint binds with positive long-run probability and the net exports-GDP ratio is at least 2 percentage points
above its mean.
                            Figure 1: Macroeconomic Dynamics around Sudden Stop Events in Emerging Economies
                                                        (cross‐country medians of deviations from HP trends)

                             Gross Domestic Product                                                                Private Consumption

        6.00%                                                                             6.00%

        4.00%                                                                             4.00%

        2.00%                                                                             2.00%

        0.00%                                                                             0.00%

        ‐2.00%                                                                            ‐2.00%

        ‐4.00%                                                                            ‐4.00%

        ‐6.00%                                                                            ‐6.00%
                    t‐2          t‐1        t             t+1      t+2                                 t‐2           t‐1         t          t+1         t+2




                                   Investment                                                                      Net exports‐GDP ratio
                                                                                          3.00%
        20.00%
        15.00%                                                                            2.00%
        10.00%
                                                                                          1.00%
         5.00%
         0.00%                                                                            0.00%

         ‐5.00%                                                                          ‐1.00%
       ‐10.00%
                                                                                         ‐2.00%
       ‐15.00%
       ‐20.00%                                                                           ‐3.00%
                      t‐2         t‐1           t          t+1       t+2                              t‐2            t‐1        t           t+1         t+2




                                                                               Tobin Q

                                                1.050

                                                1.000

                                                0.950

                                                0.900

                                                0.850

                                                0.800
                                                            t‐2          t‐1         t         t+1           t+2




Note: The classification of Sudden Stop events in the emerging markets data is taken from Calvo et al. (2006). They define systemic sudden stop events as
episodes with mild and large output collapses that coincide with large spikes in the EMBI spread and large reversals in capital flows. Tobin' Q is the ratio of
debt outstanding over book value of equity, and it is shown in levels instead of deviation from HP trend.
                             Figure 2 : Sudden Stop Event Windows in Actual Data and Model Simulations
                                                                (medians of deviations from HP trends)

                          Gross Domestic Product                                                                          Private Consumption

        0.06                                                                                            0.08

                                                                                                        0.06
        0.04
                                                                                                        0.04
        0.02
                                                                                                        0.02
          0
                                                                                                             0
       ‐0.02
                                                                                                       ‐0.02
       ‐0.04                                                                                           ‐0.04

       ‐0.06                                                                                           ‐0.06
                  t‐2         t‐1          t            t+1                 t+2                                     t‐2     t‐1        t          t+1    t+2
                model        +1sd         ‐1sd          data                Mexico                                model     +1sd      ‐1sd        data   Mexico




                                    Investment                                                                            Net exports‐GDP ratio
                                                                                                        0.06
         0.3
                                                                                                        0.05
         0.2                                                                                            0.04
                                                                                                        0.03
         0.1                                                                                            0.02
                                                                                                        0.01
           0
                                                                                                           0
        ‐0.1                                                                                           ‐0.01
                                                                                                       ‐0.02
        ‐0.2                                                                                           ‐0.03
                                                                                                       ‐0.04
        ‐0.3                                                                                           ‐0.05
                  t‐2         t‐1          t            t+1                 t+2                                     t‐2     t‐1        t          t+1    t+2
                 model        +1sd        ‐1sd          data                Mexico
                                                                                                                 model      +1sd     ‐1sd         data   Mexico




                                                                                     Tobin Q

                                                  1.1

                                                 1.05

                                                   1

                                                 0.95

                                                  0.9

                                                 0.85

                                                  0.8
                                                              t‐2              t‐1          t          t+1          t+2
                                                                    model            +1sd       ‐1sd             data




Note: Events from actual data are as in Figure 1, which uses the definitions from Calvo et al. (2006). Mexican data are for the Sudden Stop of 1995. Sudden
Stop events in the model simulations are defined in a manner analogous to Calvo et al, as events in which the collateral constraint binds, output is at least
one‐standard‐deviation below trend, and the trade balance‐GDP ratio is at least one‐standard‐deviation above trend. Tobin's Q is shown in levels.
                  Figure 3: Solow Residuals and "True" TFP in Sudden Stop Events
                                    (means of deviations from long‐run averages)

                       Baseline                                                       η=0.2

 0.01                                                        0.01

0.005                                                       0.005
                                                                0
    0
                                                           ‐0.005
‐0.005
                                                            ‐0.01
 ‐0.01
                                                           ‐0.015
‐0.015                                                      ‐0.02

 ‐0.02                                                     ‐0.025
         t‐2     t‐1            t       t+1      t+2                  t‐2       t‐1            t      t+1     t+2
               Solow residual        True TFP                                 Solow residual       True TFP




               No working capital                                                      ω=3

 0.01                                                        0.01

0.005                                                       0.005

    0                                                          0

‐0.005                                                     ‐0.005

 ‐0.01                                                      ‐0.01

‐0.015                                                     ‐0.015

 ‐0.02                                                      ‐0.02
         t‐2     t‐1            t       t+1      t+2                  t‐2       t‐1            t      t+1     t+2
               Solow residual        True TFP                                 Solow residual       True TFP
                                                            Figure 4: Sensitivity Analysis of Sudden Stop Events
                                                                         (medians of deviations from HP trends)

                           Gross Domestic Product                                                                        Private Consumption
 0.04                                                                                            0.06
 0.03                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                 0.04
 0.02
                                                                                                 0.03
 0.01                                                                                            0.02
    0                                                                                            0.01
                                                                                                    0
‐0.01
                                                                                                ‐0.01
‐0.02                                                                                           ‐0.02
‐0.03                                                                                           ‐0.03
                                                                                                ‐0.04
‐0.04
                                                                                                ‐0.05
               t‐2              t‐1                 t              t+1             t+2                        t‐2          t‐1             t              t+1              t+2
         baseline           no w. cap.             eta=0.2              omega=3          data           baseline       no w. cap.         eta=0.2             omega=3         data




                                       Investment                                                                                    Tobin Q
 0.2                                                                                            1.05
0.15
 0.1                                                                                               1
0.05
                                                                                                0.95
   0
‐0.05
                                                                                                  0.9
 ‐0.1
‐0.15                                                                                           0.85
 ‐0.2
‐0.25                                                                                             0.8
               t‐2             t‐1                  t              t+1             t+2                        t‐2          t‐1             t              t+1              t+2

         baseline          no w. cap.              eta=0.2          omega=0.3            data           baseline       no w. cap.         eta=0.2              omega=3            data




                                  Working capital                                                                        Net exports‐GDP ratio
                                                                                                0.04
 0.03
                                                                                                0.03
 0.02
 0.01                                                                                           0.02
    0                                                                                           0.01
 ‐0.01
                                                                                                   0
 ‐0.02
 ‐0.03                                                                                          ‐0.01

 ‐0.04                                                                                          ‐0.02
 ‐0.05          t‐2             t‐1                 t              t+1            t+2
                                                                                                ‐0.03
 ‐0.06
                                                                                                              t‐2          t‐1              t                 t+1           t+2

                          baseline                eta=0.2               omega=3                          baseline       no w. cap.         eta=0.2             omega=3             data




                                           Labor                                                                          Intermediate goods
 0.015
                                                                                                0.02
   0.01
                                                                                                0.01
 0.005
                                                                                                   0
        0
                                                                                                ‐0.01         t‐2          t‐1             t              t+1              t+2
 ‐0.005
  ‐0.01                                                                                         ‐0.02

 ‐0.015                                                                                         ‐0.03

  ‐0.02                                                                                         ‐0.04
 ‐0.025                                                                                         ‐0.05
  ‐0.03                                                                                         ‐0.06
                    t‐2          t‐1                    t           t+1            t+2          ‐0.07
             baseline                no w. cap.               eta=0.2             omega=3
                                                                                                            baseline         no w. cap.             eta=0.2              omega=3
