NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEAR OF REJECTION? TIERED CERTIFICATION AND TRANSPARENCY
Emmanuel Farhi
Josh Lerner
Jean Tirole
Working Paper 14457
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14457

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Emmanuel Farhi, Josh Lerner, and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Fear of Rejection? Tiered Certification and Transparency
Emmanuel Farhi, Josh Lerner, and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 14457
October 2008
JEL No. D82,O31,O34
ABSTRACT
The sub-prime crisis has shown a harsh spotlight on the practices of securities underwriters, which
provided too many complex securities that proved to ultimately have little value. This uproar calls
attention to the fact that the literature on intermediaries has carefully analyzed their incentives, but
that we know little about the broader strategic dimensions of this market. The paper explores three
related strategic dimensions of the certification market: the publicity given to applications, the coarseness
of rating patterns and the sellers' dynamic certification strategies. In the model, certifiers respond to
the sellers' desire to get a chance to be highly rated and to limit the stigma from rejection. We find
conditions under which sellers opt for an ambitious certification strategy, in which they apply to a
demanding, but non-transparent certifier and lower their ambitions when rejected. We derive the comparative
statics with respect to the sellers’ initial reputation, the probability of fortuitous disclosure, the sellers'
self-knowledge and impatience, and the concentration of the certification industry. We also analyze
the possibility that certifiers opt for a quick turnaround time at the expense of a lower accuracy. Finally,
we investigate the opportunity of regulating transparency.

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
efarhi@harvard.edu
Josh Lerner
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 214
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
tirole@cict.fr

1

Introduction

As most markets are characterized by imperfect knowledge, informational intermediaries have become central to their working. From underwriters to rating agencies,
from scientific journals to entry-level examinations, from standard-setting organizations to system integrators, intermediaries serve sellers and buyers by providing
product-quality information to the latter.
The literature on intermediaries has carefully analyzed their incentives. By contrast, little do we know about three related strategic dimensions of the certification
market: the publicity given to applications, the coarseness of rating patterns, and the
sellers’ dynamic certification strategies. Policies in these matters exhibit substantial
heterogeneity. Regarding the transparency of the application process, scientific journals, certified bond rating agencies, lenders, underwriters, employers, organic food
certifiers, or prospective dates usually do not reveal rejected applications. By contrast, entry-level examinations companies (SAT, GMAT,...) disclose previous, and
presumably unsuccessful attempts by the student. Regarding the coarseness of grading, many institutions, such as most scientific journals, adopt a “minimum standard”
or “pass-fail” strategy, while others, such as entry-level examination firms, report an
exact grade. While a fine partition in the grading space presumably requires more
resources than a pass-fail approach, what drives the choice of coarseness is unclear.
Table 1 reports the strategies of some certifiers regarding publicity and grading.
Note that “application opacity” refers to the certifier’s policy, not necessarily to the
outcome. For example, one may fortuitously learn that a paper was submitted to and
rejected by a journal; furthermore, a delayed publication may create some stigma as
the profession is unsure as to whether the delay is due to the author, slow editing
or a rejection. Similarly, while academic departments, corporations and partnerships
warn in advance assistant professors and junior members that they are unlikely to
receive tenure or keep their job, thereby allowing them to attempt to disguise a layoﬀ
as a quit, information leakages and the inference drawn from the very act of quitting
provide some limit to this strategy.

2

Table 1
Our lack of understanding of the certification process has been highlighted by the
recent eﬀorts to ensure transparency of the securities rating process, particularly in
the area of structured finance. On an explicit level, all major rating agencies follow
a well-defined process, whose end product is the publication of a rating based on
an objective analysis. But firms have been historically able to get rating agencies
not to disclose ratings that displease them. First, the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) (2008) notes that even if a firm appeals a rating that displeases
it and the appeal is rejected, the proposed rating may not be published. Instead,
a “break-up fee” is paid by the issuer to the rating agency to compensate it for its
eﬀorts.
Alternatively, as Portnoy (2006) notes, consulting services oﬀered in recent years
by rating agencies to issuers may make an apparently transparent process opaque:
With respect to ancillary services, credit rating agencies market prerating assessments and corporate consulting. For an additional fee, issuers present hypothetical scenarios to the rating agencies to understand
how a particular transaction–such as a merger, asset sale, or stock
repurchase–might aﬀect their ratings. Although the rating agencies argue that fees from ancillary services are not substantial, there is evidence
3

that they are increasing. In addition, with respect to rating agency assessment services, once an agency has indicated what rating it would give
an issuer after a corporate transaction, the agency would be subject to
pressure to give that rating. For example, if an agency were paid a fee
for advice and advised an issuer that a stock repurchase would not aﬀect
its rating, it would be more diﬃcult for the agency to change that rating
after the issuer completed the repurchase.
This point is also made in a recent congressional testimony by Coﬀee (2008):
The inherent conflict facing the credit rating agency has been aggravated by their recent marketing of advisory and consulting services to
their clients. Today, the rating agencies receives one fee to consult with
a client, explain its model, and indicate the likely outcome of the rating
process; then, it receives a second fee to actually deliver the rating (if the
client wishes to go forward once it has learned the likely outcome). The
result is that the client can decide not to seek the rating if it learns that it
would be less favorable than it desires; the result is a loss of transparency
to the market.
In response to these behaviors, the SEC (2008) proposed on June 11, 2008 that
rating agencies dramatically increase their transparency:
Require [rating agencies] to make all their ratings and their subsequent
rating actions publicly available, to facilitate comparisons of [rating agencies] by making it easier to analyze the performance of the credit ratings
the [rating agencies] issue in terms of assessing creditworthiness.
Somehow, certifiers’ policies must reflect the demands of the two sides of the
market, as well as who has “gatekeeping power” over the certification process. In the
majority of applications, on which we will mainly be focusing here, the seller chooses
the certifier. While they need to be credible vis-à-vis the buyers, the certifiers must
first cater to the sellers’ desires.
4

As for dynamic certification strategies, sellers most often adopt a top-down submission strategy, in which they apply first to the best certifiers and then, after
rejections, move down the pecking order. Why do we observe this pattern, and
what determines the rejection rate, or equivalently whether submissions tend to be
ambitious or realistic?
To address these questions, we develop a model in which certifiers respond to
the sellers’ demand for certification. At an abstract level, a certifier’s policy maps
the information it acquires about the quality of the product into a public signal;
and importantly the public signal may be the lack thereof: the certifier can (try
to) conceal the existence of an application in order not to convey bad news about
quality. By contrast, we allow for fortuitous disclosure, as buyers may hear about
the application (“through the grapevine”) even if the certifier does not disclose it.
We find conditions under which sellers opt for an ambitious strategy, in which
they apply to a demanding, but non-transparent certifier and lower their ambitions
when rejected. We derive the comparative statics with respect to the sellers’ initial
reputation, the probability of fortuitous disclosure, the sellers’ self-knowledge and
impatience, and the concentration of the certification industry. We also analyze the
possibility that certifiers opt for a quick turn-around strategy at the expense of a
lower accuracy. Finally, we investigate the opportunity of regulating transparency.
The paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 lay down the basic model,
in which multi-tier grading is costly and only minimum-standard certification is
oﬀered. It solves for a competitive or concentrated certifying industry equilibrium
and conducts the welfare analysis of transparency regulation. Section 4 analyzes
the impact of the sellers’ accuracy of information about the quality of their oﬀering.
Section 5 generalizes the basic model by endogeneizing the sellers’ quality choice.
Section 6 examines the eﬀect of entry by certifiers who trade oﬀ accuracy and turnaround time. Section 7 allows for multi-tier grading. Section 8 summarizes our
insights and discusses a number of open questions.
Relationship to the literature
There is a large literature on certification in corporate finance, industrial orga5

nization or labor markets. In corporate finance, among the most cited papers are
Booth and Smith (1986), Grinblatt and Hwang (1989) and Weiss (1991). Much of
this literature focuses on the trade-oﬀ for certified agents between the cost of certification and its benefits in terms of signaling, reduced agency costs or assortative
matching. Much less has been written on the industrial organization of the certifying industry. An exception is Lerner-Tirole (2006), in which certifiers diﬀerentiate
through their composition and decision processes, making them more or less friendly
to sponsors’ interests. The current paper investigates certifiers’ positioning with
respect to transparency; it further analyzes sequential rejections, an issue that was
shown not to arise in Lerner-Tirole, in which the technology sponsor’s objective was
simply to have the technology adopted.
Other exceptions are the papers by Morrison and White (2005) and Gill and Sgroi
(2003). In particular, banks in Morrison-White apply to regulators with diﬀerent
perceived abilities. A successful application to a tough regulator allows banks to
raise more deposits. As regulators make mistakes, banks may get a second chance.
On the other hand, the Morrison-White paper focuses on rather diﬀerent issues than
our paper; for instance, it assumes that applications are transparent.

2

The model

Time is discrete and runs from −∞ to +∞. There is a mass 1 of buyers and a steady
inflow of sellers, each with one product. For simplicity, the representative seller’s
quality i is initially unknown to both sides of the market and can take one of three
values: high (H), low (L) or “abysmal” (−∞), with respective benefits for the buyers
bi ∈ {bH , bL , −∞} with bH > bL > −∞. Conditional on not being abysmal, quality
is high with prior probability ρ and low with prior probability 1 − ρ. Buyers prefer

quality H to quality L, and won’t consider the product unless its quality has been
certified to be at least L. A seller whose quality cannot be certified to be at least L
does not bring the product to the market and obtains zero profits.
Assuming that this certification has taken place, let b
ρ denote the buyers’ posterior
belief at the time at which the product is brought to the market (more on this
6

shortly). Let Si (b
ρ) denote the seller’s expected gain from putting a product of
b. We will assume that Si is always positive
quality i on the market when beliefs are ρ

and is increasing in ρ
^. Let us provide a few illustrations:

Example 1 (sale). Suppose that production is costless and that the seller sells the

product to homogenous, price-taking consumers. Then, under such first-degree price
discrimination
ρ) = max {Eeρ [b], 0}
Si (b

ρbH + (1 − b
ρ)bL denotes the users’ posterior
is independent of i, where Eeρ [b] ≡ b
assessment of quality.

Example 2 (sale with imperfect price discrimination). Following up on Example 1,

assume now that there are two types of users, indexed by a = aH (proportion μ) or
b = Eeρ [b], the gross surplus of a user of type
aL (proportion 1 − μ) with aH > aL . If b

b “Belief-sensitive pricing” arises when user surplus depends on
j ∈ {H, L} is aj + b.
b,1 i.e., when
posterior beliefs ρ
aL + bH > μ(aH + bH ) and aL + bL < μ(aH + bL ).

ρ) (which again is independent of i) is given by
Then, Si (b
±
b
for b
ρ ≥ ρ0
aL + b
Si (b
ρ) =
b
μ(aH + b) for b
ρ < ρ0
where

aL + [ρ0 bH + (1 − ρ0 )bL ] = μ[aH + ρ0 bH + (1 − ρ0 )bL ].

Buyers then have (average) utility
¯
μ(aH − aL ) for b
ρ ≥ ρ0
.
B(b
ρ) =
0
for b
ρ < ρ0

Example 3 (clientele eﬀects / assortative matching). Some buyers may be interested solely in high-quality oﬀerings. For example, financial institutions put, due to
1

The other two cases are isomorphic to Example 1, as the volume of sales is not aﬀected by
beliefs.

7

prudential regulation reasons, a particularly high valuation on safe securities. Full
grading allows the seller to better segment the market. Suppose that a fraction of
buyers buy only high-quality products, at price KbH where K > 1. Other buyers are
less discriminating and are as depicted in Example 1. Then
ρ) = KbH 1I{eρ=1} + max{Eeρ [b], 0}1I{eρ<1} ,
Si (b

is again independent of i.

Example 4 (spillovers from adoption). A researcher whose paper is read and used by
the profession, or a technology sponsor whose intellectual property becomes part of
a royalty-free standard benefit only indirectly from adoption (prestige, referencing,
diﬀusion of ideas for a researcher, network eﬀects or spillover onto complementary
products for a technology sponsor). Letting si denote the seller’s gross benefit from
adoption the seller’s surplus is then:2
Si (b
ρ) = si 1I{Eρe [b]≥0} .

Note that in this case the seller’s surplus in general depends directly on quality i.
Definition 1: Sellers are:
strongly information loving if for all ρ
S00i (ρ) > 0 for i ∈ {H, L} and S0H (ρ) ≥ S0L (ρ)
strongly information averse if for all ρ
S00i (ρ) < 0 for i ∈ {H, L} and S0H (ρ) ≤ S0L (ρ)
strongly information neutral if for all ρ
S00i (ρ) = 0 for i ∈ {H, L} and S0H (ρ) = S0L (ρ).
This definition holds only for diﬀerentiable payoﬀ functions. A weaker property
(implied by definition 1 in the case of diﬀerentiable payoﬀ functions) is:
2

Where 1I{·} is the indicator function.

8

Definition 2: Sellers are:
information loving if
ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) > ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ)
information averse if
ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) < ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ)
information neutral if
ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) = ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ).
If bL ≥ 0, the seller is information neutral in Examples 1 and 4, and information

loving in Example 3. If bL < 0, she is information loving when she fully appropriates
the consumer surplus through a price (Examples 1 and 3).
By contrast, the seller is information averse if Eρ [b] > 0 and if she is unable to
charge the buyer and therefore has buyer adoption as her primary objective. The
seller always benefits from a no grading, simple-acceptance policy (see Lerner-Tirole,
2006), weakly so in the two-type case when bL ≥ 0 (as in Example 4) and strictly so
with two types and bL < 0 or with a continuum of types, some of them negative. That

way, she is able to “pool” negative-buyer-surplus states with positive-buyer-surplus
ones.3
Certifiers. Profit-maximizing4 certifiers audit quality. Throughout the paper, we will
assume that, through reputation or a credible internal-audit mechanism, certifiers
are able to commit to a disclosure policy, that is to a mapping from what they learn
3

To illustrate information aversion, consider the following two examples from the Harvard campus. Harvard College has seen such rampant grade inflation that grades provided little information:
in recent years, the median grade has been an A-, and over 80% of the students graduated with
honors (Rosovsky and Hartley, 2002). At Harvard Business School, the School until recently had a
formal policy that prohibited students from disclosing their grade point average to prospective recruiters (Schuker, 2005). Such “pooling” of certified students is much less common with second-tier
institutions.
4
Our results also hold if certifiers maximize their market share in the certification market.

9

to what they disclose to buyers.5 This ability to commit to a disclosure policy makes
the question of choice of their incentive scheme moot,6 , and so we can assume without
loss of generality that they demand a fixed fee for the certification service. To sum
up, a certifier’s strategy is thus the combination of a fixed fee and a disclosure policy.
In some instances, we will alternatively assume that certifiers do not charge fixed fees
and that their objective is to maximize market share. When certifiers are atomistic
and competition is perfect, the outcome will be exactly the same. Diﬀerences will
potentially materialize when we consider monopolistic competition.
Because certifiers are useless unless they rule out the abysmal quality, we can
consider three types of certifiers, two “minimum standard” certifiers and one “full
grade” certifier:
A tier-1 certifier ascertains that b = bH or b ∈ {bL ,−∞}. Tier-1 certifiers fur-

thermore do not disclose applications for which they find that b ∈ {bL ,−∞}, as

such disclosure of bad news (a “rejection”) is unappealing to sellers and reduces the
demand for such certifiers’ services.
A tier-2 certifier certifies that b ∈ {bH ,bL } or b = −∞.7
A multi-tier certifier discloses the true quality: b = bH ,bL or −∞.

We will normalize the audit cost incurred by a minimum standard certifier to be
0. By contrast, the cost of a finer grading may be positive. Certifiers compete for
5

It is not certain, of course, that this assumption always holds in the real world. For instance,
some critics have accused rating agencies of initially being excessively generous when rating new
oﬀerings, then revising the rating months later. They suggest that the natural organizations to
question this behavior, the investment banks, have little incentive to do so, because they have
typically ‘laid oﬀ’ any exposure to the securities through refinancings (U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission, 2003). Certifiers’ reputation building is analyzed in Bouvard-Levy (2008) and MathisMc Andrews-Rochet (2008).
6
An arbitrary incentive scheme gives rise to an equilibrium disclosure policy and therefore can
be duplicated through a fixed payment (equal to the expected payment under the incentive scheme)
and the resulting disclosure policy.
7
Obviously, the certifier’s reporting strategy for b = −∞ is irrelevant, as the seller then always
makes no profit. If by contrast we assumed that sellers have other products, the production of
an "abysmal quality" could be a bad signal for other oﬀerings. One would then expect that the
information that b = −∞ would not be disclosed either.

10

the sellers’ business. The certification market, unless otherwise stated, is perfectly
competitive. Equilibrium fees are then equal to 0.
Consider a seller who arrives at date t and chooses a certifier. She can contract
with a single certifier in each period. Contingent on the outcome of certification(s),
the seller chooses the date, t + τ (τ ≥ 0), at which she brings the product to the
bt+τ , then the seller’s utility is
market. If the buyers’ beliefs at that date are b
ρ=ρ
δτ Si (b
ρt+τ )

where δ < 1 is the discount factor. Thus the seller maximizes
E[δτ Si (b
ρt+τ )].
In our model, there are only two (relevant) levels of quality and audits of a given
kind always deliver the same outcome.8 And so a date-t product will actually be
brought to the market either at t or at t + 1.
There can be fortuitous disclosure: When a seller arrives at date t and does
not bring her product to the market until date t + 1, with probability d ≥ 0, buyers

exogenously discover that the date-(t+1) introduction corresponds to a date-t arrival.
With probability 1 − d, buyers receive no such information.9
Finally, we will analyze perfect Bayesian equilibria. If multiple equilibria co-exist,
that can be Pareto ranked for the sellers, we will select the Pareto dominant one.

3

Minimum standard certifiers

3.1

Determinants of tiered certification

Note that there is no point applying to a tier-2 certifier unless one goes to the
market following an endorsement. Similarly, after an application to a tier-1 certifier,
8

There is no certifier-idiosyncratic noise, unlike in Morrison-White (2005).
Fortuitous disclosures will in equilibrium increase the cost of being rejected. Note that learning
that the seller arrived at date t is here equivalent to learning that her application was rejected at
date t. We could easily enrich the model by adding “slow sellers”, who arrive at date t, but apply
only at date t + 1. Such sellers would suﬀer an unfair stigma if the date of their arrival is made
public, as do papers in academia that authors are slow at submitting to a journal.
9

11

the seller brings the product to the market if the latter is a high-quality one and
applies to a tier-2 certifier in case of rejection. The equilibrium thus exhibits the
familiar pattern of moving down the pecking order, with diminishing expectations.10
Let x denote the fraction of sellers who choose an ambitious strategy (start with
a tier-1 certifier, and apply to a tier-2 certifier in case of rejection). Fraction 1 − x
select the safe strategy (go directly to a tier-2 certifier).
When faced with a product certified by a tier-2 certifier, buyers form beliefs:
b
ρ = 0 if they know the product introduction is delayed (as they infer
a rejection in the previous period), and

b
ρ=b
ρ(x) ≡ (1 − x)ρ/ [1 − x + x(1 − ρ)(1 − d)] otherwise.

Note that b
ρ(x) decreases from ρ to 0 as x increases from 0 to 1.
Let

ρ) ≡ ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)δ[dSL (0) + (1 − d)SL (b
ρ)]
W 1 (b

and
W 2 (b
ρ) ≡ ρSH (b
ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (b
ρ)
denote the expected payoﬀs11 when applying to a tier-1 or tier-2 certifier, when
2
1
> ∂W
≥ 0.
certification by a tier-2 certifier delivers reputation b
ρ. Note that ∂W
∂e
ρ
∂e
ρ
• Safe-strategy equilibrium. It is an equilibrium for sellers to all adopt a safe

strategy (x = 0) if W 2 (ρ) ≥ W 1 (ρ):

ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ) ≥ ρSH (1) + δ(1 − ρ)[(1 − d)SL (ρ) + dSL (0)],
or
(1 − ρ)[(1 − δ)SL (ρ) + δd[SL (ρ) − SL (0)]] ≥ ρ[SH (1) − SH (ρ)].

(1)

Condition (1) captures the costs and benefits of a safe strategy. A safe strategy
avoids delaying introduction when quality is low, thereby economizing (1 − δ)SL (ρ).
It also prevents the stigma associated with fortuitous disclosure, and thereby provides
10

An exception to this widespread pattern is provided by publications in law journals, where
authors build on acceptance to move up the quality ladder.
11
Conditional on b ∈ {bL , bH }.

12

gain δd[SL (ρ) − SL (0)]. The cost of a safe strategy is of course the lack of recognition
of a high quality SH (1) − SH (ρ).
Unsurprisingly, a safe-strategy equilibrium is more likely to emerge, the lower the
discount factor (i.e., the longer the certification length), and the higher the rate of
fortuitous disclosure. Indeed, when δ = 1, the safe-strategy equilibrium never exists
(i.e., even for d = 1) if the seller is information-loving.
• Ambitious-strategy equilibrium. Next, consider an equilibrium in which all

sellers adopt an ambitious strategy. Certification by a second-tier certifier is then
very bad news. Thus x = 1 is an equilibrium if and only if W 1 (0) ≥ W 2 (0):
ρSH (1) + δ(1 − ρ)SL (0) ≥ ρSH (0) + (1 − ρ)SL (0)

(2)

• Mixed-strategy equilibrium. Finally, consider a mixed equilibrium in which

ρ(x)) = W 2 (b
ρ(x)):
x > 0 (some sellers adopt an ambitious strategy), that is W 1 (b

ρSH (1) + δ(1 − ρ)[(1 − d)]SL (b
ρ(x)) + dSL (0)] = ρSH (b
ρ(x)) + (1 − ρ)SL (b
ρ(x)). (3)
Condition (3) has a unique solution x, if it exists. Note also that whenever a
mixed equilibrium exists, the safe-strategy equilibrium also exists, and it dominates
the mixed equilibrium from the point of view of the sellers.
Interestingly, there may exist multiple pure equilibria. For example for d = 0, the
conditions for the safe-strategy and the ambitious-strategy equilibria can be written:
ρSH (1) ≤ ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)(1 − δ)SL (ρ)

(4)

ρSH (1) ≥ ρSH (0) + (1 − ρ)(1 − δ)SL (0).

(5)

and

Indeed, the sellers’ certification strategies are strategic complements: Ambitious
certification strategies devalorize tier-2 certification, thereby encouraging ambitious
applications. Focusing on seller welfare W 1 and W 2 , Figure 1 depicts the possible
equilibrium configurations.
13

W

W
W2

W1

W 1T

W1

W2

W 1T
ρ

ρ

0

ρ

0

(i) Unique Equilibrium: ρ = ρ
(safe strategy)

(ii) Unique Equilibrium: ρ = 0
( ambitious strategy)

W

2

W

W

1

W 1T

0

ρ

ρ

(iii) Three Equilibria.
Pareto-dominant one: ρ = ρ
(safe strategy)

Equilibrium configurations.
Proposition 1 With minimum standard certifiers,
(i) the (Pareto-dominant) equilibrium exhibits
• the ambitious strategy of applying to a non-transparent tier-1 certifier, and then,
in case of rejection, to a tier-2 certifier (tiered certification) iﬀ

(1 − ρ)[(1 − δ)SL (ρ) + δd[SL (ρ) − SL (0)]] < ρ[SH (1) − SH (ρ)],
• the safe strategy of directly applying to a tier-2 certifier otherwise.
(ii) ambitious strategies are more likely, the lower the probability of fortuitous disclosure (the lower d is), and the more patient the seller (the higher δ is); when δ = 1
and d = 1 ambitious strategies are adopted if and only if the seller is information
loving.
14

ρ

Let us comment on the interpretation of an equilibrium in which sellers do not
apply for tier-1 certification, given that observed certifier rankings always start with
"tier-1", almost by definition. One interpretation is that this particular class of sellers
applies to tier-2 certifiers (on this, see also Section 4 below). Another interpretation
speaks to the very definition of "tier-1", "tier-2", etc. What we here call "tier-2"
could in practice be called "tier-1" if no seller applied to what we define as "tier1" certifiers. For example, no "super tier-1" journal has been created that would
be more demanding than the top-5 economics journals and take, say, the five best
papers of the year.
An example of impatient sellers in many American universities is junior faculty
members, who are about to come up for tenure. For instance, an assistant professor in
the strategy group at a business school may submit a promising empirical analysis to
Management Science, rather than submitting it to the American Economic Review.
In part, this choice is driven by the diﬀerent time frames that the two journals
typically have for reviewing papers (on this, see Section 6). But in many cases, the
junior faculty member senses that a rejection by a tier-1 certifier would make the
track record at the tenure review too thin.12
Is lack of transparency linked to market structure?
To answer this question, assume by contrast that the market for tier-1 certification is monopolized, while tier-2 certifiers are still competitive. In the absence of
transparency (NT), the tier-1 monopolist can demand fee
FNT = W 1 (ρ) − W 2 (ρ)
whenever (1) is violated (i.e., whenever the sellers use the services of the tier-1
certifier). In cases (i) and (iii) of Figure 1, the sellers Pareto coordinate on the safe
strategy for all FNT ≥ 0. Thus, under non-transparency, the outcome is the same

as with a competitive tier-1 industry, except for the monopolist lump-sum payment
FNT in case (ii) of Figure 1.
12

The junior faculty’s impatience can reasonably be assumed to be common knowledge, and so
we are performing comparative statics with respect to the discount factor (part (ii) of Proposition
1).

15

Suppose that instead the monopolist opts for transparency (T ). He can then
charge fee
FT = W 1 (0) − W 2 (ρ) < FNT
(assuming FT ≥ 0. If FT < 0, then the monopolist faces no demand at any nonnegative fee). We conclude that the absence of transparency is not driven by market
structure.
Proposition 2 Suppose that tier-2 certification is competitive. A monopoly tier-1
certifier opts for non-transparency so as to maximize the sellers’ incentive to apply
for tier-1 certification. Up to a lump-sum transfer, the outcome is exactly the same
as for a competitive tier-1 industry.
Note that this result would also hold if certifiers did not charge fees and cared
only about market share: Regardless of the number of tier-1 certifiers, transparency
is a dominated strategy.

3.2

Regulation of transparency

In reaction to the subprime crisis the US Treasury chose to require structured investment vehicles to disclose ratings (even unfavorable ones). This section studies
whether regulation of disclosure increases welfare in industries in which sellers shop
around for certification.13
Suppose that a regulator can require transparency of applications (this amounts
to setting d = 1) and that this regulation cannot be evaded. Application to a tier-2
ρ) = W 2 (b
ρ).
certifier yields (“T ” refers to “transparency”) W 2T (b
By contrast, application to a tier-1 certifier yields a lower payoﬀ than in the
absence of transparency:

13

ρ) whenever b
ρ > 0,
W 1T = W 1 (0) < W 1 (b

We focus on governmental regulations. An interesting and related subject of inquiry could be
concerned with social regulation (social norms). For example, a social group may disagree when
one of its members reveals a rejection incurred by another member (in professional or personal
matters); society then “regulates” against transparency.

16

Application to a transparent tier-1 certifier (with payoﬀs as depicted by the dashed
horizontal line in Figure 1) is an equilibrium behavior if and only if
W 1 (0) ≥ W 2 (ρ).
And so if W 1 (0) < W 2 (ρ) < W 1 (ρ), or
ρSH (1)+δ(1−ρ)SL (0) < ρSH (ρ)+(1−ρ)SL (ρ) < ρSH (1)+δ(1−ρ)[(1−d)SL (ρ)+dSL (0)],
the transparency requirement increases the sellers’ welfare: see case (ii) in Figure
1. In the other parameter configurations (cases (i) and (iii) in Figure 1) it has no
impact on equilibrium outcomes and welfare.
Proposition 3 Transparency improves sellers’ welfare.
Self-Regulation. Relatedly, would tier-1 certifiers agree among each other not to
compete on the transparency dimension and to disclose applications? The answer is
no, as they would thereby diminish their collective attractiveness. Put diﬀerently,
a self-regulated disclosure requirement would either have no impact or drive tier-1
certifiers out of business.14
User welfare. How does transparency impact users’ welfare? As we have seen, transparency regulation makes a diﬀerence only in case (ii) of Figure 1, by killing the
ambitious-strategy equilibrium. The issue is thus whether users benefit from more or
less information. The answer to this question is case-specific. In the first-degree price
discrimination illustrations of Examples 1 and 3, users have no surplus and so we can
confine welfare analysis to that of sellers. In Example 4, either ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL ≥ 0

and then the equilibrium is always a safe-strategy one, or ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL < 0 and
14

To prove these assertions, one must assume that certifiers are slightly diﬀerentiated (and thus
can demand a positive fixed fee): As in Hotelling’s model, the total cost for a buyer of using a certifier
is the fixed fee charged by the certifier plus a function of the “distance” between the certifier and
the buyer. For example, one can imagine that tier-k certifiers (k = 1, 2) are on an Hotelling-LernerSalop circle and that sellers are distributed randomly along the circle, incurring a transportation
cost of “traveling” to a specific seller. One can then take the limit as the diﬀerentiation vanishes.
In the absence of diﬀerentiation, profits are always equal to 0, and regulatory choices are a matter
of indiﬀerence to the certification industry.

17

the equilibrium is always the ambitious-strategy one: In either case transparency is
irrelevant.
The analysis is more interesting for Example 2 (imperfect price discrimination).
In the belief-sensitive-pricing case in Example 2,15 user net surplus in the ambitiousstrategy and safe-strategy equilibria are:
B1 = δ(1 − ρ)μ(aH − aL )
2

B =

¯

μ(aH − aL ) for ρ ≥ ρ0
0 for ρ < ρ0

respectively. Thus a transparency regulation that moves the equilibrium from ambitious to safe strategies increases (decreases) user welfare if ρ ≥ ρ0 (if ρ < ρ0 ).

We thus see that while regulation always benefits sellers, it need not benefit users.

This is a noteworthy observation, in view of the fact that transparency regulation
is often heralded as protecting users; needless to say, with naive users, the case for
transparency regulation would be stronger.

4

Seller self-knowledge

For expositional simplicity, we have assumed that the seller is a poor judge to assess
the quality of her product for the buyers. In some cases, sellers are likely to have some
information about the quality of their product. Suppose that a fraction α of sellers
know their “type” (a fraction 1 − α have no clue, as earlier). Then, maintaining the
assumption that only minimum-standard certification is available, knowledgeable H
sellers apply to a tier-1 certifier, and knowledgeable L sellers apply to a tier-2 certifier.
15

I.e., when aL + bH > μ(aH + bH ) and aL + bL < μ(aH + bH ). The sellers’ payoﬀs in the two
potential equilibrium configurations are:
W 1 = ρ(aL + bH ) + δ(1 − ρ)μ(aH + bL )
W2 =

¯

aL + [ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL ] for ρ ≥ ρ0
μ[aH + [ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL ]] for ρ < ρ0 .

18

As earlier let us look for the condition under which direct tier-2 applications by
unknowledgeable sellers is an equilibrium. Let
b
ρ=

(1 − α)ρ
(1 − α)ρ + (1 − ρ)

denote the probability of high quality following certification by a tier-2 certifier.
Condition (1) is replaced by
ρ) + δd[SL (b
ρ) − SL (0)] ≥ ρ[SH (1) − SH (b
ρ)].
(1 − ρ)[(1 − δ)SL (b
Because b
ρ < ρ, this condition has become harder to satisfy.

Proposition 4 An increase in the fraction of sellers who are able to assess the
quality of their product (an increase in α) makes tiered certification by the uninformed
more likely.
An improvement in the quality of self-assessment may therefore have an ambiguous impact on the probability of rejections: The direct and obvious eﬀect is to

reduce rejections by matching applications to the true quality. However, it increases
the stigma attached to second-tier submissions (low-ambition applications are more
likely to be low-caliber products): The choice of certifier then becomes a stronger
signal of quality.

5

Endogenous quality

This section shows that our analysis is unchanged when the choice of quality depends
on the equilibrium of the certification process. Suppose that quality depends on the
seller’s investment eﬀort e ∈ [e, e]. We are interested in modeling a dimension of

eﬀort that aﬀects the likelihood of a high quality outcome but does not change the
probability of an abysmal outcome. It is reasonable to think that those margins
respond to diﬀerent forms of investment, and that for some of the examples that we

19

have in mind, the latter margin would be quite inelastic.16 Hence our focus on the
former.
Let q be the probability that a product is not abysmal. A higher eﬀort increases
the probability of the high quality ρ (e) outcome conditional on a non-abysmal outcome. Let ψ (e) denote the disutility of eﬀort. We assume that ρ (e) is increasing
and concave in e and that ψ (e) is increasing and convex in e with ρ0 (e) = +∞
and ψ0 (e) = 0. To simplify the analysis, we also assume that SL (¦) = SH (¦) (as in
Examples 1 through 3), and that d = 0.
We define two ex-ante payoﬀ functions W 1 and W 2 as follows:
W 1 (^
ρ) ≡ max {q [ρ (e) S (1) + δ (1 − ρ (e)) S (^
ρ)] − ψ (e)}
e

and
W 2 (^
ρ) ≡ max {qS (^
ρ) − ψ (e)} .
e

1

2

ρ) and e (^
ρ) be the solutions of the maximization problems underlying W 1
Let e (^

and W 2 . Clearly, e2 (^
ρ) = e.
Lemma 5 We have

dW 2 (^
ρ)
d^
ρ

>

dW 1 (^
ρ)
d^
ρ

for all ρ
^.

Proof. By the envelope theorem,
¢¢ dS (^
¡
¡
ρ)
ρ)
dW 1 (^
ρ)
= qδ 1 − ρ e1 (^
d^
ρ
d^
ρ
2
dW (^
ρ)
dS (^
ρ)
= q
d^
ρ
d^
ρ
The result follows immediately.
There are two potential equilibria. The ambitious strategy equilibrium eﬀort level
e1∗ and the safe-strategy equilibrium eﬀort level e2∗ are determined by the following
equations:
e1∗ = e1 (0) > e = e2∗ .
16

More generally, the analysis extends straightforwardly to a small elasticity of abysmal quality
to eﬀort.

20

The safe strategy is an equilibrium if and only if
W 2 (ρ (e)) ≥ W 1 (ρ (e))
while the ambitious strategy equilibrium is an equilibrium if and only if
W 1 (0) ≥ W 2 (0) .
>From Lemma 1, an equilibrium always exists. The safe and risky strategy
equilibria co-exist over a range of parameters. When there are multiple equilibria, we
adapt our Pareto dominant selection criterion and select the ex-ante Pareto dominant
equilibrium. The analysis is then identical to the case where eﬀort is exogenous,
with ρ replaced by ρ (e) and W 1 and W 2 replaced by W 1 and W 2 . In particular,

transparency weakly improves sellers’ ex-ante welfare. When it does so strictly, it
replaces an ambitious strategy equilibrium with high quality investment by a safe
strategy equilibrium with low quality investment.

6

Quick turn-around

First- and second-tier certifiers may choose their certification delays so as to attract
sellers. Shorter lags may increase the certification cost (here normalized at 0) or
result in reduced accuracy. We focus on the latter for the moment.
To capture the idea that short turn-around times benefit the sellers, we assume
that a quick turn-around certification takes less time (and therefore is subject to
discount factor ^
δ > δ), while both tier-1 and tier-2 certification take one period.17
Thus a seller who is rejected by a quick turn-around certifier could for instance apply
to a tier-2 certifier without losing as much time as if he had been rejected by a tier-1
certifier. Furthermore, we will make assumptions so that it is never optimal to turn
directly to a tier-2 certifier, and that it is never optimal to turn to a quick turnaround certifier after a rejection either by a tier-1 certifier or by a quick turn-around
17

In order to avoid integer problems (and the concomitant possibility that the date of product
introduction reveal the strategy), one must assume in this section that sellers arrive in continuous
time (but the certification length is still discrete).

21

certifier. We further assume that d = 0, and that SH (b
ρ) = SL (b
ρ) ≡ S(b
ρ) for all b
ρ, so
as to simplify the analysis.
Let

ρ(1 − zH )
ρ(1 − zH ) + (1 − ρ)zL
be the posterior belief following an H signal by a quick turn-around certifier. Without
ρ+ ≡

loss of generality, we assume that such a signal is good news for the quality of the
product, i.e. that ρ+ > ρ. This is equivalent to requiring that the fraction of false
negatives and false positives be not too high: 1 > zH + zL .
Our first assumption is suﬃcient to ensure that it is always preferable to turn to
a tier-1 certifier and then apply to a tier-2 certifier rather than to apply directly to
a tier-2 certifier:

1 − (1 − ρ) δ
.
(6)
ρ
Our second assumption is suﬃcient to ensure that after a rejection by a tier-1
S (1) > S (ρ)

certifier, a seller does not want to try a quick turn-around certification next:
δ(1 − ^δ)
S(0)
.
(7)
^δ
S(1) − δS (0)
Last, it must be the case that a seller does not want to turn to another quick turnzL <

around certifier after being rejected by one. A suﬃcient condition for the absence of
such repeated attempts is that false positives be perfectly correlated among quick
turn-around certifiers, and so a failed attempt to be certified by such a certifier does
not call for other attempts.
Given these assumptions, the only relevant strategic consideration is whether
to apply to a quick turn-around certifier or to a tier-1 certifier. Denote by y the
fraction of applicants who opt for a quick turn-around certification rather than tier-1
certifiers.
ρ2 (y) denote the posterior beliefs following tier-2 certification:
Let b
ρ2 = b
yρzH
b
.
ρ2 (y) =
yρzH + y(1 − ρ)(1 − zL ) + (1 − y)(1 − ρ)

ρ2 (y). With false positives, the higher y, the higher
We necessarily have ρ+ > ρ > b
b
ρ2 (y) and the lower the stigma associated with tier 2 certification.
22

Sellers turn to a certifier with low turn-around time rather than to a tier-1 certifier
if and only if Ψ(y) ≥ 0 where:
ρ2 (y))
Ψ(y) = ^
δ[ρ(1 − zH ) + (1 − ρ)zL ]S(ρ+ ) + [ρzH + (1 − ρ)(1 − zL )]^δδS(b
−δ[ρS(1) + δ(1 − ρ)S(b
ρ2 (y))].
The sign of Ψ0 (y) determines whether the choices between tier-1 certification and
quick turn-around certification are strategic complements (positive sign) or substitutes (negative sign). Decisions are strategic complements if and only if
δ
ρzH + (1 − ρ)(1 − zL ) ≥ (1 − ρ).
^δ

(8)

The left-hand side of (8) is the probability of being rejected when applying to a
quick turn-around certifier. The right-hand side of (8) is the discounted probability
of being rejected by a tier-1 certifier. Increasing y reduces the stigma of applying
to a tier-2 certifier which impacts the payoﬀ of both the tier-1 certification strategy
and the quick turn-around application strategy in proportion to these probabilities.
The higher zH , the lower zL and the lower δ, the more likely is (8) to be verified.
It may be worth noting that strategic complementarity also obtains when the quick
turn-around certifier mimics the acceptance rate of a tier-2 certifier.18
When (8) holds, then there can be multiple equilibria. This occurs when the
following additional conditions are verified:
Ψ(0) < 0 < Ψ(1).

(9)

If there are multiple equilibria, the equilibrium where all sellers first turn to quick
turn-around certifiers has higher seller welfare. Indeed, combining a revealed preference argument (Ψ(1) > 0) and the fact that ρS(1) + δ(1 − ρ)S(b
ρ2 (1)) > ρS(1) +
δ(1 − ρ)S(0) automatically yields the result. We maintain the maximization of seller
18

Indeed, let the quick turn-around certifier receive a quality signal σ, with distributions FH (σ)
and FL (σ) satisfying MLRP. The cutoﬀ rule σ∗ yields the same acceptance rate as a tier-1 certifier
if
ρzH + (1 − ρ)zL = 1 − ρ
where zH = FH (σ∗ ) and zL = 1 − FL (σ∗ ) .

23

welfare as our selection criterion, and so as long as Ψ(1) > 0, the economy will find
itself in the quick turn-around equilibrium.
When (8) is violated, the equilibrium is unique, and may be in mixed strategies. If
Ψ(1) ≥ 0 (and hence Ψ(0) > 0), then the equilibrium involves quick turn-around certification. When Ψ(0) ≤ 0 (and hence Ψ(1) < 0), then the equilibrium involves tier-1

certification. When Ψ(1) < 0 < Ψ(0), then the equilibrium is in mixed strategies.

Proposition 6 Suppose that 0 < zH < 1 − zL and that (6), (7) hold. If (8) holds,
then the equilibrium involves quick turn-around certification if Ψ(1) ≥ 0 and tier-1
certification otherwise. If (8) is violated, then the equilibrium involves quick turn-

around certification when Ψ(1) ≥ 0, tier-1 certification when Ψ(0) ≤ 0, and mixed
strategies otherwise.

Market structure and quick turn-around
We now analyze how market structure aﬀects the emergence of quick turn-around
certification versus tiered certification. More specifically, we maintain the assumption
that the market for tier-2 certifiers is perfectly competitive, and analyze the impact
of the degree of competition among tier-1 certifiers. We maintain throughout the
assumptions that 0 < zH < 1 − zL , that (6) and (7) hold, and that Ψ(1) > 0.
The results turn out to depend on the nature of this competition. We analyze
two cases. In case (a), tier-1 certifiers charge a fixed fee and maximize profits. In
case (b), tier-1 certifiers do no compete in prices. Rather, they care about market
share but have to incur a cost per submission, which depends on whether they opt
for tier-1 or quick turn-around certification. Case (a) might be a better description
of rating agencies while case (b) might be a better model of scientific journals.
We start with case (a). Assume that there is a single, monopolistic tier-1 certifier.
This tier-1 certifier can choose between two strategies: tier-1 certification and quick
turn-around certification. In each case, the monopolist extracts all the sellers’ surplus
over and above the sellers’ welfare if the sellers were to go directly to a tier-2 certifier.

24

Therefore, the tier-1 certification strategy yields monopoly profit19
δ [ρS(1) + δ(1 − ρ)S (ρ)] − δS (ρ)
while the quick turn-around certification strategy yields monopoly profit
^
δS(ρ+ ) + [ρzH + (1 − ρ)(1 − zL )] δδS(ρ)
− δS (ρ)
[ρ(1 − zH ) + (1 − ρ)zL ]^
The monopoly certifier will therefore opt for a quick turn-around certification strategy if and only if the monopoly profit is higher under the latter strategy than under
the former. This can be expressed as ΨM ≥ 0 where
∙
¸
δ
M
Ψ ≡ Ψ(1) + [ρzH + (1 − ρ)(1 − zL )] − (1 − ρ) ^δδ [S(ρ) − S(b
ρ2 (1))] .
^δ
Hence ΨM > Ψ(1) if and only if (8) holds. Therefore, with a monopolist tier-1
certifier which charges a fixed fee and maximizes profits, quick turn-around certification is more (less) likely than under competitive markets if (8) holds (doesn’t
hold). Similarly, one can look at an oligopolistic tier-1 structure with two (or more)
tier-1 certifiers competing in prices à la Bertrand: The outcome in the limit of small
diﬀerentiation is the same as when tier-1 certifiers are perfectly competitive. If there
is enough diﬀerentiation, on the other hand, then it can be the case in a Hotelling
duopoly where (8) holds, that quick turn-around certification is less likely than under
perfect competition (See Appendix 2).
We now turn to case (b). We assume that the tier-1 certifiers’ objective function
is given by
[market share] ∗ [1 − c]
19

Let F be the fee charged by the monopoly tier-1 certifier. If
δS (ρ) ≥ δ [ρS (1) + δ (1 − ρ) S (ρ)] − F

then the tier-2 equilibrium exists and Pareto dominates any other equilibrium. If this inequality is
violated, then there is no tier-2 equilibrium and furthermore the tier-1 equilibrium exists as
δS (0) < δ [ρS (1) + δ (1 − ρ) S (0)] − F.
A similar reasoning applies to the computation of the monopoly profit under quick turn-around
certification.

25

where c = cL for tier-1 certification and c = cH for quick turn-around certification.
We assume that cL < cH . In the case of peer-reviewed scientific journals, for example,
this might capture the cost for editors of pressing the referees to return their report
quickly.
A monopolist tier-1 certifier would choose tier-1 certification with a payoﬀ of
1 − cL over quick turn-around certification which yields only 1 − cH . By contrast, in
an oligopoly with two (or more) tier-1 certifiers where
(1 − cL )/2 < 1 − cH

(10)

then they will all choose quick turn-around certification.20 Hence in this case, the
oligopolistic game features a form of prisoner’s dilemma and competition increases
quick turn-around certification.
Proposition 7 Suppose that (6), (7) hold, and that Ψ(1) > 0. The eﬀect of competition on quick turn-around certification depends on the nature of competition.
Competition decreases quick turn-around certification if certifiers charge a fixed fee
and compete in prices so as to maximize profits if and only if (8) holds. By contrast, competition increases quick turn-around certification if tier-1 certifiers do not
compete in prices but rather in market shares as long as (10) holds.
The theoretical prediction that competition enhances quick turn-around certification when certifiers compete in market shares and not in prices is largely consistent
with the historical experience among the leading academic journals in finance.21
While certainly highly influential finance papers were also published in more general
economics journals such as the Journal of Political Economy and the Bell Journal of
Economics, for many years there was a single dominant finance journal, the Journal
20

If there are n tier-1 certifiers, then the condition for the equilibrium to feature quick turn-around
certification is
(1 − cL )/n < 1 − cH
which is weaker, the higher n.
21
This and the following two paragraphs are based on conversations with several current and
former editors of finance journals. We are particularly grateful to Cam Harvey and Bill Schwert for
sharing historical data with us.

26

of Finance (JF ). In 1973, Michael C. Jensen and his colleagues at the University
of Rochester spearheaded the formation of a new journal, the Journal of Financial
Economics (JFE).
One of the defining aspects of the JFE from its initial conception by its editors
was its emphasis on rapid turn-around time for paper submissions. In its first two
years, the median turn-around time for a submission was only three weeks. Due to
stringent pressure from the editors, as well as the then-novel feature of paying referees
for timely reviews (though the sums were rather nominal), review times remained
under five weeks for a dozen more years. The speed of review was in dramatic
contrast at the time to the other outlets where major finance publications appeared.
The emphasis on quick turn-around –in addition to the well-cited nature of many
of the initial papers published in the JFE– proved to be extremely attractive to
would-be authors. Consequently, the number of submissions to the journal soared:
the rejection rate fell from 41% in 1972 to 20.5% in 1978 to 13.5% in 1984. The gap
between the rejection rates of the JF and JFE in those years also narrowed, from
24% to 9% to 4%. During the 1980s, and particularly after the ascension of Rene
Stulz to its editorship, the JF shortened the average time in which its papers were
reviewed.

7

Multi-tier certification

Let us return to error-free certification, but assume now that certifiers can, at cost
c ≥ 0, provide a fine grade if they choose so (which, in a competitive certifying

environment, is equivalent to the sellers’ wanting a fine grade). We maintain the

assumption that d = 0 for expositional simplicity. In the same way they do not want
to disclose unsuccessful applications, tier-1 certifiers do not gain by transforming
themselves into multi-tier certifiers. The question is then whether tier-2 certifiers
disappear and how this aﬀects the sellers’ incentive to apply to tier-1 certifiers.
The broad intuition, which we develop in more detail below, goes as follows:
Sellers who would otherwise have applied directly to a tier-2 certifier, can avoid the
adverse-selection stigma by turning to a multi-tier certifier. This stigma avoidance
27

however comes at a cost if sellers are information averse. If they are information
loving or neutral, and the cost of fine grading is small, multi-tier certification drives
out tier-2 certifiers; it also drives out tier-1 certifiers as resubmission after a rejection
by a tier-1 certifier involves a delay and cannot prevent the buyers from knowing that
quality is not high. Thus, if fine grading is costless, minimum-standard certification
can survive only if sellers are information averse.
More generally, assume that c ≥ 0, and consider first an ambitious-submission

equilibrium (x = 1) under minimum-standard certification (Section 3). Sellers obtain ρSH (1) + δ(1 − ρ)SL (0). But they can avoid discounting and obtain ρSH (1) +

(1 − ρ)SL (0) − c by turning to a multi-tier certifier directly. The tiered-certification
equilibrium therefore requires, besides condition (1), that
ρSH (1) + δ(1 − ρ)SL (0) ≥ ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) − c ⇐⇒ (1 − δ)(1 − ρ)SL (0) ≤ c.

Second, consider a safe-strategy equilibrium (x = 0), and so condition (1) obtains.

This equilibrium is robust to the introduction of full-grading if and only if furthermore
ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ) ≥ ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) − c,
i.e., when c = 0 if and only if the sellers are information averse.22
To sum up, sellers resort to multi-tier grading when its cost c is low, when sellers
are impatient (δ is low), and when sellers are information neutral or loving.
Conversion to multi-tier grading is a potential defense strategy by tier-2 certifiers against the adverse-selection stigma. There is a sense in which tier-1 face less
pressure to convert to multi-tier grading: Namely there exist c and c, with c >c> 0
such that for c ≥ c, the equilibrium is as in Proposition 1 (i.e., a minimum-standard
22
For the sake of completeness, we can consider a mixed equilibrium (0 < x < 1). A necessary
and suﬃcient condition for this equilibrium to be robust to the introduction of fine grading is that
the sellers who apply directly to a tier-2 certifier do not find it advantageous to go for a full grade:

ρSH (b
ρ(x)) + (1 − ρ)SL (b
ρ(x)) ≥ ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0) − c.

28

certification) and for c≤ c ≤ c, the equilibrium remains a tier-1-certification equi-

librium if this is what Proposition 1 predicts, but switches from a tier-2-certification
equilibrium to a multi-tier equilibrium otherwise.23
Multi-tier grading as a defensive strategy by tier-2 certifiers seems to resonate
with our academic experience. Illustrations include fine grading by Be Press and the
proliferation of prizes oﬀered by tier-2 journals (and not by tier-1 journals24 ).
Our assumption that certifiers can commit to a policy may be a bit stretched in
the case of multi-tier grading. Suppose that such a commitment is enforced by reputational concerns, and consider a tier-2 certifier trying to break a tiered-certification
equilibrium by converting into a multi-tier grade certifier. If sellers do not believe in
this strategy, the certifier is deprived of high types and cannot (and has no incentive to) develop a reputation for accurate, fine grading. As we earlier announced, we
leave foundations of commitment for future research, but we note that our commitment assumption may be more problematic for some forms of certification than for
others.25
Proposition 8 Multi-tier grading is more likely, the lower its cost, and the more
23

>From equation (1), tier-1 certification prevails whenever
ρ[SH (1) − SH (ρ)] ≥ (1 − ρ)(1 − δ)SL (ρ).

Let
c ≡ ρ[SH (1) − SH (ρ)] − (1 − ρ)[SL (ρ) − SL (0)].
At c = c, the tier-2 equilibrium starts being replaced by a multi-tier equilibrium. But
(1 − δ)(1 − ρ)SL (0) = c − δ[SL (ρ) − SL (0)] < c,
and so a tier-1 equilibrium is robust at c = c.
24
An apparent exception is provided by top finance journals. In their case, prizes may stem
from a desire to provide an attractive alternative to top-5 economics journals for authors valuing
publications in general economics outlets.
25
We can however capture this idea through the following reduced form: Suppose that each
certifier secretly chooses between spending 0 and spending c per review (say, by recruiting talented
employees), and announces publicly its certification strategy (tier-1, tier-2, multi-tier); and that it
incurs a finite penalty for incorrect rankings. No certifier has an incentive to invest in the cost c per
review if sellers choose an ambitious strategy and believe that certifiers do not invest in the extra
cost.

29

impatient and the less information-averse the sellers are.
Proposition 8 focuses on a competitive certifying industry. Appendix 1 by contrast considers a monopoly certifier who can costlessly engage in fine grading; it
performs a mechanism design exercise and shows how eﬃcient disclosure relates to
the sellers’ information aversion.
Proposition 8 may shed some light on rating agencies’ practice of fine grading.
As we observed in Example 3 (Section 2), bond ratings not only certify the quality
of an issue but also allow matching between securities and buyers. This matching
dimension became more important in the mid 1970s, when broker-dealers’ regulatory
assessment of solvency (and then insurers’, pension funds’, and, with Basel II, banks’)
started to make use of ratings, creating a strong demand for high-quality liquid
claims. The mid-1970s coincidentally were a turning point in the business model of
rating agencies, which switched to the issuer-pays mode.

8

Summary and conclusion

Certifiers such as rating agencies, journals, standard setting bodies or providers of
standardized tests play an increasingly important role in our disintermediated market
economies. Yet as scrutiny of rating agencies in the aftermath of the sub-prime crisis
has shown, these organizations have complex incentive structures and may adopt
problematic approaches. This paper makes an initial attempt at understanding how
the certification industry caters to the certified party’s demand through strategies
such as the non-disclosure of rejections, and analyzes the welfare implications of such
policies.
The first insight is that, in the absence of regulation, certifiers have a strong
incentive not to publicize rejected applications.
On the normative side, sellers’ gaming of the certification process involves costs:
delay (or, in a variant of our model, duplication of certification costs) and possibly
excessive information exposure; these costs were shown to provide a role for transparency regulation. We showed that transparency regulation always benefits sellers,
30

but need not benefit users.
On the positive side, we examined when sellers are willing to take the risk of
applying to a tier-1 certifier. This willingness hinges on the behavior of other sellers
(which aﬀects the stigma associated with a tier-2 acceptance), the discount factor
(which impacts the cost of an ambitious submission strategy), the accuracy of the
sellers’ self-assessment (more realistic self-estimates favoring tiered certification), and
sellers’ information aversion (which determines the reputation-risk tolerance). We
further showed that multi-tier grading may be a rational response by tier-2 certifiers
to the stigma carried by their endorsement.
We also analyzed the impact of entry by certifiers who oﬀer a low turn-around
time and a lower accuracy. Such certifiers, if they appeal to sellers, create less stigma
for tier-2 certification than tier-1 certifiers do. We characterized the conditions under
which sellers will indeed turn to such “quick turn-around” certification. We further
showed that the more competitive the industry, the more likely it is that certifiers
oﬀer a low (high) turn-around time if certifiers maximize market share (profits).
Finally, we examined when certifiers might adopt more complex rating schemes,
rather than the simple pass-fail scheme. We highlighted that such nuanced schemes
are more likely when the costs of such ratings are lower. In addition, these schemes
are more common when sellers are less averse to the revelation of information about
their quality and more impatient.
Turning back to Table 1, it is not surprising in light of our theoretical predictions
that the bulk of the entries are under the opaque heading. State licensing examinations may be fundamentally diﬀerent due to the presence of regulatory dicta.
Entry-level examinations exhibit transparency and fine grading. These features may
reflect the power imbalance between the buyers (colleges) and sellers (would-be students). In this instance, it is the buyers rather than the sellers who choose certifiers,
which probably explains the unusual entry in Table 1.26 Finally, and also consistent
with our theory, it is not surprising that in situations where we would anticipate
that risk aversion would be greatest (e.g., an undergraduate or MBA student going
26

Top schools want to be matched with top students. They therefore have an incentive to demand
tier-1 certification, or, better in an environment with mistakes, fine and transparent grading.

31

on the job market, an entrepreneurial firm going public), we see minimum standard
certification rather than a fine-grained scheme.
This paper leaves open a number of interesting questions. We conclude by discussing a few of these.
• Two-sided certification markets.

We have assumed that certifiers cater to the sellers. This is the case in particular

if buyers are dispersed and can share the information, and so certifiers cannot charge
the buyer side.
Academic journals have traditionally charged the buying side. They bundled,
however, the certification and distribution function. The distribution function nowadays can be performed through web sites and web repositories (although journals try
to keep the two activities bundled through requirements not to keep papers posted
once they are accepted). Does the recent advocacy in favor of open access publishing
(charging authors rather than readers) reflect this new scope for unbundling? An
interesting literature (e.g., McCabe-Snyder 2005, 2007a,b and Jeon-Rochet 2007) analyzes certification from the point of view of two-sided markets theory. In particular,
it looks at when academic journals should charge readers or authors, and how the
quality of certification is aﬀected by this choice. By way of contrast, the issues of
transparency and sequential certification remain yet to be investigated in this context. One may, for instance, wonder whether the certifiers’ ability to charge buyers
would lead to more transparency.
• Horizontal aspects.

Certifiers diﬀerentiate not only through their standards (the vertical dimension),

but also with respect to the audience they target on the buyer side. For instance,
an interesting question in academic certification is the relative role of generalist and
field journals. In economics, for instance, the most valued publications are the top-5
generalist journals, but top field journals do extremely well and seem to dominate
second-tier generalist journals.
Papers may be classified through their vertical component (quality) as well as
the scope of their potential readership (a “generalist” paper is more appropriate for
32

a broader audience than a “specialist” paper). A possibility is that being accepted
at a good specialist journal carries less stigma than being accepted at a second-tier
generalist one: the paper may have been rejected because it is too specialized, but
still have very high quality.
The same patterns are seen in other contexts as well. For instance, from the 1960s
through 1990s, four investment banks specializing in technology firms–Hambrecht
& Quist, Alex. Brown, Robertson Stephens and Unterberg Towbin (later supplanted
by Montgomery Securities)–had an influence that belied their modest sizes. They
frequently participated in the underwriting of the largest technology oﬀerings, often
in partnership with the most prestigious “bulge bracket” investment banks (Brandt
and Weisel, 2003). Similarly, a strategy adopted by many of the successful new
entrants into the venture capital industry has been to adopt a well-defined specialization, and then seek to co-invest with prestigious groups which might not otherwise
have considered working with a new organization.
• Other second-tier certifier strategies to deal with adverse selection.

Grading is a potential response by certifiers to adverse selection problems. We

may think about other strategies. For example, second-tier journals sometimes organize successful special issues, which by building “network eﬀects”, may carry less
stigma. It would be interesting to understand whether special issues have more appeal to second-tier journals, and, if so, whether this is due to a visibility eﬀect (tier-1
journals having less need for visibility) or to a quality eﬀect (special issues compromising quality less for tier-2 journals). In a similar vein, less established certifiers have
attempted to distinguish themselves through innovation (for instance, Drexel Burnham Lambert’s development of the junk bond market). These issues would deserve
further exploration.

33

References
Arrow, Kenneth (1972) “Models of Job Discrimination,” in A.H. Pascal ed., Racial
Discrimination in Economic Life. Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.
Booth, J., and R. Smith (1986), “Capital Raising, Underwriting and the Certification Hypothesis”, Journal of Financial Economics, 15 (1-2): 261-281.
Bouvard, M., and R. Levy (2008) “Two-Sided Reputation,” mimeo, Toulouse School
of Economics.
Brandt, Richard L., and Thomas Weisel (2003) Capital Instincts: Life As an Entrepreneur, Financier, and Athlete. New York, John Wiley.
Coﬀee, John C., Jr. “Turmoil in the U.S. Credit Markets: The Role of the Credit
Rating Agencies,” Testimony Before the U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Aﬀairs, April 22, 2008.
Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I., and J. Tirole (1999) “The Economics of Career Concerns. I: Comparison of Information Structures,” Review of Economic Studies, 66
(1): 183-198.
Gill, D., and D. Sgroi (2003) “The Superiority of Tough Reviewers in a Model of
Simultaneous Sales,” DAE Working paper 335, Cambridge University.
Grinblatt, M.,. and C. Hwang (1989), “Signaling and the Pricing of New Issues”,
Journal of Finance, 44 (2): 393-420.
Jeon, D.S., and J.C. Rochet (2007) “The Pricing of Academic Journals: A TwoSided Market Perspective,” mimeo, University Pompeu Fabra and Toulouse School
of Economics.
Lerner, J., and J. Tirole (2006) “A Model of Forum Shopping,” American Economic
Review, 96(4): 1091—1113.
Mathis, J., Mc Andrews, J. and J.C. Rochet (2008) “Rating the Raters,” mimeo,
TSE and New York Fed.
McCabe, M.J., and C. Snyder (2005) “Open-Access and Academic Journal Quality,”
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95(2): 453—458.

34

–— (2007a) “Academic Journal Pricing in a Digital Age: A Two-Sided Market Approach,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy (Contributions). January,
vol. 7, no1, article 2.
–— (2007b) “The Economics of Open-Access Journals,” mimeo, Georgia Institute
of Technology and George Washington University.
Megginson, W.,. and K. Weiss (1991), “A Venture Capitalist Certification in Initial
Public Oﬀerings”, Journal of Finance, 46 (3): 879-903.
Morrison, A., and L. White (2005) “Crises and Capital Requirements in Banking,”
American Economic Review, 95(5): 1548—1572.
Partnoy, Frank (2006) “How and Why Credit Rating Agencies are Not Like Other
Gatekeepers,” in Yasuyuki Fuchita and Robert E. Litan, eds., Financial Gatekeepers: Can They Protect Investors?, Washington: Brookings Institution Press and
the Nomura Institute of Capital Markets Research.
Rosovsky, H., and M. Hartley (2002) Evaluation and the Academy: Are we Doing
the Right Thing?: Grade Inflation and Letters of Recommendation, Cambridge,
MA: American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Schuker, Daniel J. (2005) “In Reversal, HBS to Allow Grade Disclosure: MBA Class
of ’08 may Show Transcripts to Potential Employers,” Harvard Crimson, December
15.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2003) Report on the Role and Function
of Credit Rating Agencies in the Operation of the Securities Markets, As Required
by Section 702(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Washington: Government
Printing Oﬃce, and associated testimony and exhibits (particularly that of Sean J.
Egan).
U.S. Securities and Exchange Report, Oﬃce of Compliance Inspections and Examinations and Oﬃce of Economic Analysis, (2008), Summary Report of Issues Identified in the Commission Staﬀ’s Examinations of Select Rating Agencies, Washington,
SEC.

35

Appendix 1 (mechanism design for a monopoly certifier
under costless fine grading)
For expositional simplicity, we assume that the certifier does not discount the
future (maximizes steady-state profits) and can perform fine grading at no cost (c =
ρ) and FL (b
ρ) denote the c.d.fs of
0). Adopting a mechanism design approach, let FH (b
posterior beliefs when the seller comes to the market for types H and L, respectively.
The certifier solves:
Z

Z

ρ)dFH (b
ρ) + (1 − ρ) SL (b
ρ)dFL (b
ρ)}
S ≡ max {ρ SH (b
{F H (·),F L (·)}

s.t.
ρb
ρH + (1 − ρ)b
ρL = ρ
where
b
ρi

(11)

R
≡ b
ρdFi (b
ρ) for i ∈ {H, L}

b
ρH ≥ ρ

b
ρL ≤ 1 − ρ.

and

In words, b
ρi is the average ex post reputation of type i. Condition (11) just expresses

the martingale property of beliefs.

Rather than solving this program in full generality, we study several cases of

interest.
(a) Sellers are strongly information loving.
In this case, the convexity of Si implies that
S ≤ T ≡ ρ[b
ρH SH (1) + (1 − b
ρH )SH (0)] + (1 − ρ)[b
ρL SL (1) + (1 − b
ρL )SL (0)].

Maximizing T with respect to constraint (11) (with multiplier μ) yields first-order
conditions:

∂L
∂e
ρH

= ρ[SH (1) − SH (0) − μ] ≤ 0,

∂L
∂e
ρL

= (1 − ρ)[SL (1) − SL (0) − μ] ≤ 0,
36

with equality if

b
ρH > 0

with equality if

b
ρL > 0.

Because SH (1) − SH (0) ≥ SL (1) − SL (0), the program admits b
ρH = 1 and b
ρL = 0 as

a solution: Fine grading is optimal, and

S =ρSH (1) + (1 − ρ)SL (0).

(b) Sellers are strongly information averse.
A symmetric proof shows that it is then optimal to have tier-2 certification. And
so:
S =ρSH (ρ) + (1 − ρ)SL (ρ).
(c) Spillovers from adoption (example 2).
Suppose (as in Lerner-Tirole 2006) that
Si (b
ρ) = si 1I{Eρe [b]≥0} .

Clearly if Eρ [b] = ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL ≥ 0, the optimum is a pooling one (tier-2

certification). So let us assume that

ρbH + (1 − ρ)bL < 0.
Let ρ∗ > ρ be defined by
ρ∗ bH + (1 − ρ∗ )bL = 0.
One has:

ρ(1 − ρ∗ )
sL .
ρ∗
Put diﬀerently, the certifier “accepts” all high types and a fraction u of low types,
S = ρsH +

such that
ρ∗ =

ρ
.
ρ + (1 − ρ)u

Optimal certification is then intermediate between a tier-1 and a tier-2 certifier:
less stringent than the former, but more demanding than the latter.

37

Appendix 2 (quick turn-around equilibrium in a Hotelling
duopoly game)
Consider a Hotelling duopoly game between two tier-1 certifiers where the diﬀerentiation parameter t is large enough so that both firms have positive market share.
In a symmetric, pure-strategy equilibrium, then each firm charges fee F = t/2. Let
ρ2 ) ≡ ρS (1) + δ (1 − ρ) S (^
ρ2 ) ,
W 1 (^

W 3 (^
ρ2 ) ≡

^
δ
[[ρ(1 − zH ) + (1 − ρ) zL ] S (ρ+ ) + δ [ρzH + (1 − ρ) (1 − zL )] S (^
ρ2 )]
δ

and let
ρ− ≡ ρ
^2 (1) .
Hence,
and

£
¤
ΨM = δ W 3 (ρ) − W 1 (ρ)

£
¤
Ψ (1) = δ W 3 (ρ− ) − W 1 (ρ− ) .

Consider a quick turn-around equilibrium. If one of the two certifiers deviates to
become tier-1 and charges F (in general, F 6= t/2), then the market share of the other
certifier is

¤
£
ρ2 (y)) − W 1 (^
ρ2 (y))
t + (t/2 − F) + δ W 3 (^
y≡
.
2t
It is easy to show that, for the optimal F associated with the deviation

(12)

W 1 (^
ρ2 (y)) > W 3 (^
ρ2 (y))
for the deviation to be profitable. In particular, the deviator can charge F = t/2
(not optimal). If
W 1 (ρ− ) ≥ W 3 (ρ− )
then for y given by (12), ρ
^2 (y) < ρ− and
ρ2 (y)) > W 3 (^
ρ2 (y))
W 1 (^
if (8) holds. And so, the quick turn-around equilibrium exists for a smaller set of
parameters than for a perfectly competitive industry.
38

