                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW DO GASOLINE PRICES AFFECT FLEET FUEL ECONOMY?

                                            Shanjun Li
                                        Roger von Haefen
                                       Christopher Timmins

                                       Working Paper 14450
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14450


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2008




We thank Hunt Alcott, Soren Anderson, Arie Beresteanu, Paul Ellickson, Han Hong, Mark Jacobsen,
Sarah West, the editor, two anonymous referees, and participants at Camp Resources XIV for their
helpful comments. Financial support from Micro-Incentives Research Center at Duke University is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Shanjun Li, Roger von Haefen, and Christopher Timmins. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Gasoline Prices Affect Fleet Fuel Economy?
Shanjun Li, Roger von Haefen, and Christopher Timmins
NBER Working Paper No. 14450
October 2008
JEL No. H23,L62,Q31

                                              ABSTRACT

Exploiting a rich data set of passenger vehicle registrations in twenty U.S. metropolitan statistical
areas from 1997 to 2005, we examine the effects of gasoline prices on the automotive fleet's composition.
We find that high gasoline prices affect fleet fuel economy through two channels: (1) shifting new and
purchases towards more fuel-efficient vehicles, and (2) speeding the scrappage of older, less fuel-efficient
used vehicles. Policy simulations based on our econometric estimates suggest that a 10% increase
in gasoline prices from 2005 levels will generate a 0.22% increase in fleet fuel economy in the short
run and a 2.04% increase in the long run.


Shanjun Li                                           Christopher Timmins
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
SUNY-Stony Brook                                     Duke University
Stony Brook, NY 11794-4384                           209 Social Sciences Building
shlli@notes.cc.sunysb.edu                            P.O. Box 90097
                                                     Durham, NC 27708-0097
Roger von Haefen                                     and NBER
Department of Agricultural                           christopher.timmins@duke.edu
 and Resource Economics
North Carolina State University
Box 8109
Raleigh, NC 27695
roger_von_haefen@ncsu.edu
1. INTRODUCTION

        How the composition of the U.S. vehicle fleet responds to changes in gasoline

prices has important implications for policies that aim to address climate change, local air

pollution, and a host of other externalities related to gasoline consumption. 3 We

investigate this response. Exploiting a unique and detailed data set, we decompose

changes in the vehicle fleet into changes in vehicle scrappage and new vehicle purchase

decisions, and analyze how gasoline prices influence each of these choice margins. We

then recover the fuel economy elasticities with respect to gasoline prices in both the short

and long run.

     In 2006, the United States consumed 7.6 billion barrels of oil. This represents

roughly one-quarter of global production, with gasoline consumption accounting for 44%

of oil consumption. The combustion of gasoline in automobiles generates carbon dioxide

emissions, the predominate greenhouse gas linked to global warming, as well as local air

pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds that harm human

health and impair visibility. The costs associated with these environmental effects are

generally external to gasoline consumers, leading many analysts to argue for corrective

policies.

     To address these externalities, a suite of policy instruments have been advanced,

such as increasing the federal gasoline tax, tightening Corporate Average Fuel Economy

(CAFE) standards, subsidizing the purchase of fuel efficient vehicles such as hybrids, and

taxing fuel-inefficient “gas guzzling” vehicles. Several recent studies have compared

gasoline taxes and CAFE standards and have concluded that increasing the gasoline tax is


3
 See Parry, Harrington, and Walls (2007) for a comprehensive review of externalities associated with
vehicle usage and federal policies addressing those externalities.


                                                 1
more cost-effective (National Research Council, 2002; Congressional Budget Office,

2003; Austin and Dinan, 2005; Jacobsen, 2007). When evaluating the policy options,

two important behavioral drivers are: (1) the utilization effect, or the responsiveness of

vehicle miles traveled (VMT) to fluctuations in gasoline prices, and (2) the compositional

effect, or the responsiveness of fleet fuel economy to gasoline price changes. Although a

large body of empirical evidence on the magnitude of the utilization effect now exists

(see Small and Van Dender (2007) and Hughes, Knittel, and Sperling (2008) for

summaries and recent contributions), less evidence exists on the size of the compositional

effect. This is the focus of our paper.

     Existing studies that have attempted to quantify the elasticity of fuel economy to

gasoline prices can be divided into two categories based on the methods and data used.

Studies in the first group estimate reduced-form models where the average MPG of the

vehicle fleet is regressed on gasoline prices and other variables by exploiting aggregate

time-series data (Dahl, 1979; Agras and Chapman, 1999), cross-national data (Wheaton,

1982), or panel data at the U.S. state level (Haughton and Sakar, 1996; Small and Van

Dender, 2007). Studies using time-series data or cross-sectional data are not able to

control for unobserved effects that might exist in both temporal and geographic

dimensions. Although a panel-data structure allows for that possibility, the average MPG

used in panel-data studies (as well as other studies in this group) suffer from

measurement errors. Because fleet composition data are not readily available, most of

the previous studies infer the average MPG of the vehicle fleet based on total gasoline

consumption and total vehicle miles traveled. However, data on vehicle miles traveled

have well-known problems such as irregular estimation methodologies both across years




                                            2
and states (see Small and Van Dender (2007) for a discussion).

        The second group of studies models household-level vehicle ownership decisions

(Goldberg, 1998; Bento et al., 2008). A significant modeling challenge is to consistently

incorporate both new and used vehicle holdings. Despite significant modeling efforts,

Bento et al. (2008) have to aggregate different vintage models into fairly large categories

in order to reduce the number of choices a household faces to an econometrically

tractable quantity.4 This aggregation masks substitution possibilities within composite

automotive categories and therefore may bias the estimates of both demand elasticities

with respect to price and the response of fleet fuel economy to gasoline prices toward

zero.

        Our study employs a qualitatively different data set and adopts an alternative

estimation strategy. First, our data set measures the stock of virtually all vintage models

across nine years and twenty Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) and hence provides a

complete picture of the vehicle fleet's evolution. In contrast to the aforementioned

reduced-form studies, the fuel economy distribution of vehicle fleet is therefore observed

in our data. Second, the data allow us to control for both geographic and temporal

unobservables, both of which are found to be important in our study. In contrast to the

structural methods alluded to above, we make no effort to recover the household

preference parameters that drive vehicle ownership decisions, and hence our results are

robust to many assumptions made in those analyses. Finally, since we observe the fleet

composition over time, we are able to examine how the inflow and outflow of the vehicle

fleet are influenced by gasoline prices.

        We first examine the effect of gasoline prices on the fuel economy of new vehicles
4
    Goldberg (1998) estimates a nested logit model by aggregating all used vehicles into one choice.


                                                       3
(i.e., the inflow of the vehicle fleet) based on a partial adjustment model. We find that an

increase in the gasoline price shifts the demand for new vehicles toward fuel-efficient

vehicles. We then study the extent to which gasoline prices affect vehicle scrappage (i.e.,

the outflow of the vehicle fleet). To our knowledge, this is the first empirical study that

focuses on the relationship between gasoline prices and vehicle scrappage.5 We find that

an increase in gasoline prices induces a fuel-efficient vehicle to stay in service longer

while a fuel-inefficient vehicle is more likely to be scrapped, ceteris paribus. With both

empirical models estimated, we conduct simulations to examine how the fuel economy of

the entire vehicle fleet responds to gasoline prices. Based on the simulation results, we

estimate that a 10% increase in gasoline prices will generate a 0.22% increase in the short

run (one year) and a 2.04% increase in the long run (after the current vehicle stock is

replaced). We also find that sustained $4.00 per gallon gasoline prices will generate a

14% long-run increase in fleet fuel economy relative to 2005 levels, although this

prediction should be interpreted cautiously in light of the relatively large out-of-sample

price change considered and the Lucas critique (Lucas, 1976).6

     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data.

Section 3 investigates the effect of gasoline prices on fleet fuel economy of new vehicles.

Section 4 examines how vehicle scrappage responds to changes in gasoline prices.

Section 5 conducts simulations and discusses caveats of our study. Section 6 concludes.




5
  Previous papers on vehicle scrappage have focused on factors such as age, vehicle price and government
subsidies to retirements of old gas-guzzling vehicles (Walker, 1968; Manski and Goldin, 1983; Berkovec,
1985; Alberini, Harrington, and McConnell, 1995; Hahn, 1995; Greenspan and Cohen, 1999).
6
  In particular, large and sustained gasoline price increases may introduce new demand and supply-side
responses that would change the model parameters, which themselves might be functions of policy
variables.


                                                   4
2. DATA

         Our empirical analysis and policy simulations are based on vehicle fleet

information in twenty MSAs listed in Table 1. The geographic coverage for each MSA is

based on the 1999 definition by the Office of Management and Budget. These MSAs,

well-representative of the nation as discussed at the end of this section, are drawn from

all nine Census regions and exhibit large variation in size and household demographics.

There are three data sets used in this study and we discuss them in turn.

      The first data set, purchased from R.L. Polk & Company, contains vehicle

registration data for the twenty MSAs. This data set has three components. The first

component is new vehicle sales data by vehicle model in each MSA from 1999 to 2005.

The second component is vehicle registration data (including all vehicles) at the model

level (e.g., a 1995 Ford Escort) in each MSA from 1997 to 2000. Therefore, we observe

the evolution of the fleet composition at the model level over these 4 years.7 This part of

the data includes 533,395 model-level records representing over 135 million vehicles

registered during this period. The third component is registration data at the segment

level (there are twenty-two segments) in each MSA from 2001 to 2005.8 We observe

59,647 segment-level records representing over 170 million registrations during this

period.9 Our empirical analysis of new vehicles is based on the first part of this data set


7
  We ignore medium and heavy duty trucks and vehicles older than 1978 because the fuel economy
information is not available for them. Since these vehicles account for less than 1% of total vehicle stock,
our finding should not be significantly altered.
8
  There are 22 segments including 12 for cars (basic economy, lower mid-size, upper mid-size, traditional
large, basic luxury, prestige luxury, basic sporty, middle sporty, upper specialty, prestige sporty), 4 for vans
(cargo minivan, passenger minivan, passenger van, cargo van), 3 for SUVs (mini SUV, mid-size SUV, full
size SUV), and 3 for pickup trucks (compact pickup, mid-size pickup and full size pickup).
9
  The stock data at the model level are very expensive. Facing the tradeoff of the level of aggregation and
the length of the panel, we decided to purchase the stock data at the model level for years 1997 to 2000 and
the stock data at the segment level for years 2001 to 2005. We discuss in Section 3 how we integrate the
model and segment level data.


                                                       5
while that on vehicle scrappage is based on the second and third components of the data

set.

       Based on the changes in vehicle stock across time, we can compute vehicle survival

probabilities at the model level from 1998 to 2000 and at the segment level from 2001 to

2005.     The survival probability of a model in year t is defined as the number of

registrations in year t over that in year t-1. The survival probability of a segment in a

given year is defined similarly. These survival probabilities reflect two types of changes

in the vehicle fleet. One is the physical scrappage of a vehicle and the other is the net

migration of a vehicle in and out of the MSA, which might induce a survival probability

larger than one. The average survival probability weighted by the number of registrations

at the model level (369,507 observations) is 0.9504 with a standard deviation of 0.1098,

while the average survival probability at the segment level (48,370 observations) is

0.9542 with a standard deviation of 0.0835. The standard deviations of the survival

probabilities at the segment level being smaller reflect the aggregate nature of data at the

segment level.

       The second data set includes MSA demographic and geographic characteristics from

various sources (observations in year 2000 are shown in Table 1). We collect median

household income, population, and average household size from the annual American

Community Survey. Data on annual snow depth in inches are from the National Climate

Data Center. From the American Chamber of Commerce Research Association (ACCRA)

data base, we collect annual gasoline prices for each MSA from 1997 to 2005.

During this period, we observe large variations in gasoline prices both across years and

MSAs. For example, the average annual gasoline price is $1.66, while the minimum was




                                             6
$1.09 experienced in Atlanta in 1998 and the maximum was $2.62 in San Francisco in

2005. Figure 1 plots gasoline prices in San Francisco, Las Vegas, Albany, and Houston

during the period. Both temporal and geographic variation is observed in the figure

although geographic variation is relatively stable over time. The general upward trend in

gasoline prices during this period can be attributed to strong demand together with tight

supply. Global demand for oil, driven primarily by the surging economies of China and

India, has increased significantly in recent years and is predicted to continue to grow. On

the supply side, interruptions in the global oil supply chain in Iraq, Nigeria, and

Venezuela, tight U.S. refining capacities, damage to that capacity as a result of gulf

hurricanes, and the rise of boutique fuel blends in response to the 1990 Clean Air Act

Amendments (Brown et al., 2008) have all contributed to rising and volatile gasoline

prices.

     The third data set includes vehicle attribute data such as model vintage, segment,

make, and vehicle fuel efficiency measured by the combined city and highway MPG.

The MPG data are from the fuel economy database complied by the Environmental

Protection Agency (EPA). 10          We combine city and highway MPGs following the

weighted harmonic mean formula provided by the EPA to measure the fuel economy of a

model: MPG=1/[(0.55/city MPG) + (0.45/highway MPG)].11 The average MPG is 21.04

with a standard deviation of 6.30.              The least fuel-efficient vehicle – the 1987

Lamborghini Countach (a prestige sporty car) – has an MPG of 7.32, while the most fuel-


10
   These MPGs are adjusted to reflect road conditions and are roughly 15 percent lower than EPA test
measures. EPA test measures are obtained under ideal driving conditions and are used for the purpose of
compliance with CAFE standards.
11
   Alternatively, the arithmetic mean can be used on Gallon per Mile (GPM, equals 1/MPG) to capture the
gallon used per mile by a vehicle traveling on both highway and local roads: GPM = 0.55 city GPM + 0.45
highway GPM. The arithmetic mean directly applied to MPG, however, does not provide the correct
measure of vehicle fuel efficiency.


                                                  7
efficient one – the 2004 Toyota Prius (a compact hybrid) – has an MPG of 55.59.

      With vehicle stock data and MPG data, we can recover the fleet fuel economy

distribution in each MSA in each year.12 The left panel of Figure 2 depicts the kernel

densities of fuel economy distributions in Houston and San Francisco in 2005. The

difference is pronounced, with Houston having a less fuel-efficient fleet.                         This is

consistent with, among other things, the fact that San Francisco residents face higher

gasoline prices, have less parking spaces for large autos, and tend to support more

environmental causes.          The right panel plots the kernel densities of fuel economy

distributions in Houston in 1997 and 2005. The vehicle fleet in 1997 was more fuel-

efficient than that in 2005 despite much lower gasoline prices in 1997. This phenomenon

is largely driven by the increased market share of SUVs and heavier, more powerful and

less fuel-efficient vehicles in recent years. For example, the market share of SUVs

increased from 16 percent to over 27 percent from 1997 to 2005 despite high gasoline

prices from 2001. The long trend of increasing share of SUVs and declining fleet fuel

economy at the national level only started to reverse from 2006, mostly due to record

high gasoline prices.

     To examine whether the twenty MSAs under study are reasonably representative of

the entire country, we compare the average MSA demographics and vehicle fleet

characteristics with national data. As shown in Table 1, there is significant heterogeneity

across the twenty MSAs in both demographics and vehicle fleet attributes. Nevertheless,

the means of these variables for the twenty MSAs are very close to their national

12
  Although we only observe segment level stock data from 2001 to 2005, we can impute stock data at the
model level during this period for vehicles introduced before 2001 based on the vehicle scrappage model
estimated in Section 3. Along with these imputed model level stock data, the third component, which tells
us the stock data for vehicles introduced after 2000, completes the vehicle stock data at the model level for
years from 2001 to 2005.


                                                     8
counterparts. In Section 5.2, we examine how variation in demographics and gasoline

prices affect the transferability of our MSA-level results to the entire nation.



3. FUEL ECONOMY OF NEW VEHICLES

       Our empirical strategy is to: (1) estimate the effect of gasoline prices on both the

inflow (new vehicle purchase) and the outflow (vehicle scrappage) of the vehicle fleet,

and (2) simulate the would-be fleet of both used and new vehicles under several

counterfactual gasoline tax alternatives. In this section, we study how gasoline prices

affect the fleet fuel economy of new vehicles. We examine the effect of gasoline prices

on vehicle scrappage in the next section.

     We separately investigate new vehicle purchase and vehicle scrappage decisions.

To preserve robustness, our approach allows each choice margin to be driven by different

factors (e.g., credit availability, macroeconomic conditions) through different empirical

models. Although these two decisions may very well be inter-related, modeling both the

new vehicle market and used vehicle market simultaneously presents a significant

empirical challenge as we discussed in the introduction. For example, Bento et al. (2008)

have to aggregate different vehicle models into fairly large categories for the sake of

computational feasibility in an effort to model new vehicle purchase and used vehicle

scrappage simultaneously. However, in doing so, potentially useful information about

within-category substitution has to be discarded. Although we perform separate analyses

of new vehicle purchase and used vehicle scrappage decisions, we try to control for

possible interactions between the choice margins on our tax policy simulations.




                                              9
3.1. Empirical Model

       Because of behavioral inertia arising from adjustment costs or imperfect

information, we specify a partial adjustment process that allows the dependent variable

(i.e., new purchases of a particular vehicle type) to move gradually in response to a policy

change to the new target value. Specifically, the one-year lagged dependent variable is

included amongst the explanatory variables. This type of model can be carried out

straightforwardly in a panel data setting and has been employed previously in the study of

the effect of gasoline prices on travel and fleet fuel economy.         For example, both

Haughton and Sarkar (1996) and Small and Van Dender (2007) apply this type of model

to the panel data of average fleet MPG at the U.S. state level, and Hughes et al. (2007)

employ it in a model of U.S. gasoline consumption.

       Compared with these previous studies, our data set is much richer in that we have

registration data at the vehicle model level that provide valuable information about how

changes in the gasoline price affect substitution across vehicle model. However, the

empirical model based on the partial adjustment process cannot be applied directly to the

vehicle model-level data because vehicle models change over time. On the other hand,

aggregating data across models at the MSA level would discard useful information on

vehicle substitution. With this in mind, we generate an aggregated data panel in the

following way. In each of the four vehicle categories (cars, vans, SUVs, and pickup

trucks), we pool all the vehicles in the segment in each of the twenty MSAs from 1999 to

2005 and find the q-quantiles of the MPG distribution. Denote c as an MPG-segment cell

that defines the range of MPGs corresponding to the particular quantile and denote t as

year. Further denote Nct as the total number of vehicles in the MPG-segment cell c at




                                            10
year t, with MSA index m suppressed.

     With this panel data, we estimate the following model:



                                                         1
        ln( N ct ) = θ 0 + θ1 ln( N c ,t −1 ) + (θ 2           + θ 3 )GasPt + Other Controls + ξ ct
                                                       MPGc ,t



where the coefficient on the price of gas ( GasPt ) is allowed to vary with the inverse of

                                      GasPt
the cell’s MPG. Noting that                   equals dollars-per-mile (DPMc,t), we can re-write
                                      MPGc ,t

this expression as follows:



           ln( N ct ) = θ 0 + θ1 ln( N c ,t −1 ) + θ 2 DPM c ,t + θ 3GasPt + Other Controls + ξ ct (1)



     Since the lagged dependent variable is one of the explanatory variables, serial

correlation in the error term would render this variable endogenous. We allow the error

term to be first-order serially correlated with correlation parameter γ :



                                               ξ ct = γξ c ,t −1 + ν ct



where ν ct is assumed to be independent across t. With this serial correlation structure,

the model can be transformed into:



                                   ln( N ct ) = γ ln( N c ,t −1 ) + θ ( Z ct − γZ c ,t −1 ) + ν ct ,   (2)



                                                         11
where Zct is a vector of all the explanatory variables in equation (1), including the lagged

dependent variable, and θ represents the vector of all coefficients. θ and γ can be

estimated simultaneously in this transformed model using the least squares method,

where we take into account both heteroskedasticity and cross-cell correlation of ν ct in

estimating the standard errors.

     Another concern in finding an appropriate empirical model is to describe how

current and past gasoline prices affect consumer decisions. An implicit assumption in the

literature on new vehicle demand (Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes, 1995; Goldberg, 1995;

Bento et al., 2008) is that gasoline prices follow a random walk, which implies that only

current gasoline prices matter in purchase decisions. This assumption can have important

implications on long-run policy analysis. For example, should past gasoline prices matter

(as would be the case if gasoline prices exhibited mean-reversion), studies with the

random walk assumption would under-estimate the long-run effect of a permanent

gasoline tax increase. While some empirical evidence suggests that recent gasoline

prices follow a random walk instead of a mean-reverting pattern (Davis and Hamilton,

2004; Geman, 2007), we do consider alternative specifications that explicitly include the

role played by lagged gasoline prices in current purchase decisions.         We find that

including lagged gasoline prices has very little impact on our policy simulation results

and elasticity estimates.   Due to the strong collinearity in gasoline price variables

across years (after the MSA-constant time variation in gasoline prices is captured by year

dummies), the signs of the parameter estimates on lagged price variables tend to bounce

from positive to negative and the parameters exhibit large standard errors. We do not



                                            12
report those parameter estimates here for the sake of brevity, but we do discuss the

elasticities they imply in Section 5.1.13



3.2. Estimation Results

        We define MPG cells based on twenty quantiles of the MPG distribution.14 Due

to the discrete nature of the spectrum of MPGs from available vehicle models, there are

in total 68 cells generated for the four vehicle categories.15 The estimation results are

presented in Table 2 with various control variables. Columns 1 and 2 report the results

from the preferred specification, where the most controls are included.                        In all the

specifications except the second (where the least controls are included), we cannot reject

the first-order correlation coefficient γ being zero. In the first specification, γ is estimated

at 0.025 with a standard error of 0.157, while in the second specification it is estimated at

-0.115 with a standard error of 0.024. Therefore, all the results except for the second

specification are for the model where serial correlation is assumed to be zero, allowing a

longer panel to be used.

     In the first specification, the coefficient estimate on the lagged dependent variable,

ln(Nc,t-1), is 0.068 with a standard error of 0.006.                 This implies a modest partial

adjustment process in new vehicle purchases. The short-run partial effect of gasoline

                                                  ∂N ct
prices on the number of new vehicles is:                = [1.145-(26.70/MPG)]Nct. This implies
                                                 ∂GasP


13
   Estimation results including lagged gas prices are available from the authors upon request.
14
   We also carried out regressions based on 10-quantiles and 30-quantiles. Results from both are similar to
what are reported here. The regression based on 10-quantiles produces marginally smaller effects of
gasoline prices, consistent with our conjecture that data aggregation tends to bias the effects downwards by
discarding information about cross-vehicle substitution within the aggregated category.
15
   There are only 16 cells generated for pickup trucks from the twenty quantiles because, for example, the
5th percentile and the 10th percentile of the MPG distribution for pickup trucks is the same.


                                                    13
that an increase in the gasoline price will increase the sales of new vehicles with MPG

higher than 23.31 (i.e., the 60th percentile of the MPG distribution in the twenty MSAs),

and reduce the sales of less fuel-efficient models. The long-run partial effect of gasoline

prices on the number of new vehicle registrations is the short-run effect divided by (1-

0.068). We note in passing that the empirical model mainly captures the effect of

gasoline prices on the demand side. The supply-side effect (in particular, the effect on

product offerings) is likely to take several years to be realized, which would suggest a

more dramatic departure between the short-run and long-run effects. Nevertheless, a

serious examination of the supply-side effect necessitates a more sophisticated,

computationally-heavy model and richer firm-level data, since product offering in the

auto industry is an inherently dynamic problem involving strategic considerations.

      Comparison across specifications demonstrates the importance of various

unobserved effects. Specifications 2 and 3 show that controlling for heterogeneity across

MPG cells dramatically reduces the coefficient estimate on ln(Nc,t-1), which in turn has

important implications on how past gasoline prices affect consumer decisions. The

estimation results from specifications 3 and 4 illustrate that, without controlling for the

temporal unobservable, the effect of gasoline prices on new vehicle demand would be

under-estimated. The downward bias is likely caused by the fact that the new vehicle

fleet became less fuel-efficient in the early years largely due to the increasing popularity

of SUVs despite rising gasoline prices. We control for geographic unobservables (above

those included MSA demographics) with census region dummies.16


16
   Ideally, we would like to include MSA dummies in the regression. However, because cross-MSA
variation in gasoline prices, largely due to differences in state and local gasoline taxes and transportation
costs, are fairly stable over time, MSA dummies would subsume the cross-sectional variation in the
gasoline variable and prevent us from precisely estimating the parameter on the gasoline price.


                                                    14
     It is interesting to note what helps to identify the response of new vehicle purchases

to gasoline prices. The response is dictated by the coefficients on DPM and GasP in

equation (1).   With both year and region dummies included in the regression, the

identification of the coefficient on GasP primarily relies on cross-sectional variations of

new vehicle demand in response to changes in gasoline prices across both census regions

and MSAs in the same region. Since this cross-sectional variation reflects persistent

differences in gasoline prices across areas (e.g., due to differences in local taxes,

transportation costs, and market conditions), our estimated effect of gasoline prices on

new vehicle demand captures the response of fleet fuel economy to permanent (instead of

transitory) price changes. The identification of the coefficient on DPM, however, relies

not only on cross-sectional variation due to differences in gasoline prices but also on

cross-model variation arising from the fact that the demand response to changes in

gasoline prices varies across vehicles with different fuel efficiency.



4. THE EVOLUTION OF THE STOCK OF USED VEHICLES

       The previous section examined the effect of gasoline prices on the flow of new

vehicles into the fleet and found that an increase in the gasoline price would increase the

purchase of fuel-efficient vehicles while reducing that of fuel-inefficient vehicles. To

complete the picture of how gasoline prices affect the whole vehicle fleet, we investigate

the impact of gasoline price changes on the evolution of used vehicles. In particular, we

are interested in how gasoline prices affect the flow of vehicles out of the fleet through

vehicle scrappage.




                                             15
4.1. Empirical Model

        We define vehicle scrappage as the discontinuation of a vehicle’s registration due

to physical breakdown or dismantling.17 Another reason for discontinuation of service at

the national level is export to other countries.18 Both physical breakdown and vehicle

migration to other countries are relevant for the study of how gasoline prices affect U.S.

fleet fuel economy.        When it comes to registration data at the MSA level, the

discontinuation of a vehicle registration in an MSA can arise from physical breakdown

and vehicle migration due to inter-MSA resale or relocation of the owner. The latter

effect has the potential to bias our estimated effect of gasoline price on scrappage; we

return to this potential problem below.

     To examine changes in vehicle registration, let i denote a model of a particular

vintage, let t denote a year starting from 1997, and let m denote an MSA. With m

suppressed, the change of vehicle stock from period t-1 to period t:



                                        N jt
                                                    = Pjt ( X jt , β ) + ε jt ,                   (3)
                                       N j , t −1



where Njt denotes the vehicle stock at the end of year t. Xjt is a large vector of vehicle

attributes of model j and regional characteristics of the MSA where model j is registered

in year t. A key variable of interest in X is the gasoline price. β is a vector of parameters


17
    Greenspan and Cohen (1999) identify crime, accidents, and wear-and-tear as primary reasons for
physical breakdown or dismantling.
18
   There were 52,759 used vehicles exported to Mexico through Santa Teresa Port of Entry in New Mexico
alone in 2004. As Davis and Kahn (2008) document, these trade flows have risen dramatically since 2005
due to used-car tariff reductions between the U.S. and Mexico associated with the North American Free
Trade Agreement (NAFTA).



                                                       16
to be estimated. Pjt is the survival probability of model j in year t, which is explained by

X, while ε jt captures measurement error and any other changes of vehicles registration

that are unaccounted for by observed variables.

     Although we are more interested in the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle

scrappage from the standpoint of policy-relevance (as opposed to vehicle migration

across MSAs), the source of registration discontinuation is not identified in our data. To

minimize the effect of vehicle migration on our results, we focus on old vehicles (i.e.,

vehicles with more than 10 to 15 years of services) in our empirical analysis. The

underlying assumption is that although migrations of these old vehicles across MSAs

may occur, they are not systematically related to gasoline prices. To the extent that

correlation between the gasoline price and used vehicle migration arises from re-sales

made in order to take advantage of the fact that fuel-efficient used vehicles may have a

higher valuation in MSAs with higher gasoline prices, the correlation should be weaker

for old vehicles because the difference in vehicle valuation (which should be proportional

to the length of remaining life span of the vehicle) is more likely to be too small to cover

transport and sales transactions costs.

     To estimate the model, we assume that the error term is mean independent of

variables in X: E (ε jt | X jt ) = 0.   A potential concern with this assumption is the

endogeneity of the gasoline price due to unobservables (e.g., temporal or geographic

unobservables such as new car prices and offerings) that are correlated with both vehicle

scrappage decisions and gasoline prices. To address this, we include various time and

region dummies as well as MSA demographic variables in the vector X. We should point

out that since our used car analysis is at the vehicle model level, simultaneity between



                                              17
vehicle scrappage and gasoline prices should be less of a concern. It is unlikely for a

model-specific error term, ε jt , in vehicle scrappage to be significant enough to affect

gasoline prices.

     In the estimation, we assume that survival probabilities take a logistic form:



                                                  exp( X ′jt β )
                                    Pjt =                               .
                                            1 + exp( X ′jt β )



Nonlinear least squares can be used to recover the parameter vector β. However, this

method can only be applied to 1997-2000 where detailed stock data at the model level are

available. In years from 2001 to 2005 (i.e., the period of rapid rising gasoline prices), we

observe stock data only at the segment level; hence the model level survival probability,

Pjt, cannot be obtained from the data for this period. In order to take advantage of these

segment-level data and the gasoline price variation during this period, we employ a

generalized method of moments estimator. We set up two sets of moment conditions

based on the two parts of the data. Denote Jt as the total number of models in year t.

Bearing in mind that we suppress market index m and hence the aggregation over markets,

the first set of moments based on equation (3) is:



                                                    2000   Jt
                                          1
                            M 1 (β ) =
                                         ∑t J t
                                                    ∑ ∑X
                                                   t =1998 j =1
                                                                   ′
                                                                   jt   [N   jt                 ]
                                                                                  − N j , t −1 Pjt .   (4)




This set of moment conditions is taken to the model-level data from 1997 to 2000 while

the second set is taken to the segment-level data from 2001 to 2005.


                                                    18
     Intuitively, to form the second set of moments, we take vehicle stocks at the model

level in 2000 and simulate forward based on predicted survival probabilities. This yields

model level stock data for the years 2001 to 2005 for vehicles that existed in 2000. We

then aggregate these predicted model-level stock data to the segment-level and match

those segment-level predictions to their observed counterparts. To that end, let s denote a

segment of certain vintage and St-1 denote the total number of segments in year t-1. The

total registration of all models in segment s at year t,are given by:



                            N st =        ∑
                                         j∈St-1
                                                  N jt =    ∑
                                                           j∈St-1
                                                                     N j ,t −1 ( Pjt + ε jt ).                    (5)




The number of vehicle registrations in segment s after k years, Ns,t+k is given by:



                                                                             k
                  N s, t +k =   ∑
                                j∈St-1
                                         N j, t +k =    ∑
                                                       j∈St-1
                                                                        [∏ ( P
                                                                N j ,t −1
                                                                            h =0
                                                                                   j, t +h              ]
                                                                                             + ε j, t +h ) .      (6)




In order to forecast vehicle registration in the future, we assume that the error term

exhibits first-order serial autocorrelation:



                                                  ε jt = ρε j ,t −1 + e jt ,



where e jt is assumed to be i.i.d. across both j and t.                                      Moreover, we assume that

E (e j ,t + h | X jt ) = 0 for any non-negative h. This assumption is implied by the strict




                                                             19
exogeneity assumption of the explanatory variables (i.e., E (ε j ,t + h | X jt ) = 0 for any h)

and is stronger than the contemporaneous exogeneity (i.e., E (ε jt | X jt ) = 0) required by

the first set of moment conditions.

     The prediction of the vehicle registration in segment s after k years, Ns,t+k is (e.g.,

projecting segment registrations in 2005 based on the model-level data, Nj,t-1, in 2000):



                                                                                  k
                   ~                      ~
                   N s, t +k =   ∑
                                 j∈St-1
                                          N j, t +k =   ∑
                                                        j∈St-1
                                                                 N j ,t −1[∏ ( P
                                                                              h =0
                                                                                          j, t +h                    ]
                                                                                                    + ρ h +1ε j ,t −1 ) .   (7)




                                                    ~
The difference between N s ,t + k and its forecast, N s ,t + k arises from the error terms, ejt,

ej,t+1, …, ej,t+k. Denote the parameter vector B = [ β ρ ], the second set of moments is

then defined as:



                                                                   2005      St
                                                         1                                            ~
                                      M 2 ( B) =
                                                        ∑t S t
                                                                   ∑ ∑ X [N
                                                                  t = 2001 s =1
                                                                                      ′
                                                                                      s       st    − N st ,]               (8)




where X s is a vector of weighted mean of product attributes for all the products in

                                                  ~
segment s using the stock data in 2000 as weight. N st is the stock of segment s at year t

projected from the observed data in 2000 following the equation.

     To estimate B, we stack both sets of moment conditions to form the criterion

function. The GMM estimator B̂ minimizes:




                                                             20
                                             ⎛ M (β ) ⎞        ⎛W1 0 ⎞           ⎛ M 1(β ) ⎞
                           J = M(B)′WM(B) = ⎜⎜ 1 ⎟⎟            ⎜⎜      ⎟⎟        ⎜⎜        ⎟⎟.       19
                                                                                                                         (9)
                                             ⎝ M 2(B) ⎠         ⎝ 0 W2 ⎠          ⎝ M 2(B) ⎠



Denote G = E[∇ B M ( B )] and Ω = E[ M ( B) M ( B)′], the asymptotic variance of

     n ( Bˆ − B) is (G ′WG)−1G ′WΩWG(G ′WG)−1 . We estimate B and its asymptotic variance

using a two-step procedure where the first step sets W = I and provides consistent

estimates for B and the optimal weighting matrix W = Ω −1 .                                    The second step re-

estimates the model using the consistent estimate of the optimal weighting matrix

obtained in the first step. With the parameter estimate B̂ , we then can predict the stock

data at the model level in years from 2001 to 2005 for the models that are available in

2000. Combining these predicted model-level data with new vehicle registration data

from 2001 to 2005 described in the data section, we then have a complete vehicle stock

data at the model level in all years.20


4.2. Estimation Results

           Table 2 presents parameter estimates of the vehicle survival model with various

specifications.        The first four specifications focus on vehicles older than ten years.


19
     Alternatively, we can use a serial autocorrelation structure in forming the first set of moment conditions.
                                                                  2000   Jt
                                               1
The new moment conditions would be M 1 ( B) =
                                              ∑t J t
                                                                  ∑ ∑X
                                                                 t =1999 j =1
                                                                                ′
                                                                                jt   [N   jt                               ]
                                                                                               − N j , t −1 ( Pjt + ρε t −1 ) .

Notice t in the new conditions would have to start from 1999 instead of 1998 as shown in equation (2),
implying a shorter panel to be used in forming the moment conditions. Both methods would give consistent
parameter estimates under the strict exogeneity assumption and the serial correlation structure.
20
   Another strategy to predicting missing model level data from segment level data for 2001-2005 would
involve aggregating the 1997-2000 model level data to the segment level data and estimating a scrappage
model using segment level data from years 1997 through 2005. However, a complication with this strategy
is that we do not observe segment level MPGs nor do we have the weights necessary to construct segment
level MPGs from observable model level MPGs. Therefore, whatever segment level MPGs we would end
up using would suffer from measurement error that could significantly bias parameter estimates.


                                                       21
Estimation of the first three specifications are based on the two sets of moment conditions,

taking advantage of both 203,014 model-level observations and 19,360 segment-level

observations. The fourth specification is only based on the first set of moment conditions

and the model-level observations and does not specify the serial correlation structure of

the error term. The fifth specification focuses on vehicles older than fifteen years with

105,734 model-level observations and 10,560 segment-level observations.

     We go to great lengths to control for unobservables along various dimensions by

including a long list of dummy variables. We include vehicle segment dummies, make

dummies, as well as their interactions terms with vehicle age to control for variations in

ownership cost and resale value across models. 21 MSA demographic variables along

with region dummies are used to control for cross-sectional heterogeneity.                           Year

dummies and the interaction between a time-trend and vehicle category dummies are

used to capture temporal unobservables such as new product offering and prices that may

affect vehicle scrappage.

     Columns 1 and 2 report the estimation results for the preferred specification where

the most control variables are used. Most of the parameters are estimated very precisely.

The partial effect of gasoline prices on vehicle survival is of particular interest because it

is directly related to how gasoline prices affect the fuel economy of used vehicles. A rise

in the gasoline price increases the operating cost of a fuel-inefficient vehicle more than a

fuel-efficient one. Therefore, a fuel-inefficient vehicle is more likely to get scrapped than

its fuel-efficient counterpart, ceteris paribus. Given that survival probabilities take the

21
   Since many models are observed in numerous MSAs and over many years, we could conceivably add
model dummies to control for model-level unobservables in our scrappage estimation. The number of
models (e.g., 4,177 models with age larger than 10) is, however, too large to make this method practical
given that within-group demeaning as a way of controlling for fixed effects does not apply in the nonlinear
framework.


                                                   22
logistic functional form, the partial effect of gasoline prices on the survival of vehicles

older than 10 years equals [0.638-(18.362/MPG)] Pjt (1- Pjt), where Pjt is the survival

probability of model j in year t. For vehicles with MPG higher than 28.73 (about the 80th

percentile of the MPG distribution of vehicles older than ten years in the twenty MSAs),

the partial effect is positive, which means that an increase in the gasoline price would

raise the survival probabilities of those vehicles. On the other hand, an increase in the

gasoline price would reduce the survival probabilities of vehicles with MPG less than

28.73. We note that the identification of the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle survival,

similar to the identification of the effect on new vehicle demand in the previous section,

relies not only on temporal and cross-sectional variation in vehicle scrappage due to

differences in gasoline prices but also on cross-model variations from the fact that

vehicles with different fuel economy respond to changes in gasoline prices differently.

     The comparison of the first three specifications shows the importance of controlling

for both temporal and geographic unobservables. In particular, ignoring the temporal

unobservables would lead to the over-estimation of the effect of gasoline prices on

vehicle scrappage while ignoring the geographic unobservables does the opposite. The

fourth specification only employs the first set of moments based on the model-level data

and predicts 29.12 (versus 28.73 in the first specification) as the MPG level at which the

effect of gasoline prices on vehicle survival changes direction. The results from the fifth

specification, which is estimated using vehicles in service longer than fifteen years,

suggest that an increase in the gasoline price would prolong the life of vehicles with

MPGs higher than 24.31, while it would shorten that of less fuel-efficient vehicles.

     To see the economic significance of the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle survival,




                                            23
we present the elasticities of survival probability with respect to gasoline prices in Table

4. The first row in Panel 1 reports the weighted average measures for all vehicles older

than ten years in 2000, where the weights are the number of registrations of each model.

The average survival probability for these vehicles is 89 percent while the average
                           22
elasticity is -0.023.            This average, however, masks significant cross-vehicle

heterogeneity that arises partly from differences in fuel efficiency. To see this, we pick

two models: a 1985 Honda Civic with an MPG of 39.7, and a 1985 Chevy Impala with an

MPG of 21.1. Based on the parameter estimates, a one-percent increase in gasoline

prices would increase the survival probability of the Honda Civic by 0.051 percent while

reducing that of the Chevy Impala by 0.038 percent in Houston. As gasoline prices in

San Francisco are much higher than those in Houston, the heterogeneity across vehicles is

even stronger in San Francisco as shown in the table. It is also interesting to note the

variation in survival probabilities across these two MSAs. The fuel-efficient Honda

Civic has a higher survival probability than the Chevy Impala in San Francisco while the

opposite is true in Houston. This type of variation provides an important source for the

identification of the effect of gasoline prices on vehicle survival. The results in Panel 2

of Table 4 are based on the parameter estimates from the fifth specification, where we

assume that gasoline prices affect scrappage but not migration for vehicles already in

service longer than fifteen years. The two panels provide qualitatively the same estimates

for the survival elasticities, with Panel 2 showing that the gasoline price has a stronger

positive effect on the survival of fuel-efficient vehicles but a weaker negative effect on


22
  The 95% confidence intervals based on parametric bootstrapping are provided in the table. Because the
estimation of the vehicle survival model is computationally intensive, nonparametric bootstrapping (which
involves repeated estimation of the model) is not feasible. Parametric bootstrapping only requires that the
model to be estimated once, but it does impose stronger assumptions on the data generating process.


                                                    24
that of fuel-inefficient vehicles.



5. SIMULATIONS

         In the previous two sections, we found that gasoline prices have statistically

significant effects on both the flow into and out of the vehicle fleet. The goal of this

section is to examine the response of fleet fuel economy to gasoline price. To that end,

we conduct simulations that combine the results of the two empirical models.



5.1. Impacts of Gasoline Tax Increases

         We first simulate the short-run and long-run responses of fleet fuel economy

distribution to alternative gasoline tax policies – specifically, an increase in the federal

gasoline tax of $0.25, $0.60, $1.00 or $2.40. Among industrial countries, the U.S. has the

lowest gasoline tax (41 cents per gallon on average including federal, state and local

taxes). Meanwhile, Britain has the highest gasoline tax of about $2.80 per gallon. Parry

and Small (2005) estimate the optimal gasoline tax in the U.S. is roughly $1.01 per gallon,

so a 60 cent gasoline tax increment is needed to reach the optimal level. Williams (2005)

estimates an optimal tax of $0.91 per gallon. Although we by no means believe that

$2.80 dollar gasoline tax is politically feasible in the U.S., we consider the $2.40 gasoline

tax increase for the purpose of illustration.23 Note that the recent run-up in gasoline

prices in the United States can be viewed as being equivalent to an increase in the gas tax

between $1.00 and $2.40, which is passed-on fully to consumers.


23
  Following Bento et al. (2008), we assume that the entire tax burden falls on consumers in the simulations.
That is, the price increase equals the tax increase. This amounts to the assumption that gasoline is produced
by a perfectly competitive industry exploiting a constant return to scale technology. To the extent that
gasoline producers have to bear some tax burden, e.g., due to the imperfect competitive nature of the
industry, the results in the simulation provide upper bounds of the true effects of gasoline tax increases.


                                                    25
      Table 5 reports the effect of gasoline tax increases on the average MPG of new

vehicles, used vehicles, and all vehicles in 2005. Panel 1 presents the short-run impacts

in a scenario where 2005 is the first year of tax increases. The results show that the

significant effect of gasoline prices on vehicle scrappage for vehicles older than ten years

translates into a very small impact on the average fuel economy of used vehicles. The

impact of a tax increase on fleet fuel economy comes, therefore, mainly through the

inflow of new vehicles. The short-run elasticities of average MPG with respect to

gasoline prices are 0.191, 0.006, and 0.022 for new vehicles, use vehicles, and all

vehicles, respectively.

      To examine how the impact of a gasoline tax increases plays out over a longer time

period, we look next at a scenario where the gasoline tax increase begins in 2001. The

effect on the vehicle stock is significantly greater because it incorporates the cumulative

effects on new vehicles starting from 2001. For example, the elasticity for all vehicles

increases from 0.022 to 0.101. In an even longer term, new vehicles will continue to

replace old vehicles, so the effect of gasoline prices on the fuel economy of the whole

fleet beyond the fifth year will be increasingly dictated by its effect on the fuel economy

of new vehicles. Therefore, we can interpret the elasticity for new vehicles, 0.204, as the

long-run effect of gasoline taxes on fleet fuel economy.24

      Based on our alternative specification where we included lagged gasoline prices

variables (both dollars-per-mile and gasoline price variables) up to three years in the



24
  Linn and Klier (2007) obtain their estimates of the long-run effect of a gasoline tax also through the
response of new vehicle MPG to changes in the gasoline price. Using U.S. monthly sales data from 1980
to 2006, they find smaller responses than ours (e.g., a one-dollar increase in the gasoline price increases the
average MPG of new vehicles in 2006 by 0.5MPG). To the extent that consumers view a monthly price
change as more transitory than that observed on a yearly basis, the response in new vehicle purchase to
changes in gasoline price would be smaller using monthly data.


                                                     26
model for new vehicles, simulations show that the short-run and long-run elasticities of

the average MPG for new vehicles with respect to gasoline prices are 0.211 and 0.212

with the 95% confidence interval of [0.095 0.346] and [0.139 0.296], respectively. These

two elasticity estimates are very close to those from our baseline model (i.e., 0.191 and

0.204) where only the current gasoline price variables were included. Nevertheless, the

confidence intervals in the model with lagged gasoline price variables are visibly larger

because the standard errors of the coefficient estimates are much larger due to the high

multicollinearity in the gasoline price variables across years.


5.2. Heterogeneity in Fuel Economy Elasticity

       The fuel economy elasticities in the previous section are estimated for vehicles in

the twenty MSAs in year 2005. This section examines the heterogeneity of fuel economy

elasticities by studying how they vary with the gasoline price and other demographics.

This question has important implications for how our estimates can be used in policy

analysis at the national level and/or in a different period. For example, given the sharp

increases in gasoline price since 2005, it is interesting to ask whether fuel economy

elasticities have gone up significantly.

     Panel 1 of Table 6 shows the summary statistics of the elasticity estimates for each

MSA in each year from 1999 to 2005. The elasticities for all vehicles are based on

contemporaneous gasoline price changes; therefore, they reflect the short-run effects of

gasoline prices on fleet fuel economy. The elasticities for new vehicles, however, are

estimated based on permanent price changes and can be regarded as long-run effects.

Significant variations in these estimates are observed. Moreover, the average elasticities

both for all vehicles and for new vehicles over the seven-year period are smaller than


                                             27
those in 2005 as shown in Table 5.

     To examine the sources of variation in fuel economy elasticities, we perform linear

regressions where the dependent variable is the logarithm of estimated elasticities. We

are interested in how the gasoline price and other demographic variables affect these

elasticities while controlling for unobserved regional and temporal effects. Panel 2 of

Table 6 reports parameter estimates and their robust standard errors. Since the gasoline

price variable is also in the logarithm form, the coefficient estimates suggest that

doubling gasoline prices would increase the short-run fuel economy elasticity by 68.7%

while increasing the long-run fuel economy elasticity by 86.9%. Moreover, differences

in the demographic variables have very small effects on the fuel economy elasticities.

     Given that the average gasoline price in the twenty MSAs in 2005 was only slightly

higher than the national average (2.34 versus 2.24) and other MSA characteristics are

quite close to the national average as shown in Table 1, we expect the elasticity estimates

based on the data from the twenty MSAs in 2005 shown in the previous section should be

good proxies for the national estimates. Considering that gasoline prices in the U.S.

passed $4.00 per gallon in 2008 (a 71 percent from $2.34), our model predicts the short

and long-run fuel economy elasticities would increase by 48.7 and 61.7 percent to 0.033

and 0.330 from 0.022 and 0.204, respectively, holding all the other factors the same.



5.3. Alternative Specifications

       Given the findings in Section 3 that lagged gasoline prices matter little in

consumers purchase decisions, and that the inflow of new vehicles is the major channel

through which gasoline prices affect fleet fuel economy, we re-examine the impact of

those prices on the fuel economy of new vehicles using some alternative specifications.


                                            28
Instead of aggregating data into a panel setting as in Section 3 in order to estimate an

empirical model based on a partial adjustment process, we now use model-level

observations directly. In particular, we estimate linear equations where the dependent

variable is the vehicle MPG while the explanatory variables include the gasoline price

and other controls.

      Table 7 presents parameter estimates and robust standard errors for four

specifications. The key explanatory variable is the gasoline price. The logarithm of the

MPG is used in the first three regressions while the fourth one uses the linear form.25 The

last row reports the estimates of the fuel economy elasticity with respect to the gasoline

price. The comparison of the first three regressions yields the same finding as those from

Section 3 – without controlling for temporal unobservables, the effect of gasoline prices

would be under-estimated while the opposite is true if geographic unobservables were not

controlled for. The estimate of the fuel economy elasticity from the first regression is

0.143, compared to 0.148 based on the partial adjustment process for all new vehicles

from 1999 to 2005 as reported in Panel 1 of Table 5.



5.4. Discussion and Caveats

         Based on the simulation results in Tables 5 and 6, the average short and long-run

elasticities of fuel economy with respect to the gasoline price over the period from 1999

to 2005 is 0.014 and 0.148, respectively. We find that the elasticities increase with the

gasoline price. For example, the short-run and long-run elasticites increase to 0.022 and



25
  The gasoline price used in the estimation is the current gasoline price plus 0.068 times the gasoline price
in the last year. We also estimate some other specifications. The regressions where the current gasoline
price is used yield marginally smaller coefficients on the gasoline price variable. The log-linear
specification whose results are report here, provides higher R2 than log-log and linear-linear specifications.


                                                     29
0.204 in 2005 when gasoline prices were highest during the seven-year period. Compared

to the estimates cited in the introduction, our estimates are smaller than those from

reduced-form studies and larger than those from structural studies.         In addition to

measurement error in the constructed dependent variable (i.e., the average fleet MPG),

reduced-form studies often base their estimations on aggregate state or national level data

and are limited in their ability to control for unobserved temporal and geographic effects,

which we find to be important. Studies that do not control for unobserved effects have

much higher estimates – Dahl (1979) and Wheaton (1982) obtain the short-run fuel

economy elasticity of 0.21 and 0.33, respectively. Although both Haughton and Sarkar

(1996) and Small and Van Dender (2007) use fixed effects at the state level, they do not

control for unobserved time-varying effects. Relative to these studies, our results are

closest to the short-run and long-run fuel economy elasticity of 0.04 and 0.21 in Small

and Van Dender (2007). Studies using a structural approach have to aggregate similar

vehicles into one composite product to keep tractability in estimation. The aggregation

could bias the fuel economy elasticity toward zero by discarding the substitution across

products within the categories used for aggregation. Goldberg (1998) obtains a long-run

fuel economy elasticity of 0.05 according to her results in section IV(ii). Based on Table

5-2 in their appendix, Bento et al. (2008) find short-run and long-run elasticities of 0.005

and 0.009, respectively, for an average 2001 gasoline price of $1.49 per gallon. The

implicit assumption in these structural studies that only current gasoline prices matter in

consumer decisions may also contribute to the lower estimates of fuel economy

elasticities.

     Two caveats are worth mentioning in relation to our analysis. The first one, not




                                            30
unique to our study, concerns the effect of gasoline prices on the supply side, which may

have important bearings on the long-run effect of the gasoline price. In our empirical

models, we control for temporal unobservables by including year dummies, which on the

other hand absorb the effect of product offering which may be partly due to gasoline

price changes. Therefore, our estimates mainly capture the effect of gasoline prices from

the consumer side. The equilibrium effect from both the demand side and the supply side

could be larger than our estimates for large price increases, especially in the long run.

We are not aware of any study that addresses the important supply response, which is

inherently a dynamic problem involving strategic considerations by auto makers.

     Second, as we discussed previously, the changes in vehicle stock at the MSA level

(or the state level, for that matter) can be attributed to vehicle scrappage and vehicle

migration, which are not separately identified in the data. To the extent the majority of

vehicle migrations occur across MSAs (within the country) and that these movements are

correlated with variations in gasoline prices, the applicability of the estimates from the

MSA-level data to national policy analysis may be hindered. To deal with this issue, we

focus on old vehicles with the assumption that the migration of these old vehicles is

mainly due to the relocation of the owners (rather than resale across MSAs) and is less

likely to be correlated with changes in gasoline prices. This assumption, if too strong,

may bias upward the estimates of fuel economy response for used vehicles. Although

national-level registration data do not suffer this complication from vehicle migrations

(e.g., exports to other countries), the identification of fleet fuel economy responses has to

rely on only time-series variation in gasoline price, which compromises their ability to

control for temporal unobservables.




                                             31
6. CONCLUSIONS

       The fleet fuel economy in the U.S. is the lowest among the industrialized nations

and is falling further behind. In 2002, the average fuel economy of the vehicle fleet in

the U.S. was about 13 MPG below that of countries in the European Union and 21 MPG

below that of Japan. With volatile gasoline prices and growing concern about global

climate change and local air quality, political support for curbing U.S. fuel consumption

has increased dramatically in recent years. In this paper, we address a central question in

the analysis of different policy alternatives by quantifying the response of fleet fuel

economy to gasoline prices.

     Taking advantage of a rich data set of all registered passenger vehicles in twenty

MSAs, we are able to decompose the effects of gasoline prices on the evolution of the

vehicle fleet into changes arising from the inflow of new vehicles and the outflow of used

vehicles.   We find that gasoline prices have statistically significant effects on both

channels, but that their combined effect results in only modest impacts on fleet fuel

economy. The short-run and long-run elasticities of fleet fuel economy with respect to

gasoline prices are estimated at 0.022 and 0.204 in 2005. Our results suggest that the $4

per gallon gasoline prices observed in 2008 could result in a sizable increase in fleet fuel

economy (i.e., an increase in average fleet MPG of 3.27, or 14% relative to 2001) and a

large accompanying reduction in gasoline consumption if they were to remain permanent.

Recall that record-high gasoline prices in 1970’s only led to short-lived increases in fleet

fuel economy and failed to induce any long-term solution such as fuel-saving technology

innovations in the industry. In our view, recent high gasoline prices present opportunities

for the development and diffusion of fuel-saving technological advances in the forms of




                                            32
favorable consumer sentiment and political environment, which could not be achieved

through politically feasible gasoline tax increases.




REFERENCES

Agras, J., and D. Chapman. 1999. “The Kyoto Protocol, CAFE standards and gasoline
taxes,” Contemporary Economic Policy 17:296-308.

Alberini, A., W. Harrington, and V. McConnell. 1995. “Determinants of participation in
accelerated vehicle retirement programs,” RAND Journal of Economics 26:93-112.

Austin, D., and T. Dinan. 2005. “Clearing the air: the costs and consequences of higher
CAFE standards and increased gasoline taxes,” Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 50:562-582.

Bento, A., L. Goulder, M. Jacobsen, and R. von Haefen. 2008. “Distributional and
efficiency impacts of increased U.S. gasoline taxes,” American Economic Review
forthcoming.

Berkovec, J. 1985. “New car sales and used car stocks: a model of the automobile
market,” RAND Journal of Economics 16:282-287.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes. 1995. “Automobile prices in market equilibrium,”
Econometrica 63:841-890.

Brown, J., J. Hastings, E. Mansur, and S. Villas-Boas. 2008. “Reformulating
Competition? Gasoline Content Regulation and Wholesale Gasoline Prices.” Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management. 55: 1:19.

Congressional Budget Office. 2003. The economic costs of fuel economy standards
versus a gasoline tax. U.S. Congress: Washington, DC.

Dahl, C. 1979. “Consumer adjustment to a gasoline tax,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 61:427-432.

Davis, L. and M. Kahn. 2008. “Trade in Durable Goods: The Environmental
Consequences of the North American Free Trade Agreement.” Working Paper,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Davis, M., and J. Hamilton. 2004. “Why are prices sticky? The dynamics of wholesale
gasoline prices,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 36:17-37.



                                             33
Geman, H. 2007. “Mean reversion versus random walk in oil and natural gas prices,”
In M. Fu, R. Jarrow, J. Yen, and R. Elliott, eds. Advances in Mathematical Finance.
Birkhauser: Boston, 219-228.

Goldberg, P. 1995. “Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: the
case of the U.S. automobile industry,” Econometrica 63:891-951.

Goldberg, P. 1998. “The effects of the corporate average fuel economy standards in the
U.S.,” Journal of Industrial Economics 46:1-33.

Greenspan, A., and D. Cohen. 1999. “Motor vehicle stocks, scrappage, and sales,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 81:369-383.

Hahn, R. 1995. “An economic analysis of scrappage,” RAND Journal of Economics
26:222-242.
Haughton, J., and S. Sarkar. 1996. “Gasoline tax as a corrective tax: estimates for the
United States, 1970-1991,” Economic Journal 17:103-126.

Hughes, J., C. Knittel, and D. Sperling. 2008. “Evidence of a shift in the short-run price
elasticity of gasoline demand,” Energy Journal 29:93-114.

Jacobsen, M. 2007. “Evaluating U.S. fuel economy standards in a model with producer
and household heterogeneity,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

Linn, J., and T. Klier. 2007. “Gasoline prices and the demand for new vehicles: evidence
from monthly sales data,” Working Paper, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL.

Lucas, R. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy. 1:19-46.

Manski, C., and E. Goldin. 1983. “An econometric analysis of automobile scrappage,”
Transportation Science 17:365-375.

National Research Council. 2002. Effectiveness and impact of corporate average fuel
economy (CAFE) standards. National Academy Press: Washington, DC.

Parry, I., W. Harrington, and M. Walls. 2007. “Automobile externalities and policies,”
Journal of Economic Literature 45:373-400.

Parry, W., and K. Small. 2005. “Does Britain or the United States have the right gasoline
tax?” American Economic Review 95:1276-1289.

Small, K., and K. Van Dender. 2007. “Fuel efficiency and motor vehicle travel: the
declining rebound effect,” Energy Journal 28:25-51.

Walker, F. 1968. “Determinants of auto scrappage,” Review of Economics and Statistics
50:503-506.

                                            34
West, S., and R. Williams. 2005. “The cost of reducing gasoline consumption,” American
Economic Review 95:294-299.

Wheaton, W. 1982. “The long-run structure of transportation and gasoline demand,” Bell
Journal of Economics 13:439-454.

Williams, R. 2005. “An estimate of the optimal second-best gasoline tax considering both
efficiency and equity,” Working Paper, University of Texas, Austin, TX.




                                          35
                                    Table 1: Characteristics of the Twenty MSAs in 2000

                           Census       Median         Total       Average       Snow Annual        New         Fleet     Fleet
 MSA                       Region     Household Population Household Depth                Gas      Vehicle     MPG         Age
                                        Income          ('000)       Size       ('inch)   Price     MPG
  Albany, NY                   1        44,761              843      2.41           77.1  1.68      23.35      24.28       8.94
  Atlanta, GA                  2        50,237            4,037      2.69            3.1  1.33      22.16      23.12       8.04
  Cleveland, OH                3        40,426            2,883      2.49           78.1  1.56      23.28      23.89       8.21
  Denver, CO                   4        50,997            2,080      2.54           56.7  1.59      22.31      23.35       8.52
  Des Moines, IA               5        44,088              439      2.47           49.3  1.52      22.12      23.30       9.35
  Hartford, CT                 6        50,481            1,136      2.51           74.9  1.66      23.48      24.27       9.40
  Houston, TX                  7        42,372            4,105      2.87              0   1.5      21.77      22.68       7.78
  Lancaster, PA                1        43,425              456      2.65             28  1.58      23.01      24.08       9.14
  Las Vegas, NV                4        42,822            1,356      2.63              0   1.8      22.65      23.40       8.68
  Madison, WI                  3        46,774              411      2.37           52.2   1.6      22.93      23.96       8.89
  Miami, FL                    2        37,500            3,810      2.71              0  1.52      23.33      24.25       8.39
  Milwaukee, WI                3        45,602            1,468       2.5           59.3   1.6      23.19      23.97       8.39
  Nashville, TN                8        42,271            1,196      2.51              8  1.49      22.24      23.39       9.15
  Phoenix, AZ                  4        42,760            3,027      2.66              0  1.58      22.35      23.32       8.02
  Saint Louis, MO              5        42,775            2,551      2.54           18.6  1.42      22.67      23.49       8.63
  San Antonio, TX              7        38,172            1,554      2.79              0  1.48      21.91      22.77       8.42
  San Diego, CA                9        47,236            2,717      2.72              0  1.77      23.01      24.09       9.02
  San Francisco, CA            9        62,746            6,882      2.72              0  1.93      23.33      24.09       9.15
  Seattle, WA                  9        52,575            2,379      2.48              7  1.68      23.05      24.00       9.45
  Syracuse, NY                 1        39,869              705      2.53         191.9   1.68      22.78      23.82       8.81
  Average                               47,291                       2.65                 1.72      22.74      23.67       8.62
  U.S.                                  41,486                       2.61                 1.46      22.30      23.62       8.68
Note: The average MSA demographics are taken from the US Census (www.ipums.org) and are weighted by the total number of
households in the MSA. The average gasoline prices are weighted by the total number of registrations and the average MPGs are
weighted by the number of registrations of each vehicle model. Both the household income and the gasoline price are in 2005 dollars.
Fleet MPG and fleet age are the average MPG and vehicle age of all vehicles in year 2001.



                                                                36
                                         Table 2: New Vehicle Regression Results

                                                   (1)                      (2)                 (3)                    (4)
 Variable                                     θ            S. E.        θ           S. E.   θ           S. E.   θ              S. E.
 Constant                                   22.026        3.379       6.368        2.954   16.516      2.873   18.016         2.851
 Log(Nt-1)                                   0.068        0.006       0.638        0.024    0.074      0.007    0.071         0.007
 GasPrice                                    1.145        0.211       0.723        0.133    0.662      0.128    1.135         0.169
 Dollar Per Mile = GasPrice * GPM          -26.700        3.336      -8.798        2.735 -15.842       2.631 -26.549          3.185
 GPM                                      -203.280       65.856     -46.249       61.647 -171.780     59.376 -199.502        58.905
 Log(MHI)*GPM                                9.546        8.215       4.013        8.026    2.387      7.373    9.470         7.377
 Log(POP)*GPM                               -0.621        1.417      -0.719        1.405   -1.078      1.283   -0.623         1.270
 Log(AHS)*GPM                               63.623       25.973      35.344       26.133   57.355     23.134   63.384        22.940
 Snow * GPM                                 -0.057        0.034      -0.012        0.034   -0.066      0.031   -0.056         0.031
 Log(MHI)                                   -0.879        0.420      -0.515        0.383   -0.178      0.356   -0.502         0.356
 Log(POP)                                    1.020        0.072       0.399        0.073    1.044      0.061    1.027         0.060
 Log(AHS)                                   -5.255        1.345      -2.025        1.232   -3.400      1.096   -3.681         1.082
 Snow depth                                  0.002        0.002       0.000        0.002    0.003      0.002    0.003         0.002
 Cell dummies (67)                             Yes                       No                   Yes                 Yes
 Year dummies (6)                              Yes                       No                    No                 Yes
 Year * class dummies (3)                      Yes                       No                    No                 Yes
 Region dummies (8)                            Yes                       No                    No                  No
 Adjusted R2                                 0.619                    0.516                 0.606               0.613
 Durbin-Watson statistics                    2.156                    1.901                 2.076               2.116

Notes: Bold type indicates the coefficient estimate is statistically significant at the 5% level. The total number of observations is
6,578. The dependent variable in the equation is the logarithm of the total number of vehicles in a given MPG cell, Log(Nt).
GPM, measuring fuel intensity, is the average gallon per mile of vehicles in the MPG cell. MHI is the median household income
in $10,000 in the MSA; POP is the total population in millions the MSA; AHS is the average household size. These 3
demographic variables are from 2000 census. Snow is the average snow fall in inches from 1999 to 2005 in the MSA.




                                                                   37
                                           Table 3: Used Vehicle Survival Regression Results

                                           (1)                     (2)                     (3)                     (4)                     (5)
 Variable                              β           S. E.       β           S. E.       β           S. E.       β           S. E.       β           S. E.
 Constant                          -2.324         0.718     -0.181        0.666     -0.232        0.659     -2.314        0.702     -3.050        0.682
 GasPrice                           0.639         0.128      0.254        0.100      1.148        0.112      0.631        0.158      0.794        0.128
 DPM = GasPrice* GPM              -18.362         2.580    -20.578        2.134    -18.807        2.467    -18.362        3.164    -19.293        2.696
 GPM                              126.766        15.426    150.910       14.414    144.393       15.361    126.767       13.336    136.751       14.068
 Age                               -0.644         0.012     -0.616        0.013     -0.640        0.011     -0.607        0.022     -0.536        0.016
 Age2                               0.017         0.000      0.016        0.000      0.017        0.000      0.014        0.001      0.015        0.001
 Vintage before 1981               -0.027         0.043      0.073        0.026     -0.005        0.041      0.023        0.045     -0.071        0.039
 Vintage 1981 - 1985               -0.055         0.022     -0.101        0.017     -0.084        0.021     -0.124        0.022     -0.171        0.021
 Log(MHI)*GPM                     -20.306         4.124    -16.843        3.363    -18.797        3.915    -20.306        3.885    -20.008        3.827
 Log(POP)*GPM                       2.393         0.814      3.098        0.708      2.810        0.803      2.393        0.732      2.867        0.788
 Log(AHS)*GPM                     -64.068        12.421    -91.496       12.368    -84.383       12.911    -64.068       10.379    -74.230       11.496
 Snow*GPM                           0.022         0.018      0.007        0.015      0.016        0.017      0.025        0.015      0.034        0.016
 Log(MHI)                           1.485         0.188      1.742        0.152      1.065        0.167      1.487        0.181      1.727        0.176
 Log(POP)                          -0.232         0.035     -0.140        0.031     -0.226        0.033     -0.239        0.032     -0.229        0.034
 Log(AHS)                           6.309         0.591      4.538        0.553      3.647        0.543      6.319        0.526      5.487        0.573
 Snow                               0.000         0.001      0.001        0.001     -0.001        0.001     -0.003        0.001     -0.003        0.001
 Segment dummies (21)                 Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Make dummies (15)                    Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Segment dummies * age (21)           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Make dummies * age (15)              Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Year dummies (7)                     Yes                       No                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Year * class dummies (3)             Yes                       No                     Yes                     Yes                     Yes
 Region dummies (8)                   Yes                       No                      No                     Yes                     Yes
 ρ                                 -0.169         0.068     -0.210        0.073     -0.175        0.073                             -0.224        0.116

Notes: Bold type indicates the parameter estimate is significant at the 5% level. Specifications 1-4 are based on vehicles older than 10 years,
while specification 5 focuses on vehicles older than 15 years. Specification 4 uses only the first set of moment conditions.



                                                                          38
                 Table 4: Survival Elasticity with Respect to the Gasoline Price in 2000

 Model                 MSA                MPG         Gas Price    Survival Prob.      Survival Elasticity
 Panel 1: Based on Estimation Results from Specification (1)
 Older than 10 years   All 20             24.43          1.68           0.890       -0.023    [-0.042    0.001]
 1985 Honda Civic      Houston            39.70          1.58           0.801       0.051     [0.001     0.090]
 1985 Chevy Impala     Houston            21.18          1.58           0.885       -0.038    [-0.059   -0.014]
 1985 Honda Civic      San Francisco      39.70          2.04           0.874       0.045     [0.009     0.091]
 1985 Chevy Impala     San Francisco      21.18          2.04           0.782       -0.100    [-0.152   -0.045]
 Panel 1: Based on Estimation Results from Specification (5)
 Older than 15 years   All 20             24.37          1.60           0.779        -0.014   [-0.035   0.013]
 1985 Honda Civic      Houston            39.70          1.58           0.801        0.089    [0.054     0.143]
 1985 Chevy Impala     Houston            21.18          1.58           0.885        -0.020   [-0.042    0.000]
 1985 Honda Civic      San Francisco      39.70          2.04           0.874        0.078    [0.045     0.125]
 1985 Chevy Impala     San Francisco      21.18          2.04           0.782        -0.052   [-0.105   -0.002]

Note: The results in the first row in both panels are weighted averages where the weight is the total
registrations of the vehicle model. The numbers in the brackets in the last column define the 95% confidence
interval from parametric bootstrapping.




                                                     39
                   Table 5: Fleet Fuel Economy in 2005 under Tax Alternatives

 Tax Alternatives                New Vehicles               Used Vehicles                All vehicles
 Current Tax                        23.67                       23.65                       23.65
 Panel 1: Tax Increase from 2005
                                                    Increase in Average MPG in 2005
 + $0.25                        0.48   [0.37    0.59]     0.02 [0.00     0.04]    0.06     [0.03    0.08]
 + $0.60                        1.14   [0.88    1.41]     0.04 [0.02     0.07]    0.13     [0.09    0.17]
 + $1.00                        1.88   [1.46    2.34]     0.07 [0.04     0.11]    0.22     [0.17    0.32]
 + $2.40                        4.53   [3.48    5.70]     0.18 [0.12     0.23]    0.59     [0.36    1.06]

 Elasticity of Average MPG    0.191 [0.150 0.235]     0.006 [0.000 0.015]     0.022        [0.013 0.031]
 Panel 1: Tax Increase from 2001
                                                Increase in Average MPG in 2005
 + $0.25                      0.51 [0.38    0.61]     0.24 [0.18     0.28]    0.26         [0.19    0.30]
 + $0.60                      1.22 [0.91    1.44]     0.54 [0.40     0.62]    0.59         [0.45    0.69]
 + $1.00                      2.02 [1.51    2.40]     0.86 [0.72     1.05]    0.96         [0.77    1.19]
 + $2.40                      4.87 [3.60    5.85]     1.95 [1.51     2.62]    2.23         [1.71    3.06]

 Elasticity of Average MPG      0.204 [0.148 0.259]      0.093 [0.069 0.110]       0.101 [0.077 0.119]

Notes: The numbers in the table are from simulations based on regression results for new vehicles and used
vehicles. The numbers in brackets define the 95% confidence interval from parametric bootstrapping.




                                                   40
        Table 6: Heterogeneity in the Elasticity of Fleet Fuel Economy from 1999 to 2005 in 20 MSAs


                                     Panel 1: Summary Statistics of the Elasticities
                        Elasticity of Fuel Economy             Mean       S. D.       Min         Max
                        All Vehicles                           0.014      0.013       0.003       0.036
                        New Vehicles                           0.148      0.134       0.080       0.293




             Panel 2: The Response of the Elasticities to the Gasoline Price and other Demographics
                                                All Vehicles                                      New Vehicles
                                       (1)                      (2)                       (3)                     (4)
 Variable                        Para.        S. E.       Para.        S. E.        Para.        S. E.      Para.        S. E.
 Constant                       -5.396        0.462      -7.303        0.454       -3.485        0.206     -3.898        0.267
 Log(GasPrice)                   0.687        0.174       0.870        0.162        0.869        0.074      0.792        0.076
 Log(MHI)                       -0.101        0.111       0.112        0.133        0.205        0.060      0.114        0.075
 Log(POP)                        0.043        0.017       0.036        0.024       -0.038        0.010     -0.033        0.013
 Log(AHS)                       -0.258        0.402       1.461        0.381        0.482        0.173      1.218        0.216
 Snow depth                    -3.3E-04      3.5E-04    -1.1E-03      3.3E-04     -1.3E-04      2.4E-04   -1.3E-03      2.6E-04
 Year dummies (6)                 Yes                      Yes                       Yes                     Yes
 Region dummies (8)               Yes                      No                        Yes                     No
 Number of observations           140                      140                       140                     140
 Adjusted R2                     0.973                    0.947                     0.973                   0.942

Notes: The summary statistics are for the elasticity estimates for each MSA in each year from 1999 to 2005. They are weighted
by the total number of vehicle registrations in the MSA. The dependent variable in panel 2 is the logarithm of the elasticities.
Bold type indicates the parameter estimate is significant at the 5% confidence level. The standard errors are heteroskedasticity-
robust. We also estimate (1) and (3) in the linear-linear form, which gives qualitatively the same results. The R2s are 0.946 and
0.938, respectively.




                                                               41
Table 7: Alternative Specifications on the Response of New Vehicle Fuel Economy to Gasoline Prices

                                          (1)                    (2)                    (3)                    (4)
 Variable                        Para.          S. E.   Para.          S. E.   Para.          S. E.   Para.          S. E.
                                   (1)           (2)      (3)           (4)      (5)           (6)      (7)           (8)
 Constant                         3.476         0.078   3.530          0.048    3.479         0.049   31.096         1.764
 GasPrice                         0.075         0.017   0.050          0.004    0.106         0.008    1.637         0.392
 MHI                             -0.016         0.003   -0.009         0.002   -0.014         0.002   -0.349         0.077
 POP                              0.007         0.002    0.010         0.001    0.007         0.001    0.164         0.040
 AHS                             -0.150         0.027   -0.196         0.017   -0.189         0.017   -3.320         0.609
 Snow depth                      -0.033         0.012   0.008          0.006    0.006         0.006   -0.817         0.269
 Year dummies (6)                  Yes                    No                     Yes                    Yes
 Region dummies (8)                Yes                    No                     No                     Yes
 Number of observations          42949                  42949                  42949                  42949
 Adjusted R2                     0.146                  0.142                   0.144                  0.136
 Implied Elasticity              0.143                  0.095                   0.201                  0.136

Notes: Bold type indicates that the parameter estimate is statistically significant at the 95% level. The dependent
variable in the first three regressions is the logarithm of MPG of a new vehicle model while that in the last regression
is just the MPG. The regressions are estimated using weighted OLS where the weight is the total number of
registration of each vehicle model. Robust standard errors are reported. The implied elasticity is the elasticity of new
vehicle MPG with respect to gasoline prices. The implied elasticity for the last regression is evaluated at the weighted
average gasoline price ($1.90) and the weighted average MPG (22.89) from 1999 to 2005 in the 20 MSAs.




                                                          42
                                       Figure 1: Gasoline Prices in Selected MSAs 1997-2005


                                       2.8
                                                     San Francisco
                                       2.6           Las Vegas
                                                     Albany
                                       2.4
                                                     Houston
                     Gasoline Prices



                                       2.2

                                         2

                                       1.8

                                       1.6

                                       1.4


                                        1996         1998         2000            2002               2004        2006
                                                                         Year


                                                Figure 2: Fuel Economy Distributions




          0.07                                                                            0.07
                                                          Houston                                                            1997
          0.06                                            San Francisco                   0.06                               2005

          0.05                                                                            0.05
Density




                                                                                Density




          0.04                                                                            0.04

          0.03                                                                            0.03

          0.02                                                                            0.02

          0.01                                                                            0.01

            0                                                                               0
                 0                      10     20    30      40     50                           0   10     20     30   40     50
                                                    MPG                                                   MPG in Houston




                                                                         43
