NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING ELICITED CHOICE PROBABILITIES TO ESTIMATE RANDOM UTILITY MODELS:
PREFERENCES FOR ELECTRICITY RELIABILITY
Asher A. Blass
Saul Lach
Charles F. Manski
Working Paper 14451
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14451

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

The data analyzed in this research were collected under a contract from the Israel Ministry of National
Infrastructures to ERCG, Ltd. The research of Charles F. Manski was supported in part by U. S. National
Science Foundation grant SES-0549544. We thank Yaron Aronshtam for his excellent research assistance.
We thank three anonymous referees for their many constructive comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Asher A. Blass, Saul Lach, and Charles F. Manski. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Elicited Choice Probabilities to Estimate Random Utility Models: Preferences for Electricity
Reliability
Asher A. Blass, Saul Lach, and Charles F. Manski
NBER Working Paper No. 14451
October 2008
JEL No. C25,C42,D12,L51,L94
ABSTRACT
When data on actual choices are not available, researchers studying preferences sometimes pose choice
scenarios and ask respondents to state the actions they would choose if they were to face these scenarios.
The data on stated choices are then used to estimate random utility models, as if they are data on actual
choices. Stated choices may differ from actual ones because researchers typically provide respondents
with less information than they would have facing actual choice problems. Elicitation of choice probabilities
overcomes this problem by permitting respondents to express uncertainty about their behavior. This
paper shows how to use elicited choice probabilities to estimate random utility models with random
coefficients and applies the methodology to estimate preferences for electricity reliability in Israel.

Asher A. Blass
ERCG, Ltd.
Jerusalem, Israel
Asher@ercg.co.il
Saul Lach
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Jerusalem, 91905
ISRAEL
saul.lach@huji.ac.il

Charles F. Manski
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
cfmanski@northwestern.edu

1. Introduction

When suitable data on actual choices are not available, researchers studying consumer
preferences sometimes pose hypothetical choice scenarios and ask respondents to state the
actions they would choose if they were to face these scenarios. The data on stated choices are
then used to estimate random utility models, in the same manner as are data on actual choices.
See, for example, Beggs, Cardell, and Hausman (1981), Fischer and Nagin (1981), Louviere and
Woodworth (1983), Manski and Salomon (1987), and Ben-Akiva and Morikawa (1990).
Manski (1999) reasoned that stated choices may differ from actual ones because
researchers provide respondents with different information than they have when facing actual
choice problems. The norm has been to pose incomplete scenarios, ones in which respondents
are given only a subset of the information they would have in actual choice settings. When
scenarios are incomplete, stated choices cannot be more than point predictions of actual choices.
Elicitation of choice probabilities overcomes the inadequacy of stated-choice analysis by
permitting respondents to express uncertainty about their behavior in incomplete scenarios.
Manski (1999) sketched how elicited choice probabilities may be used to estimate random utility
models with random coefficients. This paper further develops the approach and reports the first
empirical implementation.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the random utility model usually used in
the analysis of stated choice data is presented. Assuming an extreme value distribution of the
random utility term leads to the standard multinomial logit model and to the mixed-logit model
when the utility function has random coefficients. In Section 3, the advantages of eliciting choice
probabilities as opposed to stated choices are discussed and it is shown that estimation of the

utility function parameters is simpler and relies on weaker distributional assumptions.
In Section 4, we apply the "elicited choice probability" methodology to estimate
preferences for reliability in the supply of electricity to households in Israel. We describe the
process of eliciting choice probabilities in hypothetical scenarios from a sample of households
and analyze their responses. We then use the elicited choice probabilities to estimate mean
preferences and willingness to pay for reductions in the duration or frequency of electricity
outages. We also present estimates of individual preferences which are derived from the model
in a straightforward manner. Conclusions close the paper.

2. Econometric Analysis of Stated Choices

Let i denote an individual asked to respond to a choice scenario. In standard statedchoice analysis, the respondent is presented with J hypothetical alternatives, j = 1, . . . , J and is
asked to choose one. Let yi denote the stated choice. Let person i have observed attributes si.
Let each alternative j presented to person i have stated characteristics vij. For example, in a study
of preferences for electricity reliability, the alternatives may differ in the stated duration and
frequency of electricity outages and in the price of electricity.
It is common to assume that the utility of alternative j has the random-coefficients form

Uij = xijβi + εij .

(1)

Here xij = x(vij, si) is a specified function of observed alternative characteristics and personal

2

attributes, while εij is a utility component that is observed by the decision maker but not by the
researcher. Let xi ≡ (xij ,j = 1, . . . , J) . It is also common to assume that εi ≡ (εij ,j = 1, . . . , J)
are independent and identically distributed (i. i. d.) conditional on xi, with the Type I extreme
value distribution. Then the probability of stating choice j conditional on xi and βi has the
multinomial logit form

P( y = j | xi , βi ) =

x βi

e ij
.
x βi
∑ hJ =1e ih

(2)

Finally, assume that β is statistically independent of x, with density f ( β | θ ) across the
population of potential respondents, where the form of f is known up to the parameter vector θ.
This yields the mixed-logit model of McFadden and Train (2000):

P( y = j | xi , θ ) = ∫

x β

e ij
f ( β | θ )d β .
x β
∑ hJ =1e ih

(3)

These choice probabilities provide the basis for estimation of the parameters θ by maximum
likelihood or another method.

3

3. Econometric Analysis of Elicited Choice Probabilities

3.1. Elicited Choice Probabilities and Stated Choices

Stated choice analysis assumes that individual i responding to a choice scenario knows
the value of both xi and εi, and, hence, is able to state a definite utility-maximizing choice.
However, the researcher only provides the stated characteristics vi ≡ (vij, j = 1, . . , J), which
determine xi but not εi. It is therefore questionable that the respondent knows εi when the
scenario is posed.
Eliciting choice probabilities enables respondents to express uncertainty about εi. It
permits a person to treat εi as a vector of utility components whose value need not be known
when responding to the choice scenario, but which would be known in an actual choice setting.
Formally, suppose that person i forms a subjective distribution for εi, derives the subjective
probability that he would choose each alternative in an actual choice setting, and reports these
subjective probabilities to the researcher. Let qij denote the choice probability reported by person
i for alternative j. Then qij is the subjective probability that person i places on the event that the
realizations of εi will make option j optimal.
Suppose in particular that person i has utility function (1) and, given the stated
characteristics vi, places a continuous subjective distribution Qi on εi. Then his subjective choice
probability for alternative j is

qij = Qi[xijβi + εij > xikβi + εik, all k ≠ j].

4

(4)

The right-hand side of (4) gives a subjective random utility interpretation of elicited choice
probabilities.
Subjective distribution Qi expresses resolvable uncertainty; that is, uncertainty about
utility components that are not stated in the choice scenario but that would be known in an actual
choice setting. A person contemplating a choice scenario may also face unresolvable
uncertainty. That is, there may be utility components that the person believes would remain
unknown in an actual choice setting. The usual economic assumption is that a person copes with
unresolvable uncertainty by maximizing subjective expected utility. If a person only faces
unresolvable uncertainty when responding to the choice scenario, he would place subjective
probability one on the alternative that maximizes expected utility.
It is important to understand how elicited choice probabilities and stated choices are
related to one another. Assuming that persons form subjective distributions in the manner
described above, Juster (1966) and Manski (1990) reasoned that a person asked a stated-choice
question computes his subjective choice probability for each alternative and reports the one with
the highest probability. Thus, when person i states that he would choose alternative j, he means
that qij ≥ qik, all k ≠ j. He does not necessarily mean that Uij ≥ Uik, all k ≠ j, as assumed in
standard stated choice analysis. The latter assumption is essentially correct only when qij = 1,
which means that person i places subjective probability one on the event (Uij ≥ Uik, all k ≠ j). 1
The above reasoning implies that the standard derivation of the mixed-logit model,
described in Section 2, is valid only when the subjective choice probabilities of all respondents
take the extreme values zero and one. Suppose to the contrary that a group of respondents place
1

We say that the assumption is “essentially correct” because the utility inequalities hold with subjective probability
one, not with certainty.

5

a non-extreme subjective probability, say 0.6, on choosing alternative j. If asked to state their
choices, all of these respondents would state that they would choose j, and the standard
derivation assumes that all of them would choose j in actuality. However, if respondents have
accurate expectations and if their realizations of ε are statistically independent, then only 0.6 of
them would actually choose j.
Eliciting choice probabilities is more informative than asking for stated choices. When a
person is sure that he would choose option j, he can express this belief by placing probability one
on j. When he is uncertain whether he would choose j, he can report a non-extreme choice
probability.
A person reporting non-extreme probabilities expresses the belief that, in an actual choice
setting, he would possess choice-relevant information beyond the characteristics vi provided to
him in the choice scenario; that is, some of the uncertainty he faces is resolvable. Equation (4)
quantifies the information that person i anticipates learning in an actual choice setting. If he
believes that he would acquire no further information in an actual setting, then Qi is degenerate
and he reports extreme choice probabilities. If he believes that he might obtain information that
would affect his choice, then Qi is non-degenerate and he reports non-extreme choice
probabilities.

3.2. The Linear Mixed Logit Subjective Random Utility Model

To use elicited choice probabilities to estimate the subjective random utility model (4)
requires assumptions on the subjective distribution Qi that each respondent i places on εi and
assumptions on the cross-sectional distribution of the random coefficients β. This subsection and

6

the next pose assumptions similar to those maintained in standard stated-choice analysis. The
result is an extremely simple form of econometric analysis. Section 3.4 considers weaker
assumptions that may be more credible.
The standard practice in stated-choice analysis has been to assume that the components of
(εij, j = 1, . . . , J) are objectively i. i. d. with the extreme value distribution. Suppose that
respondents make the same assumption subjectively. Then the choice probabilities (4) have the
multinomial logit form

qij =

e

xij βi

∑ hJ =1 e

xih βi

j = 1, … , J .

(5)

Applying the log-odds transformation to (5) yields the linear mixed logit model

⎛ qij ⎞
ln ⎜ ⎟ = ( xij − xi1 ) βi = ( xij − xi1 )b + uij ,
⎝ qi1 ⎠

j = 2,… , J

(6)

where β i = b + ηi , uij = ( xij − xi1 )ηi , and the alternative designated j = 1 is arbitrarily chosen.

Standard analysis of stated choices assumes that the cross-sectional distribution of β,
hence η, is statistically independent of x. Let this assumption hold. 2 Without loss of generality,
set E(η) = 0 as a normalization. It then follows that b = E(β), E(u│x) = 0, and (6) is the linear
mean regression model

2

In the application of Section 4, the attributes v of the hypothetical alternatives are randomly drawn; hence, η is
statistically independent of v. We will assume that η is statistically independent of the observed personal attributes s
that are determinants of x; hence, η is statistically independent of x in our application.

7

⎛q ⎞
E[ln ⎜ ij ⎟ | x] = ( xij − xi1 )b.
⎝ qi1 ⎠

(7)

3.3. Rounding and Symmetry of Preferences

If model (7) is taken literally, the mean-preference parameters b may be consistently
estimated by least squares, without need to assume anything about the shape of the distribution
of β. This contrasts with standard econometric analysis of stated choices, where the researcher
must specify a parametric family of distributions for β.
However, we cannot take the model quite literally. As will be discussed in Section 4,
respondents tend to round their responses to the nearest five or ten percent. Such minor rounding
has been found to be commonplace in elicitation of subjective probabilities; see Manski (2004)
and Manski and Molinari (2008).
Rounding of interior subjective probabilities (say, from 43 percent to 45 percent) is
relatively unproblematic. However, rounding of values near zero and one raises a serious
difficulty due to the sensitivity of the log odd function near the boundaries of the [0, 1] interval.
At the extreme, some respondents report subjective choice probabilities equal to zero or one, thus
generating log odds that equal minus or plus infinity. Hence, least squares estimation breaks
down. 3
The inference problem created by rounding of small (large) subjective probabilities to

3

One should not drop the cases with choice probabilities equal to zero or one, because this truncates the sample in a
response-based manner. One might consider an ad hoc transformation of reported zeroes and ones to values near
these boundaries, but the least squares estimates are sensitive to the transformation performed.

8

zero (one) can be resolved if preferences are symmetrically distributed with center at b.
Symmetry of preferences has been a common assumption in stated-choice analysis, which
typically supposes that β has a normal distribution. Symmetry implies that the unobserved uij are
symmetrically distributed about zero conditional on xi and, hence, have median zero conditional
on xi. Thus, we have the linear median regression model

⎛ qij ⎞
M [ln ⎜ ⎟ | x] = ( xij − xi1 )b,
⎝ qi1 ⎠

(8)

whose parameters may be estimated by least absolute deviations (LAD) in the absence of
rounding.
A well-known robustness property of the median of a random variable is its invariance to
transformations that do not alter the ordering of values relative to the median. Thus, if y is a
random variable with median M, then M is also the median of any function f(y) such that

y < M ⇒ f ( y ) < M and y > M ⇒ f ( y ) > M . This holds even if the function f transforms small
values of y to -∞ and large ones to ∞. Hence, equation (8) continues to be the same linear
median regression if small values of q are replaced by zero and large values by one.
In the application of Section 4 we will assume that preferences are symmetrically
distributed. When a reported subjective probability is zero or one, we transform it to a value
close to zero or one. We then estimate model (8) by LAD, whose result is insensitive to the
specific transformation used.

For brevity, we will continue to refer to b as the “mean

preferences” rather than the more cumbersome “center of symmetry of the preference
distribution.”

9

3.4. Models with Weaker Assumptions on Respondent Beliefs

The linear mixed logit model derived above has many appealing properties. The basic
form of the model presented in Section 3.2 places no restrictions on the population distribution of
preference parameters and is easily estimable by least squares. The robust-to-rounding version
of the model developed in Section 3.3 requires only that the distribution of preferences be
symmetric and is easily estimable by least absolute deviations.
These properties compare favorably with standard econometric analysis of stated choices.
As discussed in Section 3.1, the standard approach is valid only when respondents are certain of
their stated choices. It requires specification of a parametric family for the distribution of
preferences.

Moreover, it requires often difficult numerical maximization of a likelihood

function or solution of a set of nonlinear moment equations.
Perhaps the main unappealing feature of the linear mixed logit model is its assumption
that each respondent i believes (εij, j = 1, . . . , J) to be i. i. d. with the extreme value distribution.
This distributional assumption is highly convenient. As a consequence, it has been prominent as
an assumption on the objective distribution of ε from the original conditional logit model of
McFadden (1974) through the more recent mixed-logit model of McFadden and Train (2000).
However, convenience does not make an assumption credible. Previous applications of the
assumption have not been able to motivate it persuasively. Neither can we.
Cognizant of the problem, econometricians have over the years developed numerous
approaches to discrete choice analysis that rest on more credible, albeit less convenient,
assumptions about objective probability distributions; see, for example, Manski (1975, 2007),
Horowitz (1992), and Matzkin (1992). These approaches can also be applied in the present

10

setting, which requires assumptions on subjective distributions. We discuss one here.

Maximum Score Estimation of Subjective Random Utility Models
Considering a binary choice setting with alternatives (j, k), Manski (1999) suggested
assuming only that each person i places subjective median zero on εij − εik and that the crosssectional distribution of β is symmetric. The first assumption yields the inequality

qij ≥ 0.5 ⇔ ( xij − xik ) β i ≥ 0.

(9)

The second assumption yields the inequality

P(qij ≥ 0.5 | x) ≥ 0.5 ⇔ ( xij − xik )b ≥ 0.

(10)

Inequality (10) can be exploited to estimate b by the maximum score method (Manski, 1975,
1985).
Indeed, inequality (10) may be applied to stated-choice data as well as to elicited choice
probabilities. As discussed in Section 3.1, a person’s statement that he would choose option j
over k means that qij ≥ 0.5. Hence, the maximum score method can be used to estimate a
subjective random utility model with stated choice data. In contrast with the standard approach,
one need not assume that respondents are certain about their stated choices.
These nice features of maximum score estimation must be balanced against the fact that
inequality (9) point-identifies b only if the attributes x have sufficiently rich support, as
explained in Manski (1988) and elsewhere. Researchers typically present only a finite set of

11

distinct choice scenarios to respondents, which do not suffice for point identification. One may,
nevertheless, exploit (9) to bound b. The maximum score method consistently estimates the
bounds. We give an illustrative application in Section 4.7.

4. Estimating Preferences for Electricity Reliability

We have applied the “elicited-choice-probabilities” approach to estimate consumer
valuation of residential electricity reliability in Israel. Knowledge of consumer willingness to pay
for reliability is an important component of a rational planning strategy for capacity investment
in the generation and transportation of electricity, as well as a key factor in determining an
optimal electricity pricing schedule.
Section 4.1 cites previous studies using the stated-choice approach. Section 4.2 describes
our research design. Section 4.3 reports basic findings on the elicited choice probabilities.
Section 4.4 presents estimates of the mean consumer preferences β in models of form (8).
Section 4.5 derives estimates of willingness-to-pay for electricity reliability by persons with the
mean preferences. Section 4.6 presents findings on the dispersion of preferences. Finally,
Section 4.7 uses the maximum score method to estimate a simple version of the model with
weakened assumptions discussed in Section 3.4.

4.1. Stated-Choice Studies

Various theoretical and applied models have been developed in the resource and energy

12

literature to estimate the marginal value of service reliability. 4

Models have often been

estimated using stated-choice data, with customers asked to choose among different bundles of
service attributes. Important stated attributes include the number and duration of outages, as well
as the cost of service. Revelt and Train (1998) and Goett et al. (2002) used stated-choice data to
estimate mixed logit models of the type described in equation (3). Cai et al. (1998) used a
different methodology -- an extension of the “double-bounded” procedure used in studies of
contingent valuation of natural resources -- to estimate willingness to pay for electricity service
attributes.
A previous study of the Israeli electricity market was conducted by Beenstock et al.
(1998). They used both conjoint analysis and contingent-valuation data to estimate the
willingness of Israeli households to pay for reduced power outages. They found the conjoint
analysis more reliable. Here, they asked consumers to rank the hypothetical alternatives and they
analyzed the rank-ordered data. Their estimates indicate that the perceived cost of unsupplied
electricity to Israeli households in 1991 was between 2.3 US dollars per KWh (in the
spring/autumn during morning/midday hours) and 11 dollars per KWh (in the winter during
afternoon/evening hours).

4.2. Study Design

In the present study, a stratified random sample of 557 Israeli households was drawn and
an adult member of each household was interviewed in person about his or her preferences for
reliability of home electricity supply. The interviews were performed in summer 2005 by a

4

See Caves et al. (1990) for a comparison of the different approaches and Lawton et al. (2003) for a recent
review of U.S. results.

13

professional survey research firm, with responses recorded on laptop computers using Computer
Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) software.
Each respondent was asked to report choice probabilities in ten different “games.” A
game specifies a scenario in which the person is presented with two alternative bundles of
attributes (J = 2) and is asked to state his or her chances of choosing each alternative.
The games were introduced as follows:
"In each game we will show you two alternatives. Each alternative is characterized by a different
bi-monthly electricity bill and by different numbers of outages and different average duration of
the outages. In each game, you should evaluate what is the chance in percentage terms of
choosing one of the two alternatives. The chance of each alternative should be a number between
0 and 100 and the chances given to the two alternatives should add up to 100. For example, if
you give a 5% chance to one alternative it means that there is almost no possibility that you will
choose that alternative. On the other hand, if you give an 80% or over chance to an alternative it
means that almost surely you will choose it."
Since the early 1990s, economists have developed considerable experience similarly asking
respondents to state expectations of future events as the “percent chance” that the event will
occur; Manski (2004) reviews the literature. The novelty in the present study is our use of
responses to this type of question as a replacement for actual choice data to estimate the
parameters of a random utility model. 5
In each game, the alternatives presented to sample members differed in the duration (D)
and frequency (F) of outages and in the corresponding electricity bill (C). Thus, a stated
alternative is a (D, F, C) triple. The stated frequencies of outages were 0 (perfect reliability), 1, 2,
4, 5 and 8 outages per season. The duration of an outage was stated as an interval of length 0 to
10 minutes, 10 to 60 minutes, 60 to 120 minutes, and 120 to 240 minutes. In our analysis, we
took the duration to be the mid-point of the interval; that is, 5, 35, 90 or 180 minutes. The stated

5

Delavande (2008) uses a different type of probabilistic expectations data to estimate a random utility model. She
has data on actual choices and uses elicited expectations to characterize the attributes of alternatives.

14

electricity bill (C) took one of five values: the household’s actual electricity bill, 15 or 40 percent
above the actual bill, or 10 or 20 percent below the actual bill. The stated combinations of (D, F,
C) were randomly generated, but dominated alternatives were excluded.
The value that a person attaches to electricity reliability may depend on the timing of
outages. For example, an anticipated outage at 11 AM on a weekday in the summer may be
valued differently than an unanticipated outage at 8 PM on a weekend day in the winter. To
assess the variation of valuation with timing, each game was set in a scenario characterized by
three timing variables. The first timing variable is season: 50 percent of the games were set in the
summer, 41 percent in the winter, and 9 percent were set in the spring (fall is very short in
Israel). The second variable relates to the time of day when outages occur: during peak hours (39
percent), off-peak hours (30 percent), or intermediate hours (31 percent). The third timing
variable refers to the days of the week, specifically whether outages occur during the weekend or
not. An additional characteristic of the scenario is the availability of advance warning on the
outages. This feature was present in only 9 percent of the games.
To illustrate, here is how a typical game was described:

“Suppose you are in the summer and all the outages occur between 5PM and 10PM (peak hour
in summer) during weekends and there is no advance warning. In alternative 1 you are offered 5
outages lasting up to 10 minutes each and the electricity bill will be 360 NIS. In alternative 2 you
are offered 0 outages and the electricity bill will be 480 NIS.”

The abbreviation NIS stands for New Israeli Shekel, the currency unit. One NIS was worth
about 22 US cents when the survey was administered in the summer of 2005.

15

The games were played in 10 out of the 36 possible scenarios. These were the scenarios
deemed to be of greatest interest and/or relevance for analysis. (For example, all weekend hours
were considered off-peak.) In order not to confuse the respondent by changing the timing
scenario in each game, the same scenario was maintained during 5 successive games. Thus, a
respondent plays 5 different games in each of two scenarios. The scenarios changed across
respondents to cover the ten timing possibilities of interest. These scenarios and their frequency
in the sample are listed in Table 1.
We believe the scenarios posed to be realistic in the Israel context. There has been an
ongoing public debate in Israel about problems in generating the amount of electricity needed to
satisfy growing demand. During the summer, in particular, newspapers are full of alarming news
about warnings from the electricity company that it will not be able to generate enough
electricity. Outages occur with some regularity and have occurred even more frequently in the
past. Thus, we think that the survey respondents are not surprised when presented with scenarios
where outages occur in different frequencies and durations.

4.3. The Elicited Choice Probabilities

The response rate to the questions posed was very high. Of the 557 sample members,
500 (89.8 percent) reported choice probabilities in all ten games and 38 (6.8 percent) gave
responses in nine games. In all, 5430 responses were obtained from the 557 sample members.
Thus, the overall item response rate was 5430/5570 = 0.975.
Let qi1 and qi2 denote the choice probabilities (percent chance divided by 100) for the two
alternatives elicited from individual i in a given game. In all cases, we have qi2 = 1 - qi1. That is,

16

the elicited choice probabilities always add up to 1.
The elicited percent-chance responses for alternative 1 are tabulated in Table 2 and their
histogram is shown in Figure 1. The table and figure show that most responses are multiples of
ten and almost all of the rest are multiples of five. The bimodality of the histogram in the figure
reflects the random assignment of the stated characteristics of alternatives.
Minor rounding of responses is inconsequential for our analysis, but gross rounding
would be problematic. It is therefore important to observe that the data do not show evidence of
gross rounding. In particular, the elicited choice probabilities are not concentrated at the values
0, 50, and 100; the frequencies of these responses are just 0.08, 0.05, and 0.08 respectively.
Instead, the distribution of responses is weakly bimodal. The most prevalent responses were 20
and 80 percent, with response frequencies of 0.118 and 0.119.
Table 2 shows the importance of eliciting choice probabilities rather than stated choices.
A stated choice question only permits the respondent to state a 0 or 100 percent chance of
choosing an alternative. When given the opportunity to state a value in the [0, 1] interior, sample
members state an interior value in 0.84 of their responses. Thus, respondents find the stated
scenario too incomplete to give a definitive choice response in at least 0.84 of the cases. We say
“at least 0.84” because some of the observed responses of 0 and 100 percent may be rounded
versions of interior values.

4.4. Estimation of Mean Preferences

Table 3 presents LAD estimates of the parameters β in model (8) for three specifications
of the attributes x. To compute these estimates, we replace reported zero probabilities by 0.001

17

and ones by 0.999. As discussed in Section 3, LAD estimation of a median regression function is
insensitive to the specific values that we use in place of zero and one.
The estimates in Table 3 use 3947 of the available 5430 observations, and comprise data
from 556 of the 557 households. (The one deleted household participated in only a single game,
which was dropped for one of the reasons described here). The reduction in sample size
occurred for two reasons. First, we had to drop 990 games where the software erroneously
generated alternatives in which outages occur with positive frequency but zero duration. We
were concerned that respondents might be confused by such alternatives, so we dropped the
games in which they occurred.
Second, we dropped the 493 observations on games played in scenarios with advance
warning of electricity outages. The reduction in consumer welfare caused by outages may
depend on whether advance warning is given; hence, the utility parameters β should be interacted
with this feature of the scenario. However, our sample of 493 observations with advance
warning was too small to permit precise inference. We therefore decided to focus on the
scenarios with unannounced outages, for which we have many more observations. The latter
also are the scenarios of most interest to policy makers in Israel.
Recall that the unobserved component of utility in equation (6) has the form
u ij = ( xij − xi1 )η i . Thus, the random parameter specification implies that u is heteroskedastic and
that it is correlated across the games played by a given sample member. These features of u do
not affect the consistency of LAD estimation but do affect statistical inference.
We obtained the standard errors of the parameter estimates shown in Table 3 by cluster
bootstrapping the sample. Cluster bootstrapping means that, to generate a pseudo-estimate of the
parameters, we drew 556 respondents with replacement from the actual sample of 556

18

respondents and used the data on all of the games played by these persons to re-estimate the
model. We repeated this process 500 times to generate 500 pseudo estimates of β. The reported
standard errors are the standard deviations of these 500 pseudo estimates.

Parameter Estimates
The three columns of Table 3 present estimates of successively richer utility models.
Column (1) reports estimates of a simple model that takes the attributes of an alternative to be D,
F, and C. We further allow the electricity-cost coefficient to vary by income group. Respondents
self-reported whether their household income is below the Israeli average income (36 percent), at
the average income (21 percent), or above average (25 percent). The remaining 18 percent
refused to answer the question and were assigned to a residual group. We would have preferred
to ask respondents to report their household incomes, but this aspect of the questionnaire design
was not under our control. Respondents were not told the average Israeli income. Hence, there
is reason to question the accuracy of the self-reports of being below or above average.
In any case, the parameter estimates have the expected negative signs and the standard
errors indicate that they are statistically precise. Observe that the marginal disutility of electricity
cost is smaller for higher income households.
This first model makes the unrealistic assumptions that (a) the disutility of an additional
outage is the same regardless of its duration and (b) the disutility of an additional minute per
outage is the same regardless of the number of outages. To enable a more flexible description of
utility, the model in column (2) adds to x the total outage time T = F × D. This gives the
following specification of the utility function:

U ij = ( βiC × IncomeGroup ) C j + βiD D j + βiF Fj + βiT T j + ε ij .

19

(11)

This specification extends Beenstock et al. (1998), who used only attribute T, without separate
appearance of F and D.
Comparing the estimates in columns (1) and (2) shows that adding total outage time T to
the model has essentially no effect on the electricity-cost coefficients, but it sharply reduces the
magnitudes of the coefficients on D and F, which are now statistically indistinguishable from
zero. The new coefficient on T is negative and is statistically precise. Nevertheless, we include
D and F in the model since they allow for asymmetric marginal effects of D and F. Recall that
we will use the estimated coefficients to compute the willingness to pay (WTP) for reductions in
outages. The standard errors we report for WTP will account for the imprecision of the estimated
coefficients on F and D.
The models in columns (1) and (2) presume that consumer valuation of electricity
reliability does not depend on the timing of outages. As described in Section 3, the scenario
specified for each game contains three timing indicators: season, hour, and weekend/weekday.
In principle, the reduction in consumer welfare caused by outages may vary with these aspects of
timing.
To explore this matter, we interacted D, F, and T with timing indicators. For simplicity,
we grouped the off-peak and intermediate hours into a single off-peak category. We did not
foresee any reason why the electricity-cost coefficients should vary with the timing of outages
and, hence, did not interact C with the timing indicators.
F-tests of the interactions do not reject the hypothesis that the utility effect of outages
does not vary across seasons (p-value 0.11). This result is in line with the general opinion of
experts in the area and with the fact that there is little seasonal difference in household energy
consumption in Israel.

20

With these preliminary results in mind, we present in column (3) a model that interacts D,
F and T with dummy variables that distinguish peak from off-peak weekday hours and weekdays
relative to the weekend. Comparison of the estimates in columns (2) and (3) shows that addition
of the interactions does not materially change the coefficients of the model in column (2), which
now give the reduction in welfare associated with off-peak weekday outages. Notice that the
estimated interactions for D and F are much larger than those for T (relative to their off peak
weekday coefficients). Individually, these interactions effects are not precisely estimated but,
jointly, they cannot be rejected. 6 In any event, the standard error of the WTP will reflect the
imprecision of the interaction effects.

Parameter Estimates for Sub-Populations
It may be that households with different observed characteristics have systematically
different preferences and expectations. To investigate this possibility, we split the sample into
sub-samples with different characteristics and estimated a separate model for each sub-sample.
We performed three splits of the sample, these being by age, education level, and income
respectively. In each case, we estimated the model in column (3) of Table 3. Appendix Table
A1 presents the estimates.
We first split the sample between households where the respondent was 50 years of age
or older and those where the respondent was less than 50 years old. There are 1739 observations
from 244 "old" households and 2208 observations from 312 "young" households. Comparing the
two groups, the estimates of the coefficients on F, D, T and their interactions with the timing

6

An F test for zero interactions between "peak" and D, F and T has p-value less than 0.01, while a similar test for
the interaction with D and F only has p-value 0.03. Similarly, an F test for the interactions between "weekend" and
D, F and T has p value less than 0.01, while a similar test for the interaction with D and F only has p-value 0.12.

21

variables do not significantly differ from one another (p-value 0.45). The only statistically
significant difference between the age groups is in the coefficients of the cost variable (C) and its
interactions with the income group (p-value 0.027).
We next split the sample according to the respondent’s education level. There are 179
households where the respondent finished college and 377 households where the respondent did
not. Comparing the two groups, the estimates of the coefficients of F, D, T and their interactions
with the timing variables again do not significantly differ from one another (p-value 0. 58). In
this case, the cost coefficients do no differ between the education groups either (p-value 0.28).
Finally, we split the sample into three income groups: below average income (198
households), average income (119 households), above average (140 households) and households
that did not provide this information (99 households). In this case, there are statistically
significant differences in the coefficients of D and F and their interactions with the timing
variables (p-value 0.004 and 0.08, respectively).
In sum, there is some evidence that preferences and expectations may vary with
household characteristics such as age and income, but not education. For simplicity, in what
follows we ignore these differences.

Ordering Effects
Survey researchers and experimental economists are often concerned about the possibility
of ordering effects in responses when persons are asked sequences of questions. Persons may
tire as they proceed through the questions, but they also may become more familiar with the
mode of questioning. Hence, the thoughtfulness of the responses may diminish or improve as
the questioning proceeds.

22

Recall that each of our households faced five games in each scenario, and that the
scenarios were played one after the other. Ordering effects could occur within each scenario and
across scenarios. To investigate these possibilities, we considered two definitions of “early” and
“late” games. For each definition, we separately estimated the model of Table 3, column (3),
using data from the early and late games. In one definition, we defined games 1-3 within a
scenario to be the “early” games and games 4-5 to be the “late” games. In the other, we defined
the five games of the first scenario to be the early games and those of the second scenario to be
the late games.
We found that splitting the data in these ways had essentially no effect on the four
estimated cost coefficients. However, some of the nine duration/frequency coefficients
moderately differed when estimated on different data subsamples, to an extent that appears not
attributable solely to finite-sample statistical variation.

As a consequence, some of our

willingness to pay estimates remained unchanged, while others measurably differed. In sum, we
found what appear to be moderate ordering effects that should give caution to application of
some of our estimates. However, the observed effects were neither strong nor pervasive enough
to render the estimates unusable. We have no basis to conjecture about the cognitive processes
that may generate ordering effects. We think this is an important subject for future research.

4.5. Willingness to Pay for Reliability

In this section, we use the parameter estimates in column (3) of Table 3 to estimate the
willingness of a consumer with mean preferences to pay for electricity reliability. Willingness to
pay (WTP) equals the negative of the ratio of the marginal utility of an outage attribute to the

23

marginal utility of electricity cost. The frequency and duration of outages are negatively valued
attributes, so we report the amount of money the household is willing to pay for a reduction in
these attributes.
Table 4 evaluates WTP for a unit reduction in F and D at specified values of (F, D) and
specified timings for outages. Each column concerns one of the three timing scenarios: weekday
peak, weekday off-peak, and weekend off-peak. There are no peak hours on weekends.
To enhance comparability of the findings for D and F, the entries in the table divide the
WTP for a reduction in D by the number of outages F, and they divide the WTP for a reduction
in F by the duration of an outage D. Thus, the table shows the amounts that a person with mean
preferences is willing to pay for a one-minute reduction in outage, where the reduction may be
achieved by reducing the duration or frequency of outages.
For specificity, Table 4 considers a household with average income. We estimated
separate electricity-cost parameters for households with below average and above average
incomes, so their WTP are fixed multiples of the calculations presented in the table.
Specifically, a household with below (above) average income has 0.51 (3.75) times the WTP
amounts shown. 7

Findings
The top panel of the table shows WTP for one-minute reductions achieved by reducing
the duration of outages. Consider the findings for weekends. The estimate of 0.98 for F = 1
indicates that the consumer is willing to pay 0.98 US dollars for a one-minute reduction achieved
by reducing duration when there is one outage per season. We find that WTP declines with F,

7

The standard errors of the estimates also change, but not necessarily proportionally.

24

being 0.36 US dollars per minute when there are five outages per season.
The table shows that WTP during peak hours on weekdays is very similar to that during
weekends. In contrast, consumers place little or no value on reductions in the duration of
outages during off-peak hours. The estimates are small in magnitude and, for the most part, are
statistically indistinguishable from zero.
The bottom panel of Table 4 shows WTP for one-minute reductions achieved by reducing
the duration of outages. The estimates for D = 10 and D = 30 are statistically very imprecise, so
we will focus on the much more precise estimates for D ≥ 60.
Consider the findings for weekends. The estimate of 0.42 for D = 60 indicates that the
consumer is willing to pay 0.42 US dollars for a one-minute reduction achieved by reducing the
frequency of outages when outages have a duration of 60 minutes. WTP declines with D, being
25 US cents per minute when outages have last for five hours. The table shows that WTP during
weekdays is very similar to that during weekends, both for peak and for off-peak hours. It is
noteworthy that most of the WTP estimates are statistically precise, even though the coefficients
on F and D and their interactions with the timing variables usually are not.
In sum, the WTP for a one-minute reduction in outage time is similar during weekends
and during peak hours on weekdays. Consumers, however, value differently how this one minute
reduction in outage time is achieved. They are willing to pay more when a one minute reduction
in outage time is obtained by reducing the duration of outages than by reducing the number of
outages during the season. During the weekday off peak hours, this pattern is reversed as
consumers are willing to pay somewhat more for reductions in the number of outages than for
shorter durations per outage.
The welfare cost of outages is often expressed in terms of money per KWh of electricity

25

unsupplied. To translate the estimated WTP amounts of Table 4 into this measure, we multiply
them by 60 minutes and divide by the average KWh of electricity consumption, which varies by
timing scenario and income group. 8 Table 5 presents these estimates in US dollars per KWh
unsupplied.
Our estimates are somewhat higher than those estimated by Beenstock et al. (1998) for
the Israeli economy in 1991-1992. The estimates are more in line with those reported for the
United States by Doane et al. (1998) and Woo et al. (1991). Comparison of our estimates with
earlier ones by other authors should be made with caution because our methodology differs from
that of previous work. Whereas the earlier estimates are based on analysis of stated choices, ours
is based on analysis of stated choice probabilities. Comparisons should also be made with
caution because the time periods differ and because there is no inherent reason why WTP should
be the same in different countries and/or in different periods.

4.6. The Dispersion of Preferences

Recall that we assumed a random-coefficient model for utility, with β i = b + ηi . Sections
4.4 and 4.5 analyzed the mean preferences b and the derived WTP of persons with these
preferences. In this section, we study the dispersion of preferences. Our analysis is quite simple.
It does not require parametric distributional assumptions on preferences. Nor does it employ the
cumbersome maximum likelihood methods typically applied to random-coefficients models
estimated with actual or stated choice data.

8

We use the actual KWh consumed for the households in the sample, which is an average for the whole bimonthly billing cycle. We adjust this average KWh to the different scenarios using the national averages for
electricity consumption in the different scenarios and their relative frequency during the billing cycle.

26

Consider sample member i. We first apply our estimate of b to equation (6) to estimate
the unobserved utility components ui2.

We then estimate the person-specific preference

parameters ηi by solving the equations u i 2 = ( xi 2 − xi1 )η i .
We can solve exactly for η when the number of observations (games) per person is equal
to the number of regressors in the model (the dimension of η). When the number of observations
per person is larger than the number of regressors, we compute the least squares solution for η.
We use the model in column (3) of Table 3 to compute û ij . Our computations allow the
valuation of outages to vary with their timing but assume that timing affects only the mean
preference b and not the individual component ηi. While somewhat restrictive, this assumption
greatly increases the number of observations available to estimate ηi. Under this assumption, the
model has five random components. Hence, we can compute η for the 448 sample members who
played five or more games.
Table 6 presents selected quantiles of the estimated distribution of βi. The findings have
two main features that warrant attention. First, we find considerable dispersion of preferences
across the population. In each case, the interquartile range of the preference parameter is large
relative to its mean value. Second, although the majority of the estimates of all coefficients are
negative as expected, sizable fractions are positive (see Table 7). Positive values are contrary to
standard consumer theory, which presumes that households should negatively value electricity
outages and price.
Some of the dispersion and positivity of the estimated coefficients may be a consequence
of the probability rounding discussed in Sections 3 and 4.3. Recall that the LAD estimation we
used to estimate mean preferences in the population is robust to rounding. However, there is no
robust way to estimate individual preference parameters. Our use of equation (6) to estimate

27

person-specific βi inevitably rests on the rounded probability values that subjects report and, in
particular, on the way that we interpret reports of zero probability.
Rounding may partially explain our findings on the distribution of individual preferences,
but we doubt that this is the entire story. Our utility model, as any such model, can no more than
approximately describe consumer behavior. The model delivers sensible findings regarding
mean preferences, but more questionable ones about the full distribution of preferences. This
suggests that the model should not be taken as the final word when analyzing consumer
preferences for electricity reliability.

4.7. Maximum Score Estimation of Mean Willingness-to-Pay

The empirical findings presented in Sections 4.4 through 4.6 are based on the mixed-logit
model developed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. As discussed earlier, this model has many appealing
properties. However, it makes the hard-to-motivate assumption that each respondent i believes
(εij, εij) to be i. i. d. with the extreme value distribution. In this section we present findings based
on the model with weaker assumptions discussed in Section 3.4. Here we assume only that each
person i places subjective median zero on εij − εik, and we apply the maximum score method.
Define yir for each game r = 1, . . . , Ri played by individual i to be

⎧1 if qir2 ≥ 0.5
⎪
yir = ⎨
⎪0 otherwise,
⎩
r
where q i2 is the elicited probability of choosing alternative 2 in game r. The score function can

be written

28

Ri

N

N

i =1

i =1 r =1

S (b) = ∑Ri − ∑∑ yir − I {( xi 2 r − xi1r )b ≥ 0}

(12)

where I is the indicator function taking the value one when the expression within the curly
brackets is true and zero otherwise. Thus, one loses a point when the value of y differs from that
of the indicator function.
The maximum score estimate is the set of values of b that minimize the number of wrong
predictions, which is
N

Ri

S ∗ (b) = ∑∑ yir − I {( xi 2 r − xi1r )b ≥ 0} .

(13)

i =1 r =1

∗
Observe that S b is a step function.

Hence, standard derivative-based local optimization

routines cannot be applied. Instead, we perform a grid search, which guarantees that we find the
∗
global minimum of S b . We first use a coarse grid to locate a neighborhood of the global

minimum and then search a finer grid within this neighborhood. We do not report confidence
intervals or other measures of precision because asymptotic distribution theory for MS
estimation of partially identified models is not available. We only know that the estimates are
consistent under the maintained assumptions.
To ease the computational burden, we estimate simpler utility function specifications than
those underlying the estimates in Table 3. Specifically, we estimate parameters for two
specifications that eliminate all interaction terms. These are

U ij1 = βiC1 C j + βiT1 T j + ε ij1

(14a)

U ij2 = βiC2 C j + βiD2 D j + βiF2 Fj + ε ij2 .

(14b)

In each case, the mean values of the parameters can at most be identified up to scale. To fix the
scale, we impose the normalization bC = −1 . Hence, there is one parameter to estimate in the

29

first specification of the utility function, bT1 and two parameters in the second one, bD2 and bF2 .
∗
Consider the first specification. We found that the minimum value of S b occurs in the

short interval [−1.2772, −1.2223]. For comparison, LAD estimation of the mixed logit model
yields bC1 = -0.0007817 and bT1 = -0.0010206, which imply
MS estimates for

bT
bC

bT
bC

= 1.31. Thus, the LAD and the

are very similar.

∗
Consider the second specification. We found that the minimum value of S b occurs in

the two small regions (−5.90,[−116.58, −116.34]) ∪ (−5.89,[−116.66, −116.65]). Thus, the
estimate of the first parameter is essentially a point (up to 0.01 rounding) and the estimate of the
second parameter is a very short interval. For comparison, LAD estimation of the mixed logit
model yields bC2 = -0.000597, bD2 = -0.0048388, and bF2 = -0.1060176, implying
bF
bC

= 177.6. Thus, the LAD estimates of

bD
bC

and

bF
bC

bD
bC

= 8.131 and

are moderately larger than the MS estimates,

but not very different.
We are encouraged that the WTP estimates obtained by LAD and MS estimation of
simple utility functions specifications are reasonably close to one another. It would be useful to
compute MS estimates of richer utility specifications.

However, MS estimation of long

parameter vectors, such as those estimated by LAD in Table 3, is computationally very difficult.
Hence, we suffice with the simpler specifications considered here.

5. Conclusion

This paper makes two contributions. First, it extends the Manski (1999) approach to the
30

estimation of random utility models with random coefficients using elicited choice probabilities
instead of stated choices. The linear mixed logit model developed in Section 3 requires weaker
parametric restrictions than conventional mixed-logit analysis of stated choices and is much
easier to implement.

However, this model still requires certain distributional assumptions,

namely symmetry of the cross-sectional distribution of preferences and the i. i. d. extreme-value
assumption on the subjective distribution of ε. The linear model estimable by maximum score
weakens the latter assumption considerably.
Second, the paper reports the first application of the "elicited choice probability"
methodology. We estimate preferences for electricity reliability in Israel. We use the estimated
mean preferences to estimate willingness to pay for reductions in the duration of electricity
outages. We find that households with mean preferences are willing to pay significant amounts
of money for electricity reliability. During weekends and peak weekday hours, consumers are
willing to pay more for a one minute reduction in outage time obtained by reducing average
duration of outages than by reducing the number of outages. However, during the weekend off
peak hours, this pattern is reversed. The methodology allows for estimation of individual
preferences in a straightforward manner, and we find that preferences for electricity reliability
exhibit considerable dispersion in the population.
As described in the paper, eliciting choice probabilities from a sample of households
proved to be no more difficult than eliciting stated choices.

Choice probabilities allow

consumers to express uncertainty about their actual behavior whereas stated choices do not.
Thus, it seems that we can get "more for the buck" by adopting this approach in applied research.

31

References

Beenstock, M., E. Goldin and Y. Haitovsky (1998), "Response Bias in a Conjoint Analysis of
Power Outages", Energy Economics 20, 135-156.
Beggs, S., S. Cardell, and J. Hausman (1981), “Assessing the Potential Demand for Electric
Cars,” Journal of Econometrics, 16, 1-19.
Ben-Akiva, M. and T. Morikawa (1990), “Estimation of Switching Models from Revealed
Preferences and Stated Intentions,” Transportation Research A, 24A, 485-495.
Cai, Y., I. Deilami, and K. Train (1998), “Customer Retention in a Competitive Power Market:
Analysis of a 'Double-Bounded Plus Follow-ups' Questionnaire,” The Energy Journal, 19, 191215.
Caves, D., J. Herriges and R. Windle (1990), “Customer Demand for Service Reliability in the
Electric Power Industry: A Synthesis of the Outage Cost Literature,” Bulletin of Economic
Research, 42, 79-119.
Delavande, A. (2008), “Pill, Patch, or Shot? Subjective Expectations and Birth-Control Choice,”
International Economic Review, forthcoming.
Doane, M., R. Hartman, and C.-K. Woo, 1988, "Households' perceived value of service
reliability: An analysis of contingent valuation data,” The Energy Journal, Vol 9, 135-151.
Fischer, G. and D. Nagin (1981), “Random versus Fixed Coefficient Quantal Choice Models,” in
C. Manski and D. McFadden (editors), Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric
Applications, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Goett, A., K. Hudson and K. Train (2000), “Customer Choice Among Retail Energy Suppliers:
The Willingness-to-Pay for Service Attributes,” The Energy Journal, 21, 1-28.
Horowitz, J. (1992), “A Smoothed Maximum Score Estimator for the Binary Response Model,”
Econometrica, 60, 505-531.
Juster, T. (1966), Consumer Buying Intentions and Purchase Probability: An Experiment in
Survey Design, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 61, 658-696.
Lawton, L., M. Sullivan, K. Van Liere, A. Katz, and J. Eto (2003), “A Framework and Review of
Customer Outage Costs: Integration and Analysis of Electric Utility Outage Cost Surveys, ”
http://eetd.lbl.gov/ea/EMS/EMS_pubs.html.
32

Louviere, J. and G. Woodworth (1983), “Design and Analysis of Simulated Consumer Choice or
Allocation Experiments: An Approach Based on Aggregate Data,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 20, 350-367.
Manski, C. (1975), “Maximum Score Estimation of the Stochastic Utility Model of Choice,”
Journal of Econometrics, 3, 205-228.
Manski, C. (1985), “A Semiparametric Analysis of Discrete Response: Asymptotic Properties of
the Maximum Score Estimator, ” Journal of Econometrics, 27, 313-333.
Manski, C. (1988), “Identification of Binary Response Models,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 83, 729-738.
Manski, C. (1990), “The Use of Intentions Data to Predict Behavior: A Best Case Analysis,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 85, 934-940.
Manski, C. (1999), “Analysis of Choice Expectations in Incomplete Scenarios,” Journal of Risk
and Uncertainty, 19, 49-66.
Manski, C. (2004), “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 72, 1329-1376.
Manski, C. (2007), “Partial Identification of Counterfactual Choice Probabilities,” International
Economic Review, 48, 1393-1410.
Manski, C. and F. Molinari (2008), “Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in Surveys,”
Department of Economics, Northwestern University.
Manski, C. and I. Salomon (1987), “The Demand for Teleshopping,” Regional Science and
Urban Economics, 17, 109-121.
Matzkin, R. (1992), Nonparametric and Distribution-Free Estimation of the Binary ThresholdCrossing and the Binary Choice Models, Econometrica, 60: 239-270.
McFadden, D. (1974), “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P.
Zarembka (editor), Frontiers in Econometrics, New York: Academic Press.
McFadden, D. and K. Train (2000), “Mixed MNL Models for Discrete Response,” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 15, 447-470.
Revelt, D. and K. Train (1998), “Mixed Logit with Repeated Choices: Households' Choices of
Appliance Efficiency Level,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 647-657.
Woo, C.-K., R. Pupp, T. Flaim, and R. Mango (1991), "How much do electric customers want to
pay for reliability? New evidence on an old controversy, ” Energy Systems and Policy 15, 145159.

33

Table 1: Distribution of Scenarios
Scenario

Count

Percent

No advance warning, off peak, weekday, winter
No advance warning, peak, weekday, summer
No advance warning, intermediate, weekend, winter
No advance warning, intermediate, weekday, summer
No advance warning, off peak, weekend, winter
No advance warning, off peak, weekday, summer
No advance warning, peak, weekday, winter
No advance warning, intermediate, weekend, summer
No advance warning, peak, weekday, spring
Advance warning, peak, weekday, summer

587
584
568
569
524
531
538
537
499
493

10.8
10.8
10.5
10.5
9.7
9.8
9.9
9.9
9.2
9.1

Total

5,430

100

34

Table 2: Tabulation of Choice Probabilities
(for alternative 1)
Frequency.

Percent

Cum.

0
1
5
10
12
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
49
50
51
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
99
100

432
1
26
400
1
11
642
11
541
3
488
12
5
252
3
10
534
4
480
2
645
11
433
17
12
454

8.0
0.0
0.5
7.4
0.0
0.2
11.8
0.2
10.0
0.1
9.0
0.2
0.1
4.6
0.1
0.2
9.8
0.1
8.8
0.0
11.9
0.2
8.0
0.3
0.2
8.4

8.0
8.0
8.5
15.8
15.8
16.0
27.9
28.1
38.0
38.1
47.1
47.3
47.4
52.0
52.1
52.3
62.1
62.2
71.0
71.1
82.9
83.1
91.1
91.4
91.6
100.0

Total

5,430

100

35

Table 3. LAD Estimates of Utility Function Parameters1
Dependent variable: log probability ratio

Cost: baseline

Dummy for average income

Dummy for above average income

Dummy for missing income

Duration

Frequency

Total Outage Time (T = FxD)

Duration X Weekend

(1)

(2)

(3)

-0.00142

-0.00163

-0.00148

[0.00032]

[0.00030]

[0.00032]

0.00076

0.00088

0.00073

[0.00035]

[0.00035]

[0.00036]

0.00136

0.00151

0.00128

[0.00035]

[0.00036]

[0.00038]

0.00038

0.00055

0.00048

[0.00045]

[0.00045]

[0.00046]

-0.00467

-0.00082

0.00122

[0.00047]

[0.00108]

[0.00189]

-0.1182

-0.0113

-0.0049

[0.0149]

[0.0300]

[0.0565]

--

-0.00092

-0.00080

[0.00020]

[0.00041]

--

--

-0.0039
[0.0022]

--

--

Duration X Peak

-0.0032
[0.0024]

Frequency X Weekend

--

--

-0.0395
[0.0646]

Frequency X Peak

--

--

0.0233
[0.0676]

T X Weekend

--

--

0.00009
[0.0005]

T X Peak

--

--

-0.00022
[0.00049]

Observations
1

3947

3947

Cluster-bootstrapped standard errors based on 500 replications.

36

3947

Table 4: Mean WTP (US dollars) for a 1-minute Reduction in Outage Time1
(Households with Average Income)

Reduction in D
F=1
F=2
F=3
F=4
F=5

Reduction in F
D=10
D=30
D=60
D=90
D=120
D=150
D=180
D=300

(1)
Weekday, Peak
0.88
(0.49)
0.59
(0.25)
0.49
(0.17)
0.45
(0.14)
0.42
(0.13)

(2)
Weekday, Off-Peak
-0.12
(0.45)
0.05
(0.18)
0.11
(0.10)
0.14
(0.08)
0.16
(0.07)

(3)
Weekend, Off-Peak
0.98
(0.48)
0.60
(0.24)
0.47
(0.17)
0.40
(0.13)
0.36
(0.11)

Weekday, Peak
-0.24
(1.08)
0.12
(0.31)
0.21
(0.13)
0.24
(0.08)
0.25
(0.07)
0.26
(0.07)
0.27
(0.08)
0.28
(0.09)

Weekday, Off-Peak
0.38
(1.56)
0.28
(0.46)
0.26
(0.19)
0.25
(0.11)
0.25
(0.08)
0.24
(0.08)
0.24
(0.08)
0.24
(0.09)

Weekend, Off-Peak
1.51
(1.13)
0.64
(0.35)
0.42
(0.17)
0.35
(0.11)
0.31
(0.09)
0.29
(0.08)
0.28
(0.08)
0.25
(0.08)

1

Cluster-bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.

37

Table 5: Mean Outage Cost (US dollars per KWh unsupplied)1

Reduction in D
F=1
F=2
F=3
F=4
F=5

Reduction in F
D=10
D=30
D=60
D=90
D=120
D=150
D=180
D=300

1

(1)
Weekday, Peak
42.37
(23.58)
28.38
(11.85)
23.71
(8.35)
21.38
(6.87)
19.98
(6.14)

(2)
Weekday, Off-Peak
-7.38
(26.80)
3.26
(10.92)
6.81
(6.22)
8.58
(4.55)
9.65
(4.13)

(3)
Weekend, Off-Peak
47.22
(23.12)
28.56
(11.54)
22.34
(7.95)
19.24
(6.35)
17.37
(5.52)

Weekday, Peak
-11.56
(51.77)
5.74
(14.82)
10.06
(6.19)
11.50
(4.05)
12.22
(3.57)
12.66
(3.58)
12.94
(3.72)
13.52
(4.26)

Weekday, Off-Peak
22.39
(92.93)
16.73
(27.28)
15.32
(11.35)
14.85
(6.64)
14.61
(4.95)
14.47
(4.46)
14.38
(4.46)
14.19
(5.20)

Weekend, Off-Peak
72.37
(54.31)
30.73
(16.97)
20.32
(8.07)
16.85
(5.50)
15.11
(4.49)
14.07
(4.07)
13.38
(3.88)
11.99
(3.81)

Cluster-bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.

38

Table 6: Distribution of Individual β's
10%

25%

50%

75%

90%

N

βF

-2.3389

-0.504

-0.0903

0.2409

1.1457

448

βD

-0.0889

-0.0171

-0.0020

0.0114

0.0389

448

βT

-0.0100

-0.0036

-0.0003

0.0024

0.0126

448

βF

-2.3156

-0.4807

-0.067

0.2642

1.1690

448

βD

-0.0921

-0.0203

-0.0052

0.0082

0.0357

448

βT

-0.0102

-0.0038

-0.0005

0.0022

0.0124

448

βF

-2.3784

-0.5435

-0.1297

0.2014

1.1062

448

βD

-0.0927

-0.0210

-0.0058

0.0076

0.0350

448

βT

-0.0099

-0.0035

-0.0002

0.0025

0.0127

448

Weekday, off
peak

Weekday, peak

Weekend, off
peak

βC

(income=1)

-0.0346

-0.0066

-0.0011

0.002

0.0076

156

βC

(income=2)

-0.0171

-0.0086

-0.0017

0.0002

0.0027

97

βC

(income=3)

-0.019

-0.0065

-0.0015

0.0011

0.0071

116

βC

(income=4)

-0.0501

-0.0091

-0.0024

-0.0002

0.0068

79

39

Table 7: Percentage of Negative Coefficients

βF
βD
βT

βC

Weekdays off
peak

Weekdays peak

Weekends off
peak

59

56

62

55

62

53

54

54

67

Below Average

Average

Above Average

Did not respond

62

70

65

77

40

15
10
Percent
5
0
0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
Choice Probability for Alternative 1

Figure 1: Histogram of elicitied probabilities

41

Table A1. LAD Estimates of Utility Function Parameters for Sub-samples
Dependent variable:
log probability ratio
by Age (years)

Cost

Cost: ( baseline)

Dummy for average income

Dummy for above average income

Dummy for missing answer

Duration

Frequency

Total Outage Time (T = F x D)

Duration X Weekend

Duration X Peak

by Education

by Income

Full sample

50 or older

less than 50

college

non-college

below average

average

above average

nonresponse

-

-

-

-

-

-0.00110***

-0.000915***

-0.000436

-0.00103***

(0.00025)

(0.00027)

(0.00027)

(0.00039)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.00148

-0.00151***

-0.00137***

-0.00107

-0.00167***

[0.00032]

(0.000470)

(0.000371)

(0.000750)

(0.000349)

0.00073

0.000889

0.000561

0.000341

0.00102**

[0.00036]

(0.000570)

(0.000448)

(0.000862)

(0.000418)

0.00128

0.00212***

0.000858*

0.000624

0.00200***

[0.00038]

(0.000508)

(0.000440)

(0.000761)

(0.000500)

0.00048

0.0000362

0.000837*

0.000559

0.000467

[0.00046]

(0.000589)

(0.000482)

(0.00100)

(0.000465)

0.00122

0.00158

0.000926

-0.000409

0.00239

0.00753***

-0.000525

-0.00266

-0.000630

[0.00189]

(0.00261)

(0.00250)

(0.00369)

(0.00202)

(0.0024)

(0.0035)

(0.0050)

(0.0039)

-0.0049

0.00925

-0.0372

-0.110

0.0661

0.152**

-0.0864

-0.0993

-0.114

[0.0565]

(0.0789)

(0.0660)

(0.0969)

(0.0565)

(0.072)

(0.096)

(0.13)

(0.12)

-0.00080

-0.00100*

-0.000548

-0.000143

-0.00124***

-0.00192***

-0.000509

-0.000321

0.0000644

[0.00041]

(0.000548)

(0.000489)

(0.000753)

(0.000408)

(0.00046)

(0.00067)

(0.00099)

(0.00080)

-0.0039

-0.00542*

-0.00209

-0.00174

-0.00477*

-0.00657**

-0.000476

-0.00828

0.00113

[0.0022]

(0.00315)

(0.00291)

(0.00463)

(0.00264)

(0.0030)

(0.0058)

(0.0053)

(0.0045)

-0.0032

-0.00631**

0.000157

0.00122

-0.00392

-0.00968***

-0.00205

-0.000426

[0.0024]

(0.00309)

(0.00318)

(0.00470)

(0.00306)

(0.0031)

(0.0045)

(0.0059)

42

-0.000640
(0.0067)

Frequency X Weekend

Frequency X Peak

T X Weekend

T X Peak

Observations
1

-0.0395

-0.0692

0.00411

0.124

-0.131*

-0.137

-0.0531

-0.0898

0.165

[0.0646]

(0.0915)

(0.0812)

(0.116)

(0.0718)

(0.097)

(0.15)

(0.14)

(0.14)

0.0233

-0.00635

0.0636

0.144

-0.0156

-0.115

0.0181

0.105

0.192

[0.0676]

(0.0972)

(0.0827)

(0.119)

(0.0786)

(0.093)

(0.13)

(0.15)

(0.17)

0.00009

0.000464

-0.000359

-0.000895

0.000605

0.00104

0.0000999

0.000391

-0.00161

[0.0005]

(0.000646)

(0.000586)

(0.000910)

(0.000516)

(0.00065)

(0.0011)

(0.0010)

(0.0010)

-0.00022

0.000313

-0.000778

-0.00120

0.000134

0.00109*

-0.000144

-0.000652

-0.00144

[0.00049]

(0.000669)

(0.000614)

(0.000928)

(0.000575)

(0.00062)

(0.00091)

(0.0011)

(0.0013)

3947

1739

2208

1252

2695

1379

842

1034

Boostrapped standard errors based on 500 replications.

43

692

