                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TESTING THE MELITZ MODEL OF TRADE:
                  AN APPLICATION TO U.S. MOTION PICTURE EXPORTS

                                         Gordon H. Hanson
                                           Chong Xiang

                                        Working Paper 14461
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14461


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2008




We thank David Hummels, Marc Melitz, Phillip McCalman, Nina Pavcnik, Stephen Redding, and
seminar participants at UCSD, the NBER, the Princeton University IES Workshop and the 2008 EIIT
Meetings for helpful comments; Adina Ardelean, Sirsha Chatterjee, Anca Cristea, Michael Ewens,
and Jeffrey Lin for excellent research assistance; and the National Science Foundation for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Testing the Melitz Model of Trade: An Application to U.S. Motion Picture Exports
Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 14461
October 2008
JEL No. F12,F2

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper, we develop a simple empirical method to test two alternative versions of the Melitz (2003)
model, one with global fixed export costs and one with bilateral fixed export costs. With global costs,
import sales per product variety (relative to domestic sales per variety) are decreasing in variable trade
barriers, as a result of adjustment occurring along the intensive margin of trade. With bilateral costs,
imports per product variety are increasing in fixed trade costs, due to adjustment occurring along the
extensive margin. We apply our approach to data on imports of U.S. motion pictures in 46 countries
over 1995-2006. Imports per product variety are decreasing in geographic distance, linguistic distance,
and other measures of trade costs, consistent with adjustment to these costs occurring along the intensive
margin. There is relatively little variation in the number of U.S. movies that countries import but wide
variation in the box-office revenues per movie. The data thus appear to reject the bilateral-fixed-export-cost
model in favor of the global-fixed-export-cost model.


Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

Chong Xiang
Purdue University
Department of Economics
West Lafayette, IN 47907
cxiang@purdue.edu
I Introduction
         Recent literature identifies patterns of export behavior that are inconsistent with

traditional models of international trade. Most manufacturing plants in the US and

France do not export any output and those that do are larger and more productive than

those that do not (Bernard and Jensen, 1999 and 2004; Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz,

2004). Melitz (2003), in widely cited work, develops a model with firm heterogeneity

and fixed export costs that can account for these phenomena.1 Because of fixed trade

charges, only more productive plants find it profitable to sell goods abroad.2

         Fixed trade costs imply adjustment in trade volumes may occur along both the

intensive margin (value of trade per product) and extensive margin (number of products

traded). In the standard monopolistic competition model, consumer love of variety leads

all products to be exported, meaning trade varies at the intensive margin only (Helpman

and Krugman, 1985). A fall in transport costs causes exports of all products to increase,

consistent with the robust negative coefficient on distance in the gravity model of trade

(Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). With fixed export costs and firm heterogeneity, a

fall in transport costs may cause trade volumes to increase both through existing

exporters exporting more and new firms beginning to export. Bernard, Jensen, Redding,

and Schott (2007) find that most variation in US merchandise exports is at the extensive

margin, with smaller countries importing fewer US products.3 They also find that the

negative gravity coefficient for distance is due mostly to adjustment at the extensive

margin, with US manufacturers exporting fewer products to more distant countries.

1
  For other theoretical work on firm heterogeneity and trade see Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003).
2
  When applied to aggregate data, this framework yields a gravity specification that can account for why
many country pairs do not trade (Helpman, Melitz, Rubinstein, 2007; Baldwin and Harrigan, 2007).
3
  In related work, Chaney (2006) finds that variation in trade cost elasticities across sectors is consistent
with adjustment to trade occurring at the extensive margin.


                                                                                                           1
       Despite abundant indirect evidence that fixed trade costs exist, we know little

about their nature. While we can measure variable trade barriers in the form of tariffs or

transport fees, no similar data exist for expenses that are fixed. If fixed export costs are

bilateral, such that firms incur a charge to enter each new foreign market, small countries

will be disadvantaged in global trade. However, if fixed export costs are largely global in

nature, such that once firms establish a global distribution network they face only

variable charges in adding new markets, small countries are not at a disadvantage and it is

only unproductive firms that fail to participate in trade.

       In this paper, we develop a simple empirical method to test two alternative

versions of the Melitz (2003) model, one with global fixed export costs and one with

bilateral fixed export costs. With global fixed export costs, import sales per product

variety (relative to domestic sales per variety) are decreasing in variable trade barriers, as

a result of adjustment occurring along the intensive margin of trade. With bilateral fixed

export costs, however, imports per product variety are increasing in fixed trade costs, due

to adjustment occurring along the extensive margin. Both models produce an empirical

specification that has sales per foreign variety relative to sales per domestic variety as the

dependent variable and trade barriers as independent variables. To test one model against

the other, one simply examines the sign of the coefficients on trade costs.

       An advantage of our approach is that we need not take a stand on which trade

barriers represent fixed impediments and which variable impediments. The empirical

literature offers little guidance on this issue. Standard gravity variables – distance,

language, colonial history – are likely correlated with variable and fixed barriers. We

exploit the divergent predictions of the two alternative models for whether adjustment to




                                                                                            2
trade barriers occurs on the intensive or extensive margin, making our approach

applicable in a wide variety of empirical settings.

        We apply our specification to data on imports of US motion pictures.                        The

characteristics of the film industry are consistent with the assumptions of the Melitz

framework. Fixed costs are important in movie production and studios differentiate their

film product (De Vany, 2004). There is heterogeneity in movie performance, with box-

office revenues for US films being asymptotically Pareto-distributed (De Vany and

Walls, 1997 and 2004), matching the distributional assumptions in Melitz (2003) and

most extensions. Not all US movies are exported, with no country exhibiting more than

two-thirds of the movies the US produces in a given year. Data for the analysis cover

box-office revenues for domestic and US movies in 46 countries over 1995-2006, as

collected by ScreenDigest.com, an entertainment industry consultancy. We also make

use of data on national trade barriers in motion pictures from various sources.

        A broader motivation for studying motion pictures is that the vast majority of

empirical work on trade is for manufacturing, with relatively little work to date on

services.    Movies are representative of other information services, including music,

publishing, software, television, and video games, which are responsible for a growing

share of US trade. These “copyright” industries tend to have large fixed production costs

(associated with creating an initial film print, music recording, or software program) and

small marginal production costs (associated with producing additional copies). In 2005,

copyright industries accounted for 7% of US GDP; US movies, TV, and videos had

foreign sales plus exports of $20 billion, just below that for US pharmaceuticals.4 While


4
  Together, US copyright industries had exports plus foreign sales of $110 billion in 2005, exceeding the
total for US chemical products and motor vehicles combined (Siwek, 2006).


                                                                                                       3
one might presume copyrighted services can be exported at little expense, we know little

about trade barriers for these products.5 For movies, music, and software, language and

culture may affect consumer demand and the cost of marketing goods across borders.

While the physical cost of delivering information services may be low, the barriers

consumers face in gaining access to them may not be.

           Our main findings are that imports per product variety are decreasing in

geographic distance, linguistic distance, and other measures of trade barriers, in a manner

consistent with adjustment to these barriers occurring along the intensive rather than the

extensive margin. There is relatively little variation in the number of US movies that

countries import but wide variation in the box-office revenues per movie, with countries

more distant from the US spending less on the US movies that they see. Argentina, for

instance, imports roughly the same number of US movies each year as Germany, though

the box office revenues per US film there are far lower. The data reject the bilateral-

fixed-export-cost model in favor of the global-fixed-export-cost model, implying even

small countries have access to a wide variety of US motion pictures.

           Interestingly, the specification of the Melitz model preferred by the data is quite

similar to that for the standard monopolistic competition model (e.g., Krugman, 1980;

Helpman and Krugman, 1985), which has no firm heterogeneity or fixed export costs.

This is because in both the monopolistic competition model and the Melitz model with

global fixed export costs adjustment to trade costs occurs along the intensive margin.

Obviously, the standard monopolistic competition model fails in our data by not

accounting for why some US movies are not exported.



5
    There is a growing literature on motion picture trade. See Hanson and Xiang (2008) for references.


                                                                                                         4
II Theory
        In this section, we develop two versions of the Melitz model. In one, fixed

exports costs are bilateral, incurred each time a producer enters a new export market; in

the other, they are global, incurred once, when a producer starts exporting. The two

models yield different predictions for how trade costs affect box office revenues per

movie. We also explore how fixed production costs impact trade patterns, depending on

whether a portion of these costs are incurred after producers learn their type.


IIA Model Setup
        There are many sectors, over which consumers have Cobb-Douglas preferences,

and many countries, where u indexes the exporter and k indexes the importer. We focus

on the movie industry and leave other sectors in the background.                        As movies are

consumed in discrete units, we adopt a discrete choice framework (e.g., Anderson, de

Palma and Thisse, 1992; Feenstra, 2004). Our model preserves the main features of

Melitz (2003) and allows for endogenous markups, as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2005).6

        Movies are subject to cultural discount (Waterman, 2005). For a consumer in

country k, a movie from country u (the US) reduces utility by δuk as compared with a

domestic movie, where δuk > 0. δuk represents the portion of a movie’s value that is lost

in translation in moving from one country to another. We expect δuk to be lower the more

similar are two countries’ culture and language.

        Movies are also subject to fixed and variable trade costs. Variable specific trade


6
  Melitz (2003) assumes a representative consumer with CES preferences. Anderson et al. (1992) show
that if goods are consumed in continuous units, a discrete choice model generates the same market demand
functions as a representative consumer with CES preferences. As we assume individuals consume either
zero or one unit of a movie, the demand functions we derive differ somewhat from Melitz. Even so, our
qualitative predictions for the relationship between trade and trade costs are very similar to what obtains
under CES preferences, as we show in an Appendix.


                                                                                                         5
fees, defined as tuk > 0, include tariffs and surcharges on foreign movie revenues

(Marvasti and Canterbery, 2005), transaction costs in negotiating contracts between US

movie distributors and foreign movie exhibitors (Gil and LaFontaine, 2007),7 advertising

expenses (which are increasing in the length of time a movie spends in theatres), and film

printing expenses (which are increasing in the number of the number of times a movie is

shown and the number of theatres in which it appears).8 Fixed export costs, which we

introduce formally below, are associated with allocating the right to distribute a movie in

different countries, creating an international marketing campaign, editing movies for

foreign audiences, and adding subtitles or dubbing movie dialogue. Fixed costs may be

market specific (if each country requires its own marketing campaign) or global in nature

(if a single marketing campaign can serve multiple countries). Obviously, fixed and

variable trade charges may have common underlying determinants, with distance,

language, and the costs of enforcing contracts possibly affecting both.9

         In country k, consumer o picks one movie from nk domestic and foreign movies,

deriving utility Vjko = vjk + εjko if she chooses movie j. εjko is an i.i.d. random variable of

the double exponential distribution with mean 0 and variance ρ2/6, and vjk is given by

         vjk = λjk − δjk – tjk − pjk,                                                              (1)

where pjk is the price of movie j net of policy trade barriers (and we set δkk = tkk = 0). A

demand shifter, λjk, incorporates heterogeneity in movies. A movie with a high λjk is


7
  Gil and LaFontaine (2007) find that in the Spanish movie industry distributors sign an initial contract for
sharing revenues with movie exhibitors, which may be renegotiated multiple times, as a movie reveals itself
to be more or less popular than expected. Contracting costs are thus a function of the level of revenues and
not simply the discrete outcome of whether or not a movie is shown.
8
  The Motion Picture Association (2003) reports that for the average US movie in 2003, 65% of total costs
were due to film production and 35% were due to marketing (which includes making film prints;
advertising on radio, TV, newspapers and other media; and other promotional activities).
9
  We take as given the number of movie theatres in each country. While expanding the number of theatres
is a fixed cost in distributing movies, it is not one that is specific to individual films.


                                                                                                           6
popular (E.T., Titanic) and one with a low λjk is unpopular (Ishtar, Gigli). We assume the

popularity of a movie does not depend on the country in which it is shown (λjk = λj for all

k) and that λj is drawn from a common distribution, G(λ).10 Introducing heterogeneity in

demand rather than in marginal costs, as in Melitz (2003), keeps variation in admission

prices for movies within a country compressed, consistent with the data (De Vany, 2004).

        Applying results in Anderson et al. (1992), we can show that the box-office

revenues (total sales) of movie j produced in country u and shown in country k are

                (           )     (                       )
         s juk = p juk + tuk exp λ j − δ uk − tuk − p juk Ak ,                                   (2)

where Ak = α Yk / M k and M k = ∑ l ( plk + tlk ) exp ( vlk ) , Yk is income, α is the expenditure

share for the movie industry, and pjuk is the price of movie j net of policy trade barriers in

k. Mk captures market competitiveness in country k, similar to the CES price index.

Equation (2) resembles a CES demand function with each movie as a product variety.

Box-office revenues of domestically produced movie h in country k equal,

         shkk = phk exp(λh − phk ) Ak .                                                          (3)

        We assume movie production occurs in four steps. (i) A producer in country u

hires fE units of country-u labor to produce a master film print, which is a sunk labor

input. (ii) The producer draws a λ from the distribution G(λ). (iii) The producer uses a

variable labor input to exhibit the movie to an audience, with input costs incurred in the

country where the audience is located. For each unit of the movie shown in country k,

the producer hires one unit of country-k labor. And (iv) the producer collects profits.

        By assumption (ii), all fixed production costs are incurred before the popularity of


10
  The top grossing movies tend to be the same across national markets. For 2003 to 2005, our data show
the top ten movies by box office revenue for each country. In each year, at least six movies appear in the
top ten lists of two thirds or more of the countries. Waterman (2005) provides similar evidence.


                                                                                                        7
a movie is revealed, which we refer to as a pure sunk cost setting. This differs from

Melitz (2003), in which some fixed production costs are incurred after heterogeneity is

revealed, which we refer to as a partial sunk cost setting. We first derive results for pure

sunk costs and later consider partial sunk costs. Pure sunk costs capture the riskiness and

short-lived nature of movies. A strong indicator of a movie’s popularity is the box office

revenue earned during its first week of release (typically, on the domestic market), by

which time production and domestic distribution costs have been incurred. By the end of

three weeks, the average movie has earned 66% of its total box-office revenues (De Vany

and Walls, 1999). As in Melitz (2003), the role of the sunk entry cost is to pin down Nk,

the number of country-k producers that draw from G(λ).11

         In our model, each firm produces a single variety, as in Melitz (2003). However,

our setting also has a multi-product-firm interpretation, consistent with Bernard, Redding

and Schott (2006). Most movies are distributed by large movie studios, which are often

involved in movie production as well.12 While there are a large number of studios

worldwide, a half dozen distribute most high-grossing films.13 One can think of a movie

studio as a multi-product firm. Within a given year, a studio will release many movies,

where each movie is a product variety. The short lived nature of movies allows each

studio to differentiate its movies in time, avoiding the simultaneous release of two or


11
   In an Appendix we derive Nk assuming m identical countries and each country having one sector, as in
Melitz (2003). Nk and its counterparts in other countries are jointly determined.
12
   Making a movie involves four stages: development (securing rights, screen writing, casting, financing),
production (filming, special effects, music, editing), distribution (marketing, negotiating with theatres), and
exhibition. While studios are usually involved in distribution, they have varying roles in earlier stages,
sometimes handling a movie from start to finish (Paramount and Mission: Impossible II) and sometimes
buying distribution rights to an already finished movie (20th Century Fox and Little Miss Sunshine). US
antitrust rulings prevent movie studios from owning theatres, meaning studios do not control exhibition.
13
   The major studios (and their corporate parents) are Columbia/MGM (Sony), Paramount (Viacom), 20th
Century Fox (News Corp.), Universal Pictures (GE), Disney (Disney), and Warner Bros. (Time-Warner).
While there is little entry or exit by studios, changes in studio ownership are frequent (Waterman, 2005).


                                                                                                             8
more films. While a studio may produce multiple movie products, it will only produce

one variety per product. In this setting, for each product we can still apply assumptions

(i)-(iv) and proceed with the analysis.14

         Following Melitz (2003), we assume the movie industry is monopolistically com-

petitive.15 By (2) and (3), the elasticity of demand for domestic movie h is -phkk and for

country-u movie j is -(pukj + tuk). As price increases, demand becomes more elastic and

markups decrease, as with linear demands in Melitz and Ottaviano (2005). It follows that,

         phkk = wk + 1, pukj + tuk = wk + 1 + tuk → phkk = pjuk = wk + 1 for all u, h, j, (4)

where wk is the wage in country k.16 Because the cultural discount is a source of home

bias in demand, it does not affect prices (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). Similarly, λj

affects the quantity demanded but not prices. Equation (4) implies that in market k, the

prices of domestic and foreign movies (net of policy trade barriers) are the same.

         Once a producer in country k draws its λ, sunk costs have been incurred, implying

the movie will be made, with pricing given by (4) and sales by (3). The number of

country-k movies produced, nkk, is Nk, the number of country-k movies drawn from G(λ),


14
   Multi-product firms bring two additional elements into consideration. First, the popularity of a movie
may depend on the “ability” of its studio. Following Bernard, Redding and Schott (2006), we assume the
distribution of studio abilities is independent of λ and that the ability of a given studio is common for all
products. With each studio randomly drawing its ability when it enters the market, studio abilities are given
for each individual movie. Second, the entry decisions and numbers of studios in the market may depend
on studio-level sunk entry costs and per period studio-level fixed costs, as well as studio-level ability. Since
we lack data on which movies are distributed by which studios, we leave studios in the background of the
analysis and focus on individual movies. Some portion of our product-level sunk entry cost fE might be
indistinguishable from the studio-level fixed cost, but fE also remains in the background of our analysis. A
further reason to leave studios in the background is that the studio that distributes a movie abroad may not
be the same one that distributes it domestically. US studios frequently use joint ventures to release movies
abroad. See McCalman (2004, 2005) on contractual decisions in foreign movie distribution.
15
   Because the number of major movie studios is small, the assumption of monopolistic competition might
seem questionable. However, one can view competition in movies as occurring not between studios but
between the top talents involved in a movie, such as actors, directors, and producers, whose numbers far
exceed the number of major studios. To secure the star power of these talents, studios bid for their services
(Waterman, 2005), driving expected profits toward zero.
16
   The marginal cost of a domestic movie is wk, with market price wk + 1; the marginal cost of a country-u
movie shown in country k is wk + tuk, with market price wk + tuk + 1.


                                                                                                              9
        nkk = N k .                                                                          (5)

To derive sales of domestic movies in country k, we assume that G(·) is exponential, such

that G(λ) = 1 − d κ exp(−λκ), with κ > 0 and λ ∈ [lnd, +∞). By (3) movie sales, shkk, are

then Pareto-distributed, and total sales of country-k movies in country k are

Skk= N k ∫ln∞ d shkk dG (λ ) . (In section IV, we examine whether movie revenues are, in fact,

Pareto.) For the integrand to be finite, the distribution G(λ) must have a sufficiently thin

tail, which requires that κ > 1. It follows that,

                                                                      κd
        Skk = Nk ∫ln∞ d shkk dG (λ ) = nkk ( wk + 1)e− ( wk +1) Ak        .                  (6)
                                                                     κ −1

As expenditure for movies by country k, Ak, increases, or the wage in country k, wk,

decreases, the total sale of domestic movies in country-k movies increases.17


IIB Global Fixed Export Costs
        Consider the producers of country-u movies who would like to export to country

k. Exporting requires a global fixed cost of fG units of country-u labor, incurred after the

drawing of the demand shifter λ. We allow producers to observe their type before

making the export decision, consistent with the movie industry where producers release

films on the domestic market first, and then, if they are sufficiently successful, in theatres

abroad.18 Paying this fixed cost allows a country-u movie to be exported to the rest of the

world. By (2), a country-u producer of movie j gets revenue sjuk for serving country k.

Total sales from exporting movie j is then ∑ k ≠u s juk ; the profit from exporting movie j is



17
  The derivative of lnSkk with respect to wk equals -wk/(1+wk).
18
   Elberse and Eliashberg (2003) find that US movies with stronger domestic market performance tend to
have higher opening-week box-office revenues when they are released in foreign markets. McCalman
(2005) shows that movies released simultaneously in the US and a few foreign markets (“day and date”
releases) are released in other foreign markets with a lag.


                                                                                                   10
                  λj                                              +δ uk )
        π ju = e Qu − fG wu , Qu = ∑ k ≠u e− ( w +1+t   k    uk
                                                                            Ak .                       (7)

Setting πju = 0 yields the cut-off value of λ for a country-u movie to be exported:

                  wu fG
        λu = ln         .                                                                              (8)
                   Qu

Equation (8) says that the cut-off value, λu , does not vary across importing countries due

to the global nature of the fixed export cost. Once a movie is shown abroad, it is shown

around the globe. Country u thus produces two kinds of movies: those below the export

cut-off (λj < λu ), which are domestic films; and those above, which are shown globally.

        Using λu , we can derive (a) the number of country-u movies exported to country

k, and (b) total sales of country-u movies in country k:

                          ∞
        (a) nuk = N u ∫ dG (λ j ) = N u d κ exp(−λu κ ),
                         λu

                          ∞                                                              κ eλ
                                                                                            u

        (b) Suk = N u ∫ s juk dG (λ j ) = nuk ( wk + 1 + tuk )e− ( wk +1+tuk +δuk ) Ak        .        (9)
                         λu                                                              κ −1

To see the intuition behind (9), consider the total sales of country-u movies in country k,

Suk.   Equation (9b) is a gravity-like prediction in which Suk responds to country-k

characteristics, such as expenditure, and variable trade barriers. This variation consists of

an extensive margin – the number of country-u movies exported to k – and an intensive

margin – the average sale per country-u movie.                                In (9a), the extensive margin is

exporting-country specific and does not vary with importing-country characteristics. As

a result, all variation in Suk occurs along the intensive margin. The fixed export cost does

not affect the intensive margin because it does not vary across importers.

        Together, equations (5), (6) and (9) imply that:




                                                                                                             11
            ⎛ S /n ⎞                     ⎛    t   ⎞                       wk
         ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = −δ uk − tuk + ln ⎜1 + uk ⎟ + ln Cu ≈ −δ uk − tuk        + ln Cu
            ⎝ Skk / nkk ⎠                ⎝ wk + 1 ⎠                      wk + 1

                         ≈ −δ uk − tuk + ln Cu ,                                                  (10)

where Cu = exp(λu ) / d .19 In equation (10), Suk/nuk and Skk/nkk are the average sales in

country k of a movie produced in country u and of movies produced domestically. On

the left of (10) are average sales in relative terms, which we refer to as the average sales

ratio. By expressing average sales as a log difference, the competitiveness of market k,

Mk, and domestic expenditure on movies, αYk, drop out. With global fixed export costs

and pure sunk costs, the average sales ratio is negatively correlated with variable trade

barriers between an importer and an exporter.

        A result similar to equation (10) holds if we remove firm heterogeneity and fixed

export costs from our model (but retain the discrete choice setting), in which case we get,

            ⎛ S /n ⎞
         ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ ≈ −δ uk − tuk .                                                             (11)
            ⎝ S kk / nkk ⎠
In this model, which is similar to the standard monopolistic competition model, the

variation of Suk occurs along the intensive margin, as in (10); however, this model also

predicts all movies are exported, contrary to Melitz-type models.


IIC Bilateral Fixed Export Costs
        Next, we consider a version of the model with bilateral fixed export costs. To

exhibit movies abroad, producers are now subject to a fixed cost that is specific to each

destination market. Showing a country-u movie in country k involves a fixed input of fuk

units of country-k labor, showing the movie in country l involves an additional ful units of

19
   The second line of (10) includes two approximations, one is that for small x, ln(1+x) ≈ x, and the second
is that –tuk + tuk/(wk+1) = –tuk wk/(wk+1) ≈ –tuk. In the estimation, we impose the first approximation, but
not the second. Since each of the specifications we derive includes the term, tuk/(wk+1), we incorporate as
regressors interactions between trade barriers and the inverse of wages (see note 32).


                                                                                                         12
country-l labor, etc. The other elements of the model are the same. The assumption of

bilateral fixed export costs is widely used in the literature on firm heterogeneity (e.g.,

Chaney, 2006; Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein, 2007), though Melitz (2003) makes no

explicit case for fixed export costs being bilateral or global in nature.

       For a country-u producer, showing movie j in country k now yields profit

                    λ j −( wk +1+tuk +δ uk )
        π juk = e                              Ak − fuk wk .                                                                (12)

Setting πjuk =0, the cut-off value of λj for a country-u producer to serve country k is

                                                   wk fuk
      λuk = wk + 1 + tuk + δ uk + ln                      .                                                                 (13)
                                                    Ak
An increase in the importing-country wage, wk, not only increases the fixed export cost

for country-u movies, but also makes their demand more elastic and lowers their markup

(see (4)). Both effects decrease the profit of showing country-u movies in country k and

increase λuk . These features are reminiscent of Melitz and Ottaviano (2005).

       Analogous to (9), we can use λuk to derive: (a) the number of country-u movies

exported to country k, and (b) the total sales of country-u movies in country k:

                              ∞
       (a) nuk = N u ∫ dG (λ j ) = N u d κ exp(−λuk κ ),
                              λ uk


                              ∞                        κ d κ e− λ (κ −1)
                                                                 uk

       (b) Suk = N u ∫ s juk dG (λ j ) =                                 N u ( wk + 1 + tuk )e − ( w +1+t
                                                                                                   k    uk   +δ uk )
                                                                                                                       Ak
                             λ uk                           κ −1
                        κ nuk
                  =           ( w + 1 + tuk ) wk fuk .                                                                      (14)
                        κ −1 k

Equations (5) and (6) continue to hold for the domestic production and sales of country k

movies. Together with equation (14) they imply that:

           ⎛ S /n          ⎞                  wk           ⎛     t  ⎞
        ln ⎜ uk uk         ⎟ = ln( fuk ) + ln    + wk + ln ⎜ 1 + uk ⎟ + C3
           ⎝ S kk / nkk    ⎠                  Ak           ⎝ wk + 1 ⎠



                                                                                                                                   13
                                             wk        t
                         ≈ ln( fuk ) + ln       + wk + uk + C3 ,                   (15)
                                             Ak       wk + 1

where C3 = 1 − lnd. With bilateral fixed export costs and pure fixed costs, the average

sales ratio is positively correlated with fixed and variable trade costs, and negatively

correlated with importing-country movie expenditure. Equations (10) and (15) highlight

the importance of the nature of fixed export costs for the intensive and extensive margin

of trade:   changing fixed export costs from global to bilateral reverses the sign of

correlation between the average sales ratio and trade barriers.


IID Pure versus Partial Sunk Costs
       Our treatment of fixed production costs as being entirely sunk (incurred before a

producer discovers its type) departs from what is standard in the literature. Next, we

allow fixed production costs to be incurred after a producer learns its type.

       Suppose a producer of movie h in country k incurs fixed production costs of b

units of country-k labor, after she draws the demand shifter λh from the distribution G(λ).

Of all the Nk movies that could be made, only nkk < Nk movies will actually be made.

After the producer observes λh, she may decide not to make movie h at all, so as to avoid

paying the fixed production cost. Analogous to (12)-(14), we can derive (a) the profit of

movie h, (b) the cutoff value of λ for movie h to be made, (c) the number of country-k

movies actually made, and (d) the total box-office sales of country-k movies:

                                                      α Yk
       (a) π hkk = eλkh − wk −1 Ak − bwk ,     Ak =          ,
                                                      Mk
                                wk b
       (b) λkk = wk + 1 + ln         ,
                                Ak
                        ∞
       (c) nkk = N k ∫ dG (λh ) = N k d κ exp(−λkk κ ),
                       λ kk




                                                                                          14
                              ∞                    κ d κ e− λ (κ −1)
                                                           kk
                                                                                        κ nkk
           (d) S kk = N k ∫        shkk dG (λh ) =                   N k ( wk + 1) Ak =       ( w + 1) wk b . (16)
                            λ kk                    (κ − 1)e  w +1
                                                                k
                                                                                        κ −1 k

The fraction of movies that are made (nkk/Nk) varies with domestic market conditions,

such as national expenditure and the expenditure share on movies, adjustment

mechanisms that are absent under pure sunk costs.

           To see the importance of these mechanisms, consider domestic movie sales in

country k, Skk. Suppose the size of country k increases and the number of movies that

have their λ’s drawn, Nk, remains unchanged.20 The result will be that Skk rises. From

(3), there is a direct effect in that the revenue of each movie is higher. From (16c), there

is also an indirect effect in that the variable profit of each movie is higher, causing more

movies to be made (nkk rises). Does the number of movies made rise by more or less than

total movie sales? The indirect effect on ln(Skk) depends on the box office revenues of

the infra-marginal movies relative to the rest of country-k movies (the extra-marginal

movies), while the effect on ln(nkk) depends on the number of infra-marginal movies

relative to the number of extra-marginal movies. Because infra-marginal movies are less

popular than extra-marginal ones, they carry more weight in movie numbers than in

movie sales. As a consequence, the effect of Yk on ln(nkk) exceeds the indirect effect on

ln(Skk). Given the Pareto distribution of sales, the effect of Yk on ln(nkk) equals its total

effect on ln(Skk). This means a change in market size has no effect on the intensive

margin, Skk/nkk, and all adjustment in Skk occurs along the extensive margin. In contrast,

under pure sunk production costs, market size does not change the number of movies

made, forcing adjustment in Skk to occur along the intensive margin.

           Using (16), we can derive the average sales ratio under alternative assumptions

20
     By (16), a change in Nk has the same effects on nkk and Skk.


                                                                                                                     15
for fixed trade costs. If fixed export costs are global, the sales of country-u movies in

country k are described by equation (9) so that:

           ⎛ S /n ⎞                              A      ⎛   t    ⎞
        ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = −tuk − δ uk − wk + ln k + ln ⎜1 + uk ⎟ + Cu1
           ⎝ S kk / nkk ⎠                        wk     ⎝ wk + 1 ⎠
                                                 A
                          ≈ −tuk − δ uk − wk + ln k + Cu1 ,                  (17)
                                                 wk

where Cu1 = λu − ln b − 1 . The average sales ratio is negatively correlated with variable

trade costs, as in (10), and is now correlated with importing country expenditure, unlike

(10). Domestic movie production adjusts along the extensive margin but movie exports

adjust along the intensive margin so that importing country characteristics now have

different impacts on the sales of foreign and domestic movies. If fixed export costs are

bilateral, the sales of country-u movies in country k are described by (14) such that:

           ⎛ S /n ⎞       f       ⎛    t   ⎞     f    t
        ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = ln uk + ln ⎜1 + uk ⎟ ≈ ln uk + uk .                   (18)
           ⎝ Skk / nkk ⎠   b      ⎝ wk + 1 ⎠      b wk + 1

Equation (18) is similar to the predictions under the original setting of Melitz (2003).

The average sales ratio is positively correlated with fixed and variable trade costs, as in

(15), but uncorrelated with importing country characteristics, unlike (15). Domestic and

foreign movie sales each adjust along the extensive margin only so that importing

country expenditure has the same impact on the average sales of both movie types.

       Table 1 presents equations (10), (15), (17) and (18) in a two-by-two matrix. Each

equation gives the relationship between the average sales ratio, trade costs, and other

importing-country characteristics for one of the four models considered. Specifications

differ across the columns according to fixed export costs (global versus bilateral) and

down the rows according to sunk production costs (pure versus partial).



                                                                                         16
IIE Empirical Specifications
        We use the predictions in Table 1 for our empirical specifications. Let country u

be the US, Sukt and nukt be total box-office revenue for US films and the total number of

US films shown in country k in year t, and Skkt and nkkt be the total box office revenue and

total number of domestically produced films shown in k in year t. In Table 1, all four

models predict that the average sales ratio is correlated with trade barriers. The two

models with global fixed export costs (the left column) predict negative correlations with

variable trade barriers, while those with bilateral fixed export costs (the right column)

predict positive correlations with fixed trade costs. Let Xuk be a vector of covariates for

trade barriers between the US and country k. The first regression we estimate is, 21

            ⎛ S /n ⎞
         ln ⎜ ukt ukt ⎟ = αt + βXuk + εukt.                                                      (19)
            ⎝ S kkt / nkkt ⎠
Under global fixed export costs Xuk contains variable trade barriers (in levels), with β < 0;

under bilateral fixed export costs Xuk contains fixed trade costs (in logs) and variable

trade costs (in level ratios with wages), with β > 0.

        Many of the variables one would include in Xuk are proxies rather than direct

measures of bilateral trade barriers, such as distance, having a common language, sharing

a colonial history, etc. It is difficult to determine whether these factors are associated

with fixed or variable impediments. An advantage of the specification in (19) is that we

do not need to resolve the fixed-versus-variable-trade-barrier dilemma. Since global and

bilateral fixed export costs give opposite sign predictions for the correlation between the

average sales ratio and trade barriers, testing one against the other simply involves

21
  Recent work examines the correlation between the normalized number of firms exporting to a country
and the size of the importing country (e.g., Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz, 2004; Arkolakis, 2007). In an
Appendix, we show this correlation does not help us distinguish global versus bilateral fixed cost models.


                                                                                                        17
determining whether the elements of the parameter vector β are positive or negative.

Also, the double differencing implicit in the average sales ratio in (19) sweeps out of the

estimation market competitiveness, the consumption share of movies, and number of

movies that could be made for country k, all of which are hard to measure.

        The second specification we estimate incorporates predictions from theory for the

correlation between the average sales ratio, importing country size, and importing

country labor costs. Let Ykt be the vector of variables that measure movie expenditures

and wages in country k. We augment the specification in (19) to obtain

               Sukt / nukt
         ln(               ) = αt + βXuk + γYkt + εukt.                                            (20)
               Skkt / nkkt
When the margin of adjustment for movie exports matches that for domestic movie

production, importing country expenditure (adjusted by the wage) has symmetric impacts

on movie exports and domestic movie output. Expenditure is uncorrelated with the

average sales ratio, implying γ = 0, as occurs along the diagonal of Table 1.

Alternatively, where the margins of adjustment for movie exports and domestic movies

do not align, we have that γ ≠ 0, as occurs along the off-diagonal of Table 1.


III Data
IIIA Exports of US Motion Pictures
        We evaluate the demand for US films and domestically made films using data on

box-office revenues by country and year.22 Box-office revenues are equivalent to the

c.i.f. (customs, insurance, freight) value of motion-picture services consumed in cinemas,

22
   Individuals consume services of new movie releases through cinemas and previous movie releases
through TV and video rentals or purchases. Distributors release movies to cinemas first, then to the pay per
view, home video, cable TV, and broadcast TV markets in sequence, such that for a given film the services
do not compete contemporaneously (e.g., for the typical movie there is a 150-200 day lag between the date
of release in theatres on the US market and the date of release on the home video market) (Waterman,
2005). Unfortunately, data on film revenues by origin country from non-cinema sources are unavailable.


                                                                                                          18
plus retail markups. These revenues include import duties, transport costs, and other

trade costs incurred in delivering the service to the consumer, as well as sales taxes and

exhibition fees collected by cinemas. They are consistent with the trade-cost-inclusive

measure of sales used in the models developed in section II.

         Data on box-office revenues for 46 countries over the period 1995-2006 are

available from Screendigest.com.23 In each country, Screendigest reports the number of

films screened, total film attendance, and total box-office revenues for films imported

from the United States and films produced domestically.24 Data cover first-run theatrical

releases, which excludes older films, pornographic films, and movies shown only on TV

or through the home video market. For Europe, coverage begins in 1995, while for other

regions it begins later.25 Data are compiled from government agencies, national film

bodies, film exhibitor and distributor associations, and company spokespeople.26

         One concern about the Screendigest data is it may represent a sample of countries

selected for having large film markets. Were the company to avoid countries that import


23
   We use data from an industry source because government sources do not collect data on global film
revenues. The US government does not publish trade flows for movies. UN Comtrade lists motion-picture
trade as a commodity, Cinematographic Film Exposed or Developed (SITC 883), which is the reported
value of physical shipments of film prints across borders. Physical film shipments vastly understate film
revenues. Comtrade reports 2000 US film exports of $0.5 million to France, $0.5 million to Germany, and
$6.5 million to the U.K., while Screendigest reports 2000 box-office revenues for US films of $513 million
in France, $615 million in Germany, and $429 million in the U.K. (Hancock and Jones, 2003).
24
   Most box-office revenues are earned shortly after a film is released (De Vany and Walls, 1999),
suggesting that revenues reported in a given year match the movies released in that year. Some revenue
data are available for films imported from countries other than the US, but the countries covered vary
across destinations (e.g., while the UK is a major importer of movies from India, other countries are not).
25
   Screendigest covers a total of 56 countries (including the US). For nine countries, however, data are
available for box office revenues of US movies but not the number of US movies released.
26
   One issue is how to classify the nationality of a film. Screendigest defines the origin country for a film
by the location of the company that produces the film. For a given movie, filming may occur in multiple
locations. Titanic (1997), for instance, was shot in Canada, Mexico and the United States, with most other
production activities occurring in Los Angeles. Screendigest considers the movie to be US in origin
because the production companies, 20th Century Fox and Paramount, are US based. Despite Titanic’s
filming locations, it is clearly a US movie. The dialogue is in English, it was first released in the US
market, and its cultural themes were targeted to a US audience. The cultural discount involved in exporting
Titanic to, say, Italy would logically have the US as the reference point.


                                                                                                         19
few foreign films, our results on the extensive and intensive margins of trade would not

be globally representative.       The Screendigest data include all of Europe and North

America, and most of Asia, South America, and the more secular states in North Africa

and the Middle East (see Table A2). Missing are the Caribbean and Central America,

Central Asia, most Islamic republics, Pacific island nations, and Sub-Saharan Africa,

which are regions dominated by small developing countries. To determine whether film

imports in these economies differ from the Screendigest sample, we examined film

listings in major newspapers covering 25 markets in the missing regions.27 In these

countries, 1.4 new US movies are released on average each week, equivalent to 72 US

movies a year, a level of imports roughly comparable to those by the Baltic counties,

which are among the smaller markets in the Screendigest sample. While we do not have

information on box office revenues in these 25 countries, they are importing large

numbers of US films, suggesting the countries excluded from Screendigest are not

importing only a handful of movies.


IIIB Trade Barriers in Motion Picture Trade
        The method for testing the Melitz model that we develop in section II calls for all

relevant trade barriers to be included in the estimation.               We include measures of

geographic distance, cultural distance, levies on film imports, quantitative restrictions on

film imports, and the protection of intellectual property rights.

        For cultural trade barriers between the United States and its trading partners, we

use indicators of linguistic dissimilarity between countries. Following Fearon (2003) and


27
  These countries are Bangladesh, Cambodia, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
Ghana, Honduras, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria, Panama,
Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Senegal, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Uganda, Uruguay, and Vietnam.


                                                                                                   20
Wacziarg and Spolare (2006), we calculate linguistic distance as 1 minus the expected

value of a linguistic similarity factor between a person randomly drawn from the United

States and one randomly drawn from country k:

         LDuk = 1 −    ∑∑ l    o
                                   plu pok Glo /15 ,                                               (21)

where l indexes the ethnic groups that speak different languages in the US, o indexes

those in country k and plu and pok are the population shares of language groups l and o in

the US and country k. The linguistic similarity factor is Glo /15 , where Glo is the number

of branches of the language tree that groups l and o share and 15 is the maximum number

of branches. We make linguistic similarity concave with respect to Glo because early

divergence in the language tree (e.g., Indo-European vs. Japanese language families) is

likely to signify greater cultural difference than later divergence (e.g., Italic vs. Germanic

languages). In section IV, we compare linguistic distance to other language variables.

As another measure of culture dissimilarity, we use a related metric of religious distance.

Data on the global language tree is from Fearon (2003) and on the global religion tree is

from Fearon and Mecham (2007). For additional measures of cultural distance, we use

three indices of national values from Hofstede (2001): an individualism index (intensity

of perception that social ties between individuals are loose), a masculinity index (strength

of belief that men should have assertive roles in society), and a power distance index

(willingness to accept an unequal distribution of power).28

         One measure of policy trade barriers for the film industry is a country’s MFN


28
  These indices are based on surveys IBM conducted of its global employees in 70 countries in the 1960s
and 1970s. US values (country averages) are 91 (44) for the individualism index, 62 (51) for the male
dominance index, and 40 (59) for the power distance. Relative to other countries, US respondents tend to
be more likely to perceive social ties as being weak, to have stronger beliefs that men should have assertive
roles in society, and to be more willing to accept an unequal distribution of power.


                                                                                                          21
tariff on Cinematographic Film Exposed and Developed (HS 3706), which is the product

category that covers trade in film prints across borders, from the UN Trains dataset.

Since tariff data are unavailable in later years and reported inconsistently across countries

in earlier years, we measure tariffs as the average value over the 1990-1998 period. For

the countries in our sample, the average MFN tariff on film imports is 5.6%.

       A second source of data on trade barriers is an annual report by the Motion

Pictures Association of America (MPAA) to the US Trade Representative. The MPAA

report covers over 100 countries, listing for each the policies its members claim adversely

affect their business. Policies include tariffs and levies ( tariffs on film imports, taxes on

royalties for foreign films, levies on foreign video sales), quantitative restrictions (import

quotas on foreign films, minimum screen time for domestic films, requirements that

domestic short subjects be shown with foreign films), and other restrictions (subsidies to

domestic movie producers, requirements that foreign films be printed locally, mandates

that foreign-language movies be dubbed, restrictions on foreign investment in film or

TV). Since these measures are collected by an industry association, they may be subject

to upward bias (if the MPAA exaggerates protection) and compressed variance (if the

MPAA portrays all countries as restricting imports of US films). Given heterogeneity in

how countries define barriers, we use dummy variables to indicate whether a specific

type of barrier is in place, averaged over 1991, 1999, and 2006. Some film industry

observers suggest that by the 1990s national industry barriers were insignificant in most

countries, except China and a handful of former communist states (Waterman, 2005).

       The protection of intellectual property rights (IPRs) may also be important for

exports of motion pictures.     Movie producers complain that many countries devote




                                                                                           22
insufficient effort to preventing individuals from selling pirated DVDs of US movies

(Siwek, 2006). McCalman (2005) finds that while moderate IPR protection encourages

the spread of US movies, either very weak or very strong IPR protections decrease the

speed with which US movies are released abroad.29 The measures of IPR protection we

use are (i) the Ginarte-Park (1997) index of patent protection in 2000; (ii) the Global

Competitiveness Report measure of the strength of IPR protection, averaged over 2003

and 2004; (iii) an indicator for whether the US Trade Representative has placed a country

on the Priority Watch List for inadequate protection of intellectual property rights in a

given year (under a congressionally mandated annual review process known as Special

301); and (iv) an indicator for whether a country has entered into force the World

Copyright Treaty of the World Intellectual Property Organization.30


IIIC Preliminary Data Analysis
        For the countries in our sample, the US is by far and away the largest source for

movie imports. For 2001-2006, the years for which we have complete data for most

countries, Figure 1 shows that US movies account for over 60 percent of total box office

revenues (domestic plus foreign movie sales) in all countries except China, France, the

Philippines, and Korea. In all but six countries, the US accounts for over 40 percent of

the numbers of movies exhibited. China is clearly an outlier. Its government permits no

more than 20 foreign films to be released in the country each year. While other countries

also place limits on film imports, they tend to be much less restrictive. Between 2001

and 2006, 12 countries set minimum requirements for the amount of screen time devoted
29
   In related work, McCalman (2004) finds that while Hollywood studios are more likely to use licensing
arrangements in countries with moderate IPR protection, they tend to use more integrated governance
structures in countries with either high or low IPR protection.
30
   The WIPO Copyright Treaty (adopted in 1996) commits signatories to abide by specific definitions of
copyrighted material and to enforce property rights over this material. See http://www.wipo.int/.


                                                                                                    23
to domestic films. In only four countries are time limits in excess of 30% and even in

these cases theatres can often circumvent limits by showing domestic features in the

afternoon, on weekdays, or other times when demand is slack (Chung and Song, 2008).

An alternative strategy is to take on a passive domestic partner for the distribution of a

movie, which allows a film to qualify for domestic treatment (Waterman, 2005).

       Table 2 gives summary statistics for the key variables used in the analysis and an

Appendix Table A2 shows the mean values for the numbers of US and domestic films

exhibited and box office revenues per film for US and domestic films over 2001-2006.

During this period, 327 new domestically produced movies were shown on average in the

US each year. Consistent with the presence of fixed exports costs of some kind, the

typical country in our sample imports less than half of US movies produced annually,

with the mean number of US movies exhibited equal to 142. Most countries are clustered

around this mean, with the country at the 20th percentile (Hungary) importing 106 US

movies annually and the country at the 80th percentile (Singapore) importing 162 movies.

In contrast, box-office revenues per movie show wide variation. Mean revenues per

movie are $1.24 million (in 2007 US dollars), with the country occupying the 20th

percentile (Slovenia) at $0.10 million and the country occupying the 80th percentile

(Italy) at $2.37 million. While the ratio of the 80th to the 20th percentile for number of US

movies imported is 1.5, for box office revenues per US film it is 23.7. This suggests that

variation in US film exports occurs more at the intensive margin (revenues per film) than

the extensive margin (number of films). The wider variation in the intensive over the

extensive margin is also seen in Figure 2, which plots log revenues per US movie against

log number of US movies (each expressed as the deviation from sample means), averaged




                                                                                          24
by country over 2001-2006. The standard deviation for revenues per movie is 1.39

compared to 0.38 for the number of movies.

           As is the case with most products, the value of film imports is strongly increasing

in the importer’s GDP. Most of the variation in imports associated with market size

occurs along the intensive margin. Figures 3a and 3b plot the number of US movies

imported and box-office revenues per US movie against importing-country GDP.31 There

is a weak positive relationship between the number of US films and GDP (slope

coefficient of 0.04), and a strong positive relationship between revenues per US film and

GDP (slope coefficient of 0.90). Figures 3c and 3d show that GDP is positively correlated

with both revenues per domestic movie (slope coefficient 0.68) and number of domestic

movies exhibited (slope coefficient 0.73). Not surprisingly, larger countries produce

more movies and have higher sales per movie.

           To examine the intensive and extensive margins more formally, we follow Eaton,

Kortum and Kramarz (2004) and use the identity, Nuit × ( Ruit N uit ) ≡ ( Ruit Rit ) × Rit ,

where Ruit is box office revenues for US movies in country i at time t, Nuit is the number

of US movies shown in i at t, and Rit is aggregate box office revenues in i at t. We then

estimate the following two regressions (with robust t statistics in parentheses):

                              ln Nuit = 4.5 + .32 ln ( Ruit Rit ) + .12 ln Rit + εit
                                                (1.74 )             (12.60 )
                              ln Ruit / Nuit = −4.5 + .68 ln ( Ruit Rit ) + .88 ln Rit − εit
                                                      ( 3.67 )             ( 95.06 )
By the logic of least squares, across the two regressions the constant and error terms sum

to zero and the coefficients on each variable sum to one. The relative magnitude of the

31
     All variables are expressed relative to the mean value across countries.


                                                                                               25
coefficients indicates how aggregate shocks affect the number of movies (the extensive

margin) and revenues per movie (the intensive margin). In response to a 10% increase in

US market share in a country, revenue per US movie increases 6.8% and the number of

movies 3.2%; in response to a 10% increase in total market size in a country, revenues

per US movie increase 8.8% and the number of movies only 1.2%. This is further

evidence most adjustment in US movie exports occurs at the intensive margin.

        The theoretical results presented in Table 1 suggest a simple way to identify the

nature of fixed trade costs is to examine the sign of the correlation between trade barriers

and the average sales ratio (average revenue per US movie/average revenue per

domestically made movie).        Figures 4a and 4b plot the average sales ratio against

geographic distance to the US and linguistic dissimilarity with the US. Geographic and

linguistic distance each has a negative correlation with the average sales ratio, which is

consistent with global fixed export costs (first column of Table 1) and inconsistent with

bilateral fixed export costs (second column of Table 1).

        We do not know whether geographic and linguistic distance affect variable or

fixed trade barriers. Yet, from the predictions in Table 1, it appears distance affects

bilateral trade along the intensive margin, such that in motion pictures the relevance of

distance for trade is in how it affects variable trade barriers.


IV Estimation Results
IVA Main Results
        Table 3 presents estimation results for equation (19). The dependent variable is

the log average sales ratio (average box office revenue per US movie relative to average

box office revenue per domestic movie). The specifications include correlates of trade



                                                                                         26
barriers in levels (as consistent with column (1) of Table 1) and logs (as consistent with

column (2) of Table 1).32 Our sample consists of 46 countries for the years 1995-2006,

with data for some countries not beginning until after 2000.

         We first examine the role of linguistic distance. In columns 1 and 2, the linguistic

dissimilarity index (from equation (21)), is negative and precisely estimated (in logs or

levels), indicating that the more linguistically different a country is from the US the less it

spends per U.S movie it imports, relative to domestic movies.33 Simply by adding

linguistic distance to a regression with year dummies, the explained variation rises from

5% to 27%. The coefficient estimates imply that a country with linguistic dissimilarity

one standard deviation below the mean (Switzerland) would have sales per US movie that

are 66 log points higher than a country at one standard deviation above the mean

(Estonia). To see whether this result is driven by use of English, column 3 includes a

dummy variable that equals 1 if a country has English as its primary language.34 The

English dummy is positive and precisely estimated, meaning that English-speaking

countries spend more per US movie than non-English speaking countries. In columns 4

and 5, which include both language variables, the English dummy loses significance

while linguistic dissimilarity remains precisely estimated. It appears linguistic distance is

about more than whether two countries speak the same language, also capturing other
32
   The expressions in column (2) of Table 1 specify that the ratio of variable trade costs to wages (in levels)
be included as regressors. In unreported regressions, these ratios were jointly statistically insignificant,
with p-values on the F-statistic for the hypothesis that they are jointly different from zero always greater
than 0.5. To limit the number of tables, we do not report regressions with these interactions.
33
   Since the index is close in value to 1, its value in logs is similar to its value in levels, which accounts for
the similar coefficient estimates in columns (1) and (2). The US has two major linguistic groups, English
and Spanish. English goes down to branch-level 6 (out of 15) on the language tree and Spanish goes down
to level 10. By construction, the linguistic similarity index for the US never reaches the minimum value,
meaning we might exaggerate true linguistic distance. We tried two alternative metrics (aggregating the
language tree up to 10 or 6 levels) and in both cases obtained very similar results to those in Table 3.
34
   In unreported results, we experimented with alternative language variables (whether a country has
English as an official language, English as an open circuit language, English as a commonly spoken
language, the fraction of the population speaking English). The results were similar to those in Table 3.


                                                                                                              27
aspects of cultural dissimilarity and divergent national experience.          In subsequent

specifications, we use linguistic dissimilarity to measure linguistic distance.

       Columns 6-11 of Table 3 examine the role of geographical distance. Coefficients

on linguistic dissimilarity become smaller in magnitude with the inclusion of geographic

distance but remain highly significant. The first geographic distance variable is a dummy

that equals 1 if a country is an island (and so is likely to have a long history of trade with

culturally distinct nations); its coefficient is positive and precisely estimated in all

specifications. We then consider two sets of variables, great circle distance to the US (in

logs or in levels with a quadratic term) and the absolute values of longitudinal and

latitudinal differences with the US. For both sets of variables, the coefficients are

negative and precisely estimated, meaning countries farther away from the US spend less

per US movie. In columns 10 and 11, which include both sets of distance variables

together, great circle distance loses significance while longitude and latitude remain

precisely estimated. Distance in latitude matters about twice as much as distance in

longitude, suggesting that barriers to trade in US movies are greater in going from the

northern to southern hemisphere than in crossing the Atlantic or Pacific Oceans. In later

specifications, we use longitude and latitude to measure geographic distance.

       In accordance with Figure 4, the regression results in Table 3 show that the

average sales ratio is negatively correlated with common measures of trade barriers.

Countries more distant from the US – in terms of geography or language – have lower

sales per US movie (relative to sales of domestic movies). This suggests geographic and

linguistic distance affect trade through their impact on variable trade barriers, rather than

through their impact on fixed trade costs. These results confirm that adjustment in




                                                                                           28
motion picture trade primarily occurs along the intensive margin. With respect to Table

1, the data prefer the specifications in the first column over the second.

        Table 4 presents estimation results for equation (20). The specifications add

correlates of movie expenditures and wages in importing countries: GDP, population, and

income at the 20th percentile (to capture wages for low skilled labor hired to exhibit

movies),35 the fraction of the population living in urban areas, and the number of cinemas

in the country. Columns 7 and 8 show that none of these variables has a precisely

estimated coefficient (they are also jointly insignificant). The average sales ratio appears

to be uncorrelated with national income, labor costs, and the size of the domestic movie

market. Refering back to Table 1, the data appear to prefer the model in the upper-left

cell over the other specifications. From section II, this case is one in which the margin of

adjustment for domestic movie production matches that for movie exports. Given the

negative and significant coefficients on the trade barrier variables, the results in Table 4

imply that both domestic movie production and movie exports adjust primarily along the

intensive margin, consistent with global fixed export costs and pure sunk costs.

        In Tables 5-7, we introduce additional trade barriers into the estimation. Given

the data appear to prefer the specification in the upper left of Table 1, we include

measures of trade barriers in levels. In all specifications, geographic and linguistic

distances continue to be negative and significant (except for latitude distance in two

instances). Table 5 includes indicators of the protection of intellectual property rights.

35
   Consistent with column (2) of Table 1, we include GDP and population in logs and wages in levels
(results are similar with all variables in logs). We use Grogger and Hanson’s (2008) estimates of income at
the 20th percentile to measure low skill wages in a country, which they construct by assuming that income
has a log normal distribution. With log normality, one can use the Gini coefficient and mean income (e.g.,
GDP per capita) to back out the variance of income and then use the mean and variance of income to
estimate income at any percentile. In unreported regressions, we used wages for low skill industries from
the UNIDO industrial data base and obtained similar results. In further unreported regressions, we included
income at the 80th percentile and wages in high skill UNIDO industries, also with similar results.


                                                                                                        29
When entered individually, each of the indicators – the Ginarte-Park patent protection

index, the Global Competitiveness Report measure of the strength of IPR protection, an

indicator for whether a country is on the US Priority Watch List (for inadequate

protection of IPRs), and an indicator for whether a country has signed the World

Copyright treaty – is imprecisely estimated. When entered jointly, one measure, the

strength of IPR protection, is statistically significant at the 10% level. It is positive,

suggesting that stronger IPR protection leads to higher revenues per US film. Overall, we

find some support for the idea that IPR protection is a barrier to US movie exports,

similar to McCalman’s findings that the strength of IPRs affects how US studios

distribute movies abroad. In unreported results, we found zero correlation between the

average sales ratio and other measures of the importing country’s institutional

environment, including the strength of enforcement of commercial contracts and the

transparency of government policy (as measured by the World Economic Forum);

financial development (the share of private credit to the private sector in GDP); and

whether a country’s legal system has its origins in common law (as in the US).

       Moving on to policy barriers on movie imports, Table 6 adds tariffs on imports of

exposed film and indicators constructed from the MPAA for whether a country imposes

levies on foreign film revenues, has quantitative restrictions on movie imports, or has

other restrictions on film imports.     The variables are imprecisely estimated, either

individually or jointly. The statistical insignificance of the tariff on exposed film is

unsurprising, given that the value of physical film imports bears little relation to revenues

earned by foreign movies (see note 23). The lack of significance for the MPAA measures

of trade barriers is perhaps more surprising. It could reflect the ease with which movie




                                                                                          30
distributors and exhibitors circumvent restrictions on movie imports (e.g., taking on a

passive domestic partner to distribute a movie) or that many barriers are no more than

token attempts to prop up the domestic film industry (e.g., requirements in Argentina that

a domestic short subject be shown with each full length foreign film or in Brazil that

dubbing of foreign language films occur in the country). It could also reflect a tendency

of the MPAA to exaggerate trade barriers (to provoke USTR into action), which could

bias up measures for countries in which actual barriers are small.36

         Finally, Table 7 introduces additional measures of national culture into the

estimation in the form of the Hofstede indices. Of the three indices, masculinity is

statistically significant while individualism and power distance are not. When the three

indices are entered together, the masculinity index retains significance. It appears that

US movie sales are stronger in countries in which traditional beliefs favor men having

assertive roles in society. Action films with dominant male characters (e.g., Dirty Harry,

James Bond, Rambo, The Terminator, Gladiator) have long been a staple of US movie

studios, consistent with this finding. The introduction of the cultural measures has no

affect on the results for geographic or linguistic distance.


IVB Alternative Distributional Assumptions
         In deriving Table 1, we followed the literature by having the distribution of movie

sales be Pareto. Specifically, by (3), the distribution of domestic movie sales, shkk, is

Pareto with the pdf κ aκ / sκ +1 for s ∈ [a, ∞), where a = d(wk+1)exp(-wk-1)Ak is common

across movies. This assumption is not innocuous. In an Appendix, we derive the average

36
  We constructed the three MPAA indicator variables from a larger number of indicators for whether a
country has specific types of trade barriers (see the descriptions in section III). In unreported results, we
entered these indicators into the regression individually. None was significant, except for an indicator of
having a highly restrictive quota, which applied only to China.


                                                                                                         31
sales ratio for our four models, without specifying a distribution for λ. Reassuringly,

under global fixed export costs and pure sunk costs – the case supported by the data – the

relationship between the average sales ratio and trade costs is the same as in column 1 of

Table 1. Under bilateral fixed export costs, however, the results depend on the Pareto

assumption. Without it, variable trade costs may not drop out of the average sales ratio.

Fixed and variable trade barriers may work against each other, making the correlation

between trade barriers and the average sales ratio ambiguous.

        To see if the data support the Pareto assumption, Figure 5 plots log box office

revenues against log rank for movies exhibited on the U.S. market for even years in our

sample period.37 Across all movies, the rank-size relationship is nonlinear, meaning the

Pareto assumption is violated. Yet, it appears the rank-size relationship is linear for the

upper and lower tails of the distribution, as in De Vany and Walls (1997, 2004). In an

Appendix, we show that we can approximate the empirical rank-size relationship with a

spline function,38 as would be consistent with a two-segment Pareto distribution, with one

segment applying to the upper tail and one applying to the lower tail. With a two-

segment Pareto, the rank-size relation has two linear segments joined at a kink.

        With a two-segment Pareto distribution for movie sales, the distribution of movie

types, λ, is a two-segment exponential, the pdf of which is illustrated in Figure 6. The

shape parameters for the upper segment (more popular movies) and lower segment (less

popular movies) are κ1 and κ2, with κ1 > κ2. The kink point is λT. The pdf for λ is given

by g2(λ) = κ 2 d κ 2 /(eλκ 2 PA ) for λ ∈ [ln(d), λT] and g1(λ) = κ1d κ1 /(eλκ1 PA ) for λ ∈ [λT, +∞),

37
   Data on US movie revenues are from AC Nielsen. We lack box office revenues for individual movies in
foreign countries and so can only examine the distribution of movie revenues for the US domestic market.
38
   For each year from 1997 to 2006, the R2 in the spline function regressions is 0.99 or higher. While some
nonlinearity remains even with a spline, the additional explanatory power from accounting for this
nonlinearity is minimal, as the spline alone explains over 99% of the variance in log revenues.


                                                                                                        32
where PA = 1+ (d / eλT )κ1 − (d / eλT )κ 2 .39              When κ1 = κ2 the two-segment exponential

reduces to the one-segment exponential considered in section II.

            In an Appendix, we show for a two-segment exponential distribution for λ, that if

            λT < λ kk and λT < λ uk ,                                                                            (C1)

then the predictions in Table 1 hold. The unambiguous results in Table 1 obtain when

both the export threshold, λ uk , and the domestic production threshold, λ kk , are above the

kink point, λT. This is because our analyses of exports and domestic production only

concern the movies with type parameters above the thresholds λ uk and λ kk . If the kink

point is below these two values, the analysis in section II goes through. Thus, if (C1)

holds, Table 1 is a valid basis for estimation.

            However, if (C1) does not hold, the predictions for the average sales ratio differ

from Table 1 in all cases except global fixed export costs/pure sunk costs. To see this,

suppose λT > λ kk and λT > λ uk . We can derive the average sales ratio by taking a second-

order Taylor expansion around λ uk = λ kk = λT, as shown in an Appendix. Under bilateral

fixed export costs and partial sunk costs, the approximation for the average sales ratio is

               ⎛ S /n        ⎞      fuk   t
            ln ⎜ uk uk       ⎟ ≈ ln     + uk + C (λuk − λT ) 2 − C (λkk − λT ) 2                                 (22)
               ⎝ Skk / nkk   ⎠       b wk + 1

where C = (κ1-κ2). Comparing (22) with (18), we see that under the one-segment

exponential distribution, the second order terms of the Taylor expansion collapse to 0 and

only the first order terms remain. Similarly, if λ uk and λ kk are close the kink, λT, the


                                                  λT   κ1         λT   κ2                     κ2      λκ 2
39
     Since the two segments cross at λT, κ 1 ( d / e ) = κ 2 ( d / e ) . The cdf of λ is (1 − d / e          ) / PA for λ ≤
                  κ1   λκ1
λT and ( PA − d / e ) / PA for λ > λT. The cdf is continuous at λT and it converges to 1 as λ →∞.


                                                                                                                        33
second order terms will be close to zero. Regarding the other cases, under bilateral fixed

export costs and pure sunk costs, the approximation for the average sales ratio is,

            ⎛ S /n ⎞       f    t
         ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ ≈ ln uk + uk + C (λuk − λT ) 2 ,                                                (23)
            ⎝ S kk / nkk ⎠  b wk + 1

and under global fixed export costs and partial sunk costs it is,

            ⎛ S /n ⎞       f    t
         ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ ≈ ln uk + uk − C (λkk − λT ) 2 .                                                (24)
            ⎝ Skk / nkk ⎠   b wk + 1

To test whether (C1) holds, we estimate the average sales ratio augmented by the second

order terms in (22)-(24) and see whether the terms enter significantly. Under the null that

(C1) is satisfied (or that there are global fixed export costs and pure sunk costs), the

second order terms have zero correlation with the average sales ratio.

         To derive the estimating equations for a two-segment Pareto distribution, let suk be

the US box office revenue of the export cut-off movie with λ uk and let sT be the US box

office revenue of the movie with λT at the kink of the two-segment exponential

distribution. By equation (2), ln(suk/ sT) = λ uk - λT. And by equations (13) and (16b),

λ kk - λT = wk + lnwk - lnAk’, where Ak’ = Ak eλ               T   −1
                                                                        / b , which based on equation (20)

implies we can use second-order terms of Ykt to control for ( λ kk - λT)2. Equation (22)

(which nests equations (23) and (24)) can thus be approximated as,

                                                                         2
            ⎛ S /n ⎞                                  ⎛ s ukt ⎞
                                                              ⎟ + γ 3 (Ykt ) + ε ukt .
                                                                            2
         ln ⎜ ukt ukt ⎟ = α t + β X uk + γ 1Ykt + γ 2 ⎜ ln                             40
                                                                                                      (25)
            ⎝ S kkt / nkkt ⎠                          ⎝ sTt ⎠



40
  sT,t is US box office revenue in year t for the kink point of the spine log-rank-log-size relationship that we
estimate using data on US movies (as shown in an Appendix). sukt is US box office revenue in year t of the
movie with rank nukt (where we implicitly assume that exported movies are more popular than those not
exported, and that the movies popular in the US are also popular in country k).


                                                                                                             34
Under the one-segment Pareto distribution (or under global fixed costs/pure sunk costs),

γ2 = γ3 = 0, while under the two-segment Pareto (for the three cases other than global

fixed costs/pure sunk costs) γ2 ≠ 0 and γ3 ≠ 0.

       Table 8 shows regression results for (25). In all specifications, the interaction

terms are individually and jointly insignificant, suggesting the predictions in Table 1 are a

valid basis for estimation. These results support the conclusions from section IVA that

the data favor a model with global fixed export costs and pure sunk costs.



V Discussion
       Fixed export costs figure prominently in recent theoretical trade models. While

current empirical research using manufacturing data suggests that these costs exist, it has

little to say about their nature. In services, which are undergoing rapid growth in trade,

we know little about the impediments to global commerce.

       We develop a simple empirical method to test two alternative versions of the

Melitz (2003) model, one in which fixed export costs are bilateral and another in which

they are global. To apply the Melitz model to trade in motion pictures, we extend it to a

discrete choice setting and relax standard distributional assumptions. Data on US film

exports reject the bilateral fixed export cost model in favor of the model with global fixed

export costs. Trade in movies adjusts primarily along the intensive margin. Even small

countries important large numbers of US films, leaving only modest variation in the

extensive margin of trade. Along the intensive margin, average revenues per US film

vary widely across countries and are negatively correlated with geographic distance,

linguistic distance, and other measures of trade barriers. The specification of the Melitz

model preferred by the data turns out to be quite similar to that for the standard


                                                                                          35
monopolistic-competition model. While the standard model fails to account for why no

country imports the full set of movies the US produces, it characterizes the revenues

earned by movies that are exported reasonably well.

       Our results depart sharply from the findings in the literature for manufacturing, in

which adjustment in trade occurs primarily at the extensive margin. One explanation for

the difference in results between sectors is that fixed trade barriers for information

services (at least as characterized by motion pictures) are dissimilar to those for

manufacturing.    For information services, products are delivered through devices

consumers already own (TVs, radios, computers, video game consoles, cell phones) or an

existing global infrastructure that can be shared by producers (theatre complexes,

telephone lines, satellite networks, the worldwide web), with individual products

requiring little in the way of post-sale service. Fixed barriers to trading information

services include developing a marketing strategy to attract consumers and negotiating

contracts over the delivery of intellectual property. Once a marketing strategy and

standard contract have been developed for one market, they may be easy to replicate in

other markets, making the fixed costs of delivering information services primarily global

in nature. If fixed trade costs are global, it turns out that much of our understanding from

standard models about how trade adjusts to trade barriers carries over.




                                                                                         36
References
Anderson, Simon P., Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse, 1992, Discrete
    Choice Theory of Product Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Anderson, James E. and van Wincoop, Eric. 2004. “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 42(3): 691-751.
Antràs, Pol, and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy,
    112 (2004), 552-580.
Arkolakis, Costas. 2007. “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in
    International Trade.” Mimeo, Yale University.
Baldwin, Richard E., and James Harrigan. 2007. “Zeroes, Quality, and Space: Trade
    Theory and Trade Evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 11471.
Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum. 2003. “Plants
    and Productivity in International Trade.” American Economic Review 93: 1268-90.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 1999. “Exceptional Exporter Performance:
    Cause, Effect, or Both.” Journal of International Economics 47: 1-25.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2004. Why Some Firms Export.” Review
    of Economics and Statistics 86: 561-569.
Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2006. “Multiproduct Firms
    and Trade Liberalization.” Mimeo, Yale University.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen Redding, and Peter K. Schott. 2007.
    “Firms in International Trade.” NBER Working Paper No. 13054.
Chaney, Thomas. 2006. “Distorted Gravity: Heterogeneous Firms, Market Structure
    and the Geography of International Trade,” mimeo, University of Chicago.
Chung, Chul, and Minjae Song. 2008. “Preference for Cultural Goods: Demand and
    Welfare in the Korean Film Market.” Mimeo, KIEP.
De Vany, Arthur. 2004. Hollywood Economics. London: Routledge.
De Vany, Arthur and David W. Walls, 1997. “The Market for Motion Pictures: Rank,
    Revenue, and Survival”. Economic Inquiry. October 1997, 35(4): 783-97.
De Vany, Arthur, and W. David Walls. 2004. “Motion Picture Profit, the Stable Paretian
    Hypothesis, and the Curse of the Superstar,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and
    Control, 28(6): 1035-57.
Eaton, Jonathan, Samuel Kortum, and Francis Kramarz. 2004. “Dissecting Trade:
    Firms, Industries, and Export Destinations,” NBER Working Paper No. 10344.
Elberse, Anita and Jehoshua Eliashberg, 2003. “Demand and Supply Dynamics for
    Sequentially Released Products in International Markets: The Case of Motion
    Pictures”. Marketing Science. Summer 2003, 22(3): 329-54.
Fearon, James D. 2003. “Ethnic and Cultural Diversity by Country,” Journal of
    Economic Growth, 8(2): 195-222.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2004, Advanced International Trade, Theory and Evidence,
    Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Gil, Ricard, and Francine LaFontaine. 2007. “The Role of Revenue Sharing in Movie
    Exhibition Contracts.” Mimeo, UC Santa Cruz.
Ginarte, Juan C. and Walter G. Park. 1997. “Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-
    National Study.” Research Policy 26: 283-301.
Girma, Sourafel, Holger Gorg, and Eric Strobl. 2004. “Exports, International
    Investment, and Plant Performance: Evidence from a Non-Parametric Test,”


                                                                                   37
   Economics Letters 83: 317-324.
Girma, Sourafel, Richard Kneller, and Mauro Pisu. 2005. “Exports versus FDI: An
   Empirical Test,” Review of World Economics 141: 193-218.
Grogger, Jeffery, and Gordon Hanson. 2008. “Income Maximization and the Selection
   and Sorting of International Migrants.” NBER Working Paper No. 13821.
Hancock, David, and Charlotte Jones, 2003. Cinema Distribution and Exhibition in
   Europe, 2nd Edition. London: Screendigest.
Hanson, Gordon H., and Chong Xiang. 2008. “International Trade in Motion Picture
   Services.” In Marshall Reinsdorf and Matthew Slaughter, eds., International Flows of
   Invisibles: Trade in Services and Intangibles in the Era of Globalization, Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.
Harrigan, James. 2005. “Airplanes and Comparative Advantage.” NBER Working
   Paper No. 11688.
Helpman, Elhanan and Krugman, Paul. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein. 2007. “Estimating Trade
   Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes,” NBER Working Paper No. 12927.
Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2004. “Export versus FDI
   with Heterogeneous Firms,” American Economic Review 94: 300-316.
Hofstede, Geert. 2001. Culture's Consequences, Comparing Values, Behaviors,
   Institutions, and Organizations Across Nations. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage.
Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
   Trade," American Economic Review 70: 950-959.
Marvasti, Akbar, and E. Ray Canterbery. 2005. “Cultural and Other Barriers to Motion
   Pictures Trade,” Economic Inquiry 43(1): 39-54.
Motion Picture Association. 2003. “US Entertainment Industry: 2003 Market
   Statistics.” Mimeo, MPA.
McCalman, Philip. 2004. “Foreign Direct Investment and Intellectual Property Rights:
   Evidence from Hollywood's Global Distribution of Movies and Videos,” Journal of
   International Economics, 62(1): 107-23.
McCalman, Phillip, 2005. “International Diffusion and Intellectual Property Rights: An
   Empirical Analysis”. Journal of International Economics.
Motion Picture Association of America. 2002. “Trade Barriers to Exports of US Filmed
   Entertainment.” Report to the US Trade Representative.
Melitz, Jacques. 2002. “Language and Foreign Trade.” CEPR Discussion Paper No.
   3590.
Melitz, Marc J. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-industry Reallocations and
   Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6): 1695-1725.
Melitz, Marc J. and Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano. 2005. “Market Size, Trade, and
   Productivity,” NBER Working Paper No. 11393.
Rauch, James E., and Trindade, Vitor. 2006. “Neckties in the Tropics: A Model of
   International Trade and Cultural Diversity”. Mimeo, UCSD.
Siwek, Stephen E. 2006. “Copyright Industries in the US Economy: The 2006 Report,”
   Economists Incorporated for the International Intellectual Property Alliance.
Waterman, David. 2005. Hollywood’s Road to Riches. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.



                                                                                    38
                                                 Appendix
(A1) Predictions under CES Preferences
Suppose the sub-utility for movies for the representative consumer in country k is uk =
{∑ j θ kj ckj (σ −1) / σ + ∑ u ≠ k ∑ j θuj [δ uk
                                              '
                                                 cuj ](σ −1) / σ }σ /(σ −1) , where θ represents the popularity of
movie j and is drawn from the Pareto distribution whose cdf is 1 – a0ς/θς, with a0, ς > 0
and θ ∈ [a0, +∞ ). θkj = θj for all k. Movies are subject to ad valorem policy trade
barriers, specified as tuk’ > 1. Other elements of the model are the same as in section II.

CES preferences imply that the total sales of a country-u movie in country k are
s juk = θ σj −1δ uk'σ −1tuk'1−σ p1juk Ak , for Ak' ≡ α Yk / Pk1−σ , where j indexes the movie, pjuk is the price
                                   −σ '


of movie j net of policy trade barriers and Pk is the CES price index in country k. The
total sales of domestically produced movie h in country k equal shkk = θ hσ −1 p1hkk
                                                                                  −σ '
                                                                                     Ak . Price
is a constant markup over marginal cost, wk.

The intermediate steps for deriving the numbers and total sales of domestic and foreign
movies are similar to section II and they are available upon request. Under pure sunk
costs/global fixed export costs,
                                                                          (σ − 1)σ −1
                                                                σ −1
           ⎛ Suk / nuk ⎞                '
                                       tuk                Bσςθ u
        ln ⎜            ⎟ = (1 − σ ) ln ' + ln Cu , Cu =             , B=             , (X1)
           ⎝ S kk / nkk ⎠              δ uk              ς − (σ − 1)         σσ

                                                                                         (              )
                                                                                                         1/(σ −1)
where       θu       is     the      cut-off      for      exports       and       θu = fG wu / BQu'                ,
               'σ −1 '1−σ ' 1−σ
Qu' = ∑ k ≠u δ uk   tuk Ak wk . Under pure sunk costs/bilateral fixed export costs,
           ⎛ S /n ⎞                 wσ
        ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = ln fuk + ln k' + C3 ,           C3 = constant.             (X2)
           ⎝ Skk / nkk ⎠             Ak
Under partial sunk costs/global fixed export costs,
           ⎛ S /n ⎞                t'      A'                     ⎡B          ⎤
        ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = (1 − σ ) ln uk' + ln σk + Cu1 ,   Cu1 = ln ⎢ (θu )σ −1 ⎥ . (X3)
           ⎝ Skk / nkk ⎠          δ uk     wk                     ⎣b          ⎦
Under partial sunk costs/bilateral fixed export costs,
           ⎛ S /n ⎞        f
        ln ⎜ uk uk ⎟ = ln uk .                                                    (X4)
           ⎝ S kk / nkk ⎠   b
Equation (X1) is similar to the prediction of the standard monopolistic competition
model, with no firm heterogeneity or fixed export costs. Equation (X4) is the prediction
of the original setting of Melitz (2003). Results under alternative distributional
assumptions for θ can be derived using steps that are similar to section IVB and are
available upon request.

(A2) Derivation of Nk with Pure Sunk Cost and Global Fixed Export Cost
Suppose there is only one sector, movies. There are m + 1 countries identical in size and
wage, all with one sector, movies. Variable trade costs are symmetric for every country
pair; i.e. tuk = t and δuk = δ for all u, k. By symmetry,


                                                                                                              39
        wk = w, Ak = A for all k,                                                      (X5)
where Ak is defined in equation (2). In a country k, after firm h draws its types, it makes
profits πhkk = shkk / phkk if the movie is not exported, where shkk is by equation (3). Movie
h makes additional variable profits πhkl = shkl /( phkl + tkl ) in every export market l if it is
exported, where shkl is by equation (2). By symmetry, the expression for the export cutoff
θu, equation (8), becomes
                 wf
        λu = ln( G ) + ( w + 1 + t + δ ) .                                             (X6)
                 mA
                                                                                         λu
The expected profit of a movie net of entry cost, prior to entry, is π = ∫ π hkk dG (λh ) +
                                                                                        ln d
  ∞
∫λ [π
  u
        hkk   + (mπ hkl − wk f G )]dG (λh ) . As entry and exit drive expected profits to zero,
π = wkfE. Plugging in the expressions for πhkk, πhkl and λu:
        κ d − ( w+1)
             e       A(1 + md κ −1e− λ (κ −1) −t −δ ) = fE + fGpx, px = 1 − G (λu ) ,
                                        u
                                                                                                  (X7)
       κ −1
where px is the (ex ante) probability that movie h is exported and px is a function of λu
                                                                                          λu
and A. The expected revenue of a movie, prior to entry, is r = ∫ shkk dG (λh ) +
                                                                                          ln d
  ∞                                                      ∞
∫λ [s
  u
        hkk   + mshkl ]dG (λh ) = (w+1)( π +wfGpx)+ t ∫ π hkl dG (λh ) . The total sale of movies is
                                                         λu

Skk = Nk r . Since expected profits are 0, total revenue equals total payments to labor; i.e.
Skk = wkLk. Therefore,
                                 κ d κ tA − λu (κ −1) −(t +δ + w+1)
       Nk(w+1)(fE +fGpx) + N k            e                         = Lk.           (X8)
                                w(κ − 1)
Equations (X5)-(X7) determine the values of λu, w, A and px as we can choose A as the
numeraire. Equation (X8) then determines the value of Nk.

(A3) Correlation between (Normalized) Number of Exports and Importer Size
Let µuk denote the market share of country-u movies in country k; i.e. µuk = Suk/Yk, where
Yk is the size of country k. Then nuk/µuk = Yk /( Suk / nuk ) . For the global fixed export cost
                                              M k e wk +1+tuk +δuk (κ − 1)
                                            nuk
(FEC) model, by equation (9b),                    =                        , where Mk is defined in
                                       µuk     ( wk + 1 + tuk )ακ eλu
equation (2). Mk tends to increase as more movies are shown in country k. In general
equilibrium, the number of movies shown in country k is likely to increase with Yk and
so nuk/µuk is likely to be positively correlated with Yk. However, it is difficult to derive the
exact correlation between nuk/µuk and Yk without solving the full general equilibrium
                                                                     n              Yk (κ − 1)
model. For the bilateral FEC model, by equation (14b), uk =                                            , and
                                                                     µuk     κ ( wk + 1 + tuk ) wk fuk
so nuk/µuk is also positively correlated with Yk.

(A4) Average Sales Ratio with No Distributional Assumptions
We summarize the results in Table A1. Below we derive the average sales ratio for the
model with bilateral FEC and partial sunk costs, as well as its derivative with respect to


                                                                                                         40
fixed trade costs. The proofs for the rest of the results in Table A1 are similar and
available on request. By equation (14), the number of movie exports is nuk =
      ∞                                                                                     ∞      λ
N u ∫ dG (λ j ) and the total sales are Suk = N u ( wk + 1 + tuk )e− ( wk +1+tuk +δuk ) Ak ∫ e j dG (λ j ) .
     λ uk                                                                                   λ uk
                                     ∞                                               ∞
By equation (16), nkk = N k ∫ dG (λh ) and Skk = N k ( wk + 1) Ak e− ( wk +1) ∫ eλh dG (λh ) . Thus
                                     λ kk                                           λ kk


    Suk / nuk             tuk wk      ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλ j dG (λ j ) ⎞       ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλ j dG (λ j ) ⎞
                                         λ uk                         λ
ln(           ) = −δ uk −        + ln ⎜                    ⎟  − ln ⎜ kk∞                ⎟ , where we have
                                            ∞
    Skk / nkk             1 + wk      ⎜ ∫λ dG (λ j ) ⎟             ⎜ ∫λ dG (λ j ) ⎟
                                      ⎝ uk                 ⎠       ⎝ kk                 ⎠
                                                            t
used the approximation ln(1 + tuk /(1 + wk )) = uk . Let g(.) denote the pdf of the
                                                         1 + wk
                                    Suk / nuk                                 ⎛ ∂λ      ⎞
distribution of λ. Then ∂ ln(                 ) /∂fuk = [Mr( λuk )-Mn( λuk )] ⎜ − uk    ⎟ , where Mr( λuk )
                                    Skk / nkk                                 ⎝ ∂f uk   ⎠
     exp(λuk ) g (λuk )
=    ∞
                              is the share of the marginal movie ( λuk ) in total revenues Suk, and
    ∫λuk exp(λ j )dG (λ j )
                  g (λ uk )
Mn( λuk ) =      ∞
                             is the share of λuk in the number of movies nuk. The marginal
             ∫λ uk dG (λ j )
movie carries more weight in numbers than in revenues (see also section II.C.) and so
                                                                              ⎛ ∂λ ⎞
Mr( λuk ) - Mn( λuk ) < 0 (the rigorous proof is available on request). Since ⎜ − uk ⎟ < 0 by
                                                                              ⎝ ∂fuk ⎠
                                     S /n
equation (13), we have that ∂ ln( uk uk ) /∂fuk > 0.
                                     Skk / nkk

(A5) Estimating the Log Rank-Size Relation for US Movies
Let sj denote the US box office revenue of movie j and rj denote its rank. By equation (3)
sj = exp(λj)D0 where D0 = (wu+1)exp(-wu-1)Au is common across movies. Since the
distribution of λ is a two-segment exponential as specified in section IVB, the distribution
of s is the following two-segment Pareto. The cdf is Gs(s) = [1 −(a / s )κ 2 ]/PA’ for s ∈ [a,
sT] and Gs(s) = [PA’ −(a / s )κ1 ]/PA’ for s ∈ [sT, ∞], where a = D0d, sT = exp(λT)D0, κ1 > κ2,
PA’ = 1+ (a / sT )κ1 − (a / sT )κ 2 and κ1 (a / sT )κ1 = κ 2 (a / sT )κ 2 . For a movie with sj ≥ sT, P(US
box office revenue ≥ sj) = 1 – Gs(sj) = (a / s j )κ1 /PA’. In a sample of size n there are
exactly rj movies with US box office revenues ≥ sj and so empirically, P(US box office
revenue ≥ sj) = rj/n. Thus rj/n = (a / s j )κ1 /PA. Taking logs and re-arranging we get lnsj =
αs1 – βs1 lnrj, where αs1 is a constant and βs1 = 1/ κ1. This is the first segment of the spline
function. Analogously, for movies with sj < sT we get rj/n = (1 – 1/PA’)+ (a / s j ) κ 2 /PA’.
When (1 – 1/PA’) is small relative to rj/n, this expression can be approximated as lnsj =
αs2 – βs2 lnrj, where αs2 is a constant and βs2 = 1/ κ2. This is the second segment of the
spline function. Let rT denote the rank of the movie whose US box office revenue is sT.
Let IT be the indicator variable that equals 1 if lnrj > lnrT and 0 otherwise. Then the spline


                                                                                                        41
function is lnsj = αs1 – βs1 lnrj – (βs2 – βs1)IT( lnrj – lnrT). Estimating this function using
data on box office revenues for US movies we get (t-statistics in parentheses):

             year         αs1        – βs1 – (βs2 – βs1)        N         R2         lnrT
             1995       21.124      -0.947    -7.658           308      0.957       5.220
                        (88.63)    (-17.90) (-25.78)
             1996       20.794      -0.827    -5.412           318      0.955       5.011
                       (145.13)    (-23.83) (-24.70)
             1997       20.647      -0.758     -4.47           324      0.991       4.852
                        (13.00)    (-20.77) (-55.96)
             1998        20.99      -0.854    -3.891           324      0.992       4.860
                       (126.67)    (-22.32) (-52.04)
             1999       20.937      -0.833    -3.985           324      0.993       4.875
                       (145.37)    (-24.99) (-58.88)
             2000       20.438      -0.684    -3.397           310      0.994       4.727
                       (135.79)    (-18.92) (-50.45)
             2001       20.649      -0.734    -3.593           291      0.993       4.710
                       (126.26)    (-18.68) (-49.22)
             2002       20.884      -0.786    -3.944           318      0.994       4.875
                       (136.37)    (-22.13) (-56.21)
             2003       20.531      -0.681    -3.687           321      0.995       4.745
                       (167.70)    (-23.26) (-68.73)
             2004       20.782      -0.777    -3.723           350      0.995       4.844
                       (166.67)    (-26.48) (-64.94)
             2005       20.537      -0.724    -3.964           354      0.997       4.836
                       (162.95)    (-24.72) (-76.77)

(A6) Derivation of Condition 1 (C1)
If λT < λ kk , the movies above λ kk follow a one-segment exponential distribution, and so
 ∞                                    ∞           λ               κ d κ e − λ (κ −1)
                                                                          kk

∫λ kk dG (λkj ) = d exp(−λkk κ ) and ∫λ kk e dG (λkj ) =
                   κ                        uj
                                                                                     . This means that
                                                                       κ −1
   ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λkj ) ⎞       κ eλ kk           κ wk
      λ kk
ln ⎜                    ⎟ = ln[         ] = ln[            ] + wk + 1 + ln b , where the last equality is
          ∞
   ⎜ ∫λ dG (λkj ) ⎟             κ −1            (κ − 1) Ak
   ⎝       kk           ⎠
                                               ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λuj ) ⎞
                                                                    ⎟ = ln[ κ e ] = ln[ κ wk ]
                                                                               λ uk
                                                  λ
by equation (16b). Likewise, if λT < λ uk , ln ⎜ uk∞
                                               ⎜ ∫λ dG (λuj ) ⎟             κ −1       (κ − 1) Ak
                                               ⎝     uk             ⎠
+ wk + 1 + tuk + δuk + lnfuk, where the last equality is by equation (13). Plug these
expressions into Table A1 and we can show that the expressions for the average sales
ratio are the same as in Table 1.


                                                                                                      42
(A7) Average Sales Ratio for a Two-Segment Pareto Distribution
Below, we treat λ uk and λ kk as two independent variables (i.e. ∂ λ uk /∂ λ kk = 0). We have
also considered expressing λ uk as a function of λ kk and trade costs using equations (13)
and (16b). This alternative approach produces the same results.
                     Suk / nuk              tuk wk                                         ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λuj ) ⎞
                                                                                              λ
By Table A1, ln(               ) = −δ uk −          +h( λ uk , λ kk ), where h(.) = ln ⎜ uk∞                    ⎟
                     Skk / nkk             1 + wk                                          ⎜ ∫λ dG (λuj ) ⎟
                                                                                           ⎝      uk            ⎠
        ∞     λ
     ⎛ ∫ e dG (λkj ) ⎞
               kj
        λ
− ln ⎜ kk∞               ⎟ . The Taylor expansion around λ uk = λ kk = λT is
     ⎜ ∫λ dG (λkj ) ⎟
     ⎝     kk            ⎠
                  t w                         ∂h                       ∂h                      ∂ 2h
          −δ uk − uk k + h(λT, λT) +                ( λ uk - λT) +           ( λ kk -λT) +             ( λ uk -
                  1 + wk                   ∂ (λuk )                 ∂ (λkk )                ∂ (λuk ) 2
                     ∂ 2h                          ∂2h
         λT)2 +              ( λ    -λ T) 2
                                            +                  ( λ uk -λT) ( λ kk -λT),                          (X9)
                  ∂ (λkk ) 2                  ∂ (λuk )∂ (λkk )
                                 kk




where all the first and second order derivatives are evaluated at the point of expansion.
       (P1) h(λT, λT) = 0.
                                                                   −1                                                    −1
                              ⎡ κ −κ                   ⎤   ⎡ 1          1      1                         ⎤
         (P2) ∂h/∂ λ uk = κ 2 ⎢1 − 1 2 e( λuk −λT )κ 2 ⎥ − ⎢        −(      −      )e( λuk −λT )(κ 2 −1) ⎥ .
                              ⎣     κ1                 ⎦   ⎣ κ 2 − 1 κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1                      ⎦
∂h/∂ λ uk = 1 when λ uk = λ kk = λT.
                                                                   −1                                                    −1
                            ⎡ κ −κ                   ⎤   ⎡ 1          1      1                         ⎤
       (P3)∂h/∂ λ kk = −κ 2 ⎢1 − 1 2 e( λkk −λT )κ 2 ⎥ + ⎢        −(      −      )e( λkk −λT )(κ 2 −1) ⎥
                            ⎣     κ1                 ⎦   ⎣ κ 2 − 1 κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1                      ⎦
which equals -1 when λ uk = λ kk = λT .
                                                                               ∂ 2h
         (P4) By (P2), ∂h/∂ λ uk does not depend on λ kk ; so                             = 0.
                                                                         ∂ (λuk )∂ (λkk )
                                      κ                                     1        1
                             κ 22 (1 − 2 )e( λuk −λT )κ 2     (κ 2 − 1)(         −        )e( λuk −λT )(κ 2 −1)
                 ∂h
                  2
                                      κ1                                 κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1
         (P5)            =                                −
              ∂ (λuk ) 2
                                      κ                         1           1        1
                           [1 − (1 − 2 )e( λuk −λT )κ 2 ]2 [         −(          −        )e( λuk −λT )(κ 2 −1) ]2
                                      κ1                     κ 2 − 1 κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1
                                            ∂ 2h
by (P2). When λ uk = λ kk = λT                      = C = κ1 - κ2.
                                         ∂ (λuk ) 2
                                     κ 2 (λ            − λT )κ 2                1      1
                                 κ 22 (1 −
                                        )e        kk
                                                                        (κ 2 − 1)(  −      )e( λkk −λT )(κ 2 −1)
                 ∂ h2
                                     κ1                                      κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1
         (P6)            =−                                      +                                                   ,
              ∂ (λkk ) 2             κ                                1         1      1
                            [1 − (1 − 2 )e( λ     kk − λT )κ 2 2
                                                              ] [         −(        −      )e ( λkk − λT )(κ 2 −1) 2
                                                                                                                  ]
                                     κ1                            κ 2 − 1 κ 2 − 1 κ1 − 1
which equals - C when λ uk = λ kk = λT.
       (P7) Plugging (P1)-(P6) into equation (X9) and we get equation (24).


                                                                                                                         43
                     Table A1: Predictions for Average Sales Ratio without Specifying the Distribution of λ

                                 Global Fixed Export Costs                                              Bilateral Fixed Export Costs
                              Suk / nuk                                                            Suk / nuk             tuk wk      ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λuj ) ⎞
                                                                                                                                        λ
Pure Sunk Costs         ln(             ) = −δ uk − tuk + ln C x1                              ln(           ) = −δ uk −        + ln ⎜ uk∞                ⎟
                              Skk / nkk                                                            Skk / nkk             1 + wk      ⎜ ∫λ dG (λuj ) ⎟
                                                                                                                                     ⎝     uk             ⎠
                                                   ∞       λ

(before λ draw)                  Cx1 =
                                                 ∫λ   u
                                                          e uj dG (λuj )
                                                                                                                 + lnCx3, Cx 3 =
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                           ∞                    ∞          λ                                                            ∞    λ
                                         [ ∫ dG (λuj )][ ∫ e uj dG (λuj )]                                                          ∫       e uj dG (λuj )
                                           λu                   ln d                                                                 ln d

                      ∂fuk = 0, ∂δuk < 0, ∂tuk < 0, ∂Ak = 0, ∂wk ≈ 0.                                  ∂fuk > 0, ∂δuk ??, ∂tuk ??, ∂Ak < 0, ∂wk > 0.




                            Suk / nuk                ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λkj ) ⎞                        Suk / nuk                ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλuj dG (λuj ) ⎞
                                                        λ                                                                      λ
Partial Sunk Costs      ln(           ) = −δ uk − ln ⎜ kk∞                ⎟                    ln(           ) = −δ uk + ln ⎜ uk∞                ⎟
                            Skk / nkk                ⎜ ∫λ dG (λkj ) ⎟                              Skk / nkk                ⎜ ∫λ dG (λuj ) ⎟
                                                     ⎝     kk             ⎠                                                 ⎝     uk             ⎠
                                                                    ∞          λuj

(after λ draw)                     −tuk +ln Cx 2 , Cx 2        =
                                                                 ∫λ e dG(λ )
                                                                       u
                                                                                          uj
                                                                                               −
                                                                                                 tuk wk       ⎛ ∫ ∞ eλkj dG (λkj ) ⎞
                                                                                                                 λ
                                                                                                         − ln ⎜ kk∞                ⎟
                                                                           ∞
                                                                                                 1 + wk       ⎜ ∫λ dG (λkj ) ⎟
                                                                   ∫λ dG (λ )
                                                                           u
                                                                                     uj                       ⎝     kk             ⎠
                      ∂fuk = 0, ∂δuk < 0, ∂tuk < 0, ∂Ak > 0, ∂wk < 0.                                   ∂fuk > 0, ∂δuk ??, ∂tuk ??, ∂Ak ??, ∂wk ??.

Table A1 summarizes the expressions for the average sales ratio and the signs of its partial derivatives. We have used the
                                             t
approximation that ln(1 + tuk /(1 + wk )) = uk (see also notes 19 and 32). The models are arranged in the same order as in Table 1.
                                           1 + wk
The results hold for any distribution of λ. “∂x” is the partial derivative of the average sales ratio for xuk. The ∂wk terms are signed
                               w
under the assumption that ∂ k /∂wk is close to 0. “??” means the partial derivative cannot be signed.
                             1 + wk




                                                                                                                                                              44
                                         Table A2
Country           No. of domestic films No. of US films Revenue per domestic film Revenue per US film
Lithuania                             4             134                      0.04                0.05
Latvia                                2              92                      0.04                0.05
Estonia                               8              85                      0.08                0.06
Romania                               9             114                      0.05                0.06
Slovak Republic                       4              99                      0.02                0.06
Iceland                               5             128                      0.18                0.09
Malaysia                             12             159                      0.45                0.10
Slovenia                              7             114                      0.04                0.10
Czech Republic                       19             101                      0.38                0.26
Philippines                         103             186                      0.39                0.26
Singapore                             6             162                      0.51                0.33
Hungary                              22             106                      0.19                0.38
Finland                              14             106                      0.79                0.39
Argentina                            53             152                      0.17                0.41
Thailand                             26             137                      1.06                0.41
Belgium                              44             232                      0.10                0.42
Turkey                               15             125                      1.21                0.43
New Zealand                           5             152                      0.84                0.49
Portugal                             15             125                      0.18                0.50
Indonesia                            11             114                      1.80                0.52
Poland                               22             122                      0.78                0.64
Ireland                               4             102                      0.33                0.65
Norway                               15             118                      1.20                0.67
Denmark                              24             112                      1.34                0.73
Austria                              22             124                      0.14                0.75
Sweden                               27             115                      1.22                0.97
Netherlands                          31             132                      0.67                1.00
Switzerland                          47             122                      0.20                1.03
Brazil                               42             143                      0.80                1.39
Russia                               59             143                      0.84                1.50
Spain                               120             223                      1.02                2.35
Italy                               106             168                      1.39                2.37
South Korea                          77             124                      5.17                2.49
Mexico                               22             163                      1.70                2.65
Australia                            24             179                      0.99                2.88
Canada                               77             193                      0.36                3.38
China                                90              20                      1.73                3.50
France                              223             162                      2.25                3.88
Germany                             127             153                      1.52                5.22
UK                                   89             169                      3.65                6.30
USA                                 327             327                    27.83               27.83
Revenue is in millions of 2007 US dollars.



                                                                                          45
                                                       Table 1:
                     Predictions for Sales per Foreign Movie Relative to Sales per Domestic Movie



                        Global Fixed Export Costs                               Bilateral Fixed Export Costs

                              Suk / nuk                                               Suk / nuk                   w         t
Pure Sunk Costs         ln(             ) = −tuk − δ uk + ln Cu ,               ln(             ) = ln( fuk ) + ln k + wk + uk + C3
                              Skk / nkk                                               Skk / nkk                   Ak       wk + 1
(before λ draw)
                        (equation 10)                                           (equation 15)



                              Suk / nuk                            A                  Suk / nuk        f       t
Partial Sunk Costs      ln(              ) = −tuk − δ uk − wk + ln( k ) + Cu1   ln(             ) = ln( uk ) + uk
                              S kk / nkk                           wk                 Skk / nkk         b     wk + 1
(after λ draw)
                        (equation 17)                                           (equation 18)




                                                                                                                                      46
                       Table 2: Summary Statistics

Variable                                       N        Mean St. Dev.
Number of US films                            284     141.366 41.483
Number of domestic films                      284      46.345 52.865
Revenue per US film                           284       1.293   1.506
Revenue per domestic film                     284       0.859   0.965
Log average sales ratio                       284       0.386   0.958

Linguistic dissimilarity index                284        0.751       0.143
Log linguistic dissimilarity index            284       -0.304       0.185
English official language                     284        0.095       0.294

Island                                        284       0.074        0.262
Latitude difference with US                   284      16.609       16.714
Longitude difference with US                  284     104.237        47.48
Distance to US (ratio to mean)                284       1.008        0.407
Log distance to US                            284      -0.068        0.414
Log GDP                                       284      26.146        1.328
Log population                                284      16.767        1.215
Income, 20th percentile (ratio to mean)       281       1.002        0.671

Ginarte-Park index                            271       0.723        0.156
Intellectual property protection index        284       0.695        0.161
Super 301 action                              284       0.141        0.348
Ever sign WCT                                 284       0.345        0.476

Tariff on exposed film                        219       0.028        0.081
Levies tariff on movies                       284       0.378        0.371
Has quantitative restrictions on movies       284       0.455        0.374
Has other restrictions on movies              284       0.388        0.320

Individualism index                           273       0.592        0.208
Masculinity index                             273       0.498        0.234
Power distance index                          273       0.516        0.217

Sample is 284 observations on 46 countries over period 1995-2006.




                                                                             47
                                          Table 3: Average Sales Ratio and Trade Barriers
                               (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)     (11)
log linguistic dissimilarity -2.448                         -2.725             -1.922              -1.831              -1.879
                             (0.540)                       (0.666)             (0.545)             (0.518)             (0.555)
linguistic dissimilarity                -3.198                        -3.383              -2.480              -2.110              -2.559
                                       (0.685)                       (0.839)             (0.701)             (0.710)             (0.753)
English official language                         0.543     -0.341    -0.202
                                                 (0.279)   (0.409)   (0.375)
Island                                                                          1.524     1.528     0.654     0.951     1.468     1.449
                                                                               (0.306)   (0.314)   (0.269)   (0.278)   (0.300)   (0.344)
latitude diff. with US                                                          -0.015    -0.014                        -0.014    -0.018
                                                                               (0.004)   (0.004)                       (0.005)   (0.007)
longitude diff. with US                                                         -0.008    -0.008                        -0.007    -0.009
                                                                               (0.002)   (0.002)                       (0.002)   (0.004)
log distance to US                                                                                  -0.788              -0.179
                                                                                                   (0.150)             (0.229)
distance to US                                                                                                -1.762              -0.638
                                                                                                             (0.782)             (0.981)
distance to US squared                                                                                        0.317               0.338
                                                                                                             (0.280)             (0.293)

R2                           0.269     0.273     0.073     0.276     0.276     0.381     0.377     0.340     0.344     0.383     0.382
N                             284       284       284       284       284       284       284       284       284       284       284

The specification is that in equation (19). The dependent variable is sales per US movie relative to sales per domestic movie.
Coefficient estimates for year dummies are not shown. Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses.



                                                                                                                                      48
                            Table 4: Average Sales Ratio, Market Size, and Labor Costs
                                (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)      (6)               (7)        (8)
log linguistic dissimilarity -1.813    -1.911     -1.909    -2.143
                             (0.576)   (0.562)   (0.588)    (1.690)
linguistic dissimilarity                                                -2.323    -2.473            -2.437     -2.463
                                                                        (0.745)  (0.721)            (0.743)    (2.088)
Island                        1.488     1.525      1.516     2.689       1.484     1.528             1.509      2.741
                             -0.299    -0.304     -0.321    -1.077      -0.302    -0.311            -0.323     -1.092
latitude diff. with US        -0.014    -0.015    -0.017     -0.038      -0.014   -0.014            -0.016     -0.035
                             (0.005)   (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.027)     (0.005)  (0.004)            (0.005)    (0.027)
longitude diff. with US       -0.008    -0.008    -0.007     -0.008      -0.008   -0.008            -0.007     -0.009
                             (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.013)     (0.002)  (0.002)            (0.002)    (0.013)

log GDP                       0.041                   0.079       0.099      0.049                    0.089      0.101
                             (0.061)                (0.186)     (0.431)     (0.061)                 (0.190)    (0.436)
log population                            0.034      -0.045      -0.165                  0.040       -0.047     -0.141
                                         (0.072)    (0.178)     (0.431)                 (0.072)     (0.181)    (0.429)
income, 20th percentile                             -0.066       0.092                              -0.066      0.066
                                                    (0.309)     (0.445)                             (0.316)    (0.467)
log urbanization rate                                            -0.090                                        -0.057
                                                                (1.024)                                        (1.007)
log number of cinemas                                            0.102                                          0.089
                                                                (0.264)                                        (0.263)
R2                            0.384      0.383       0.387       0.400      0.381       0.379       0.384      0.395
N                              284        284         281         262        284         284         281        262
Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses. See notes to Table 3 for other details.



                                                                                                                         49
        Table 5: Average Sales Ratio and Protection of Intellectual Property

                                       (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)
   linguistic dissimilarity index   -2.316    -2.570    -2.376     -2.387    -2.534
                                    (0.719)   (0.739)   (0.747)   (0.772)    (0.749)
   Island                            1.462     1.739     1.514     1.290      1.461
                                    (0.358)   (0.388)   (0.324)   (0.393)    (0.468)
   latitude diff. with US            -0.014    -0.023    -0.016    -0.012    -0.017
                                    (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.007)    (0.009)
   longitude diff. with US           -0.008    -0.007    -0.007    -0.007     -0.008
                                    (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)

   log GDP                           -0.160   -0.096      0.078     0.166     -0.257
                                    (0.268)   (0.208)   (0.191)   (0.210)    (0.294)
   log population                     0.224    0.135     -0.025    -0.095      0.347
                                    (0.264)   (0.205)   (0.186)   (0.192)    (0.271)
   income, 20th percentile           0.042    -0.211    -0.062    -0.041     -0.112
                                    (0.322)   (0.288)   (0.314)   (0.317)    (0.304)

   patent protection index           1.378                                    1.264
                                    (1.048)                                  (1.100)
   IPR protection index                        1.790                          2.246
                                              (1.215)                        (1.258)
   on US priority watch list                             -0.125               0.164
                                                        (0.176)              (0.178)
   World Copyright Treaty                                          0.304      0.405
                                                                  (0.338)    (0.350)

   R2                               0.400     0.398     0.385      0.398      0.433
   N                                 268       281       281        281        268

Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses. See notes to Table 3
for other details.




                                                                                       50
               Table 6: Average Sales Ratio and Policy Trade Barriers

                                       (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)
     linguistic dissimilarity index -3.875      -2.648    -2.448    -2.378    -3.141
                                    (1.010)    (0.808)   (0.720)   (0.754)   (0.931)
     Island                          1.432      1.658     1.519     1.488     1.243
                                    (0.452)    (0.394)   (0.337)   (0.390)   (0.618)
     latitude diff. with US          -0.021     -0.019    -0.017    -0.016    -0.019
                                    (0.007)    (0.007)   (0.005)   (0.006)   (0.009)
     longitude diff. with US         -0.005     -0.007    -0.007    -0.007    -0.007
                                    (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)

     log GDP                          -0.058    0.095     0.061      0.094    -0.075
                                     (0.274)   (0.218)   (0.219)   (0.189)   (0.317)
     log population                   0.099     -0.089    -0.030    -0.044    0.189
                                     (0.261)   (0.220)   (0.182)   (0.189)   (0.288)
     income, 20th percentile          -0.097    -0.155    -0.025    -0.068    -0.035
                                     (0.348)   (0.390)   (0.368)   (0.313)   (0.424)

     tariff on exposed film          -0.066                                   0.083
                                    (1.030)                                  (1.387)
     levies tariff on foreign movies            0.328                         0.246
                                               (0.460)                       (0.585)
     has quantitative restrictions                        0.066                0.235
                                                         (0.286)             (0.383)
     has other restrictions                                        -0.050     -0.843
                                                                   (0.471)   (0.857)

     R2                              0.482     0.396     0.384     0.384     0.497
     N                                216       281       281       281       216

Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses. See notes to Table 3
for other details.




                                                                                       51
               Table 7: Average Sales Ratio and Other Cultural Barriers

                                            (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)
          linguistic dissimilarity index -2.258     -1.861    -2.571    -1.964
                                         (0.916)   (0.671)   (0.854)   (0.694)
          Island                          1.492     0.864     1.399     0.741
                                         (0.309)   (0.313)   (0.406)   (0.419)
          latitude diff. with US          -0.017    -0.007    -0.015    -0.005
                                         (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.006)   (0.006)
          longitude diff. with US         -0.006    -0.006    -0.006    -0.006
                                         (0.001)   (0.002)   (0.002)   (0.002)

          log GDP                         0.073     0.044     0.129     0.087
                                        (0.189)    (0.171)   (0.208)   (0.180)
          log population                 -0.020     -0.031    -0.106    -0.096
                                        (0.175)    (0.166)   (0.212)   (0.188)
          income, 20th percentile        -0.080     0.209     0.016     0.291
                                        (0.324)    (0.254)   (0.358)   (0.290)

          individualism index            0.367                          0.054
                                        (0.672)                        (0.635)
          masculinity index                         1.505               1.506
                                                   (0.392)             (0.410)
          power distance index                                0.656     0.713
                                                             (0.999)   (0.820)

          R2                             0.396     0.487     0.402     0.498
          N                               270       270       270       270

Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses. See notes to Table 3
for other details.




                                                                                       52
                           Table 8: Testing for Alternative Distributions

                                                    (1)           (2)          (3)
             linguistic dissimilarity index      -2.437         -2.328       -2.332
                                                 (0.743)       (0.871)      (0.872)
             island                               1.509          1.438        1.437
                                                 (0.323)       (0.385)      (0.385)
             latitude diff. with US               -0.016        -0.013       -0.013
                                                 (0.005)       (0.008)      (0.008)
             longitude diff. with US              -0.007        -0.007       -0.007
                                                 (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
             log GDP                               0.089        15.010       15.055
                                                 (0.190)       (8.804)      (8.798)
             log population                       -0.047       -14.145      -14.230
                                                 (0.181)       (7.141)      (7.088)
             Income, 20th percentile             -0.066       -10.538      -10.543
                                                 (0.316)      (18.537)     (18.536)
             ln(suk/ sT)                                        -0.228       -0.237
                                                               (0.165)      (0.154)
             ln(suk/ sT)2                                        0.008        0.004
                                                               (0.041)      (0.038)
             Log GDP2                                           -0.667       -0.670
                                                               (0.383)      (0.380)
             Log population2                                    -0.359       -0.361
                                                               (0.331)      (0.329)
             Income2                                            -1.009       -1.018
                                                               (1.104)      (1.097)
             Log GDP*income                                      0.886        0.893
                                                               (1.887)      (1.883)
             log population*income                              -0.551       -0.559
                                                               (1.866)      (1.862)
             log GDP*log population                              1.065        1.073
                                                               (0.692)      (0.686)
             F statistic interaction terms                       1.610        1.430
             (p value)                                         (0.132)      (0.196)
             R2                                   0.384          0.453        0.453
             N                                     281            281          281

Notes to Table 8: The specification is that in equation (25). Coefficient estimates for year
dummies are not shown. Standard errors (clustered by importing country) are in parentheses. In
column 2 ln(suk/ sT) is calculated based on estimation results of a spline function for the log rank-
size relationship using the full sample of US movies in AC Nielsen in each year; in column 3 the
variable is calculated based on estimation results using a restricted sample of US movies. The F
statistic is for the null that the variables ln(suk/ sT) to log GDP*log population are jointly zero.

                                                                                                  53
                                      Figure 1: Share of US films in national movie expenditure, 2001-2006




                                     1
                                                                                                                           N ew Zealand

Share of US in Box Office Revenues
                                                                               Canada
                                                                                          Slovenia       Rom ania
                                                                                                 Aus tralia
                                                                                  Rus   s ia Mexico
                                                                                     Argentina              Iceland
                                                                                                        Lithuania
                                     .8                                UK any
                                                                                          Hungary
                                                                                            Brazil
                                                                                       Singapore    Latvia
                                                                                           Slovak Republic
                                                                      Germ           Portugal
                                                                               Aus triaC zech
                                                                                 Netherlands
                                                                                       Norway       Es toniaTurkey
                                                                                                Republic
                                                                                     Indones    ia
                                                                                            Ireland
                                                                           Spain      DenmPoland
                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                                              Finland
                                                                                              ark
                                                                    Switzerland
                                                                      Belgium                         Malays ia
                                                                                               Thailand
                                     .6


                                                                           Italy


                                                                 France
                                                                                     Philippines
                                                                             South Korea
                                     .4




                                                     China
                                     .2
                                     0




                                          0           .2                .4                 .6                 .8                 1
                                                       Share of US in No. of Films Exhibited



                   Figure 2: Intensive versus Extensive Margin of Movie Imports, 2001-2006
                                     4
Log number of US films imported
                                     2




                                                                               Belgium               Spain
                                                                         Philippines                       C anada
                                                                                                         Aus
                                                                                                     Italy   traliaU K
                                                               Malays ia
                                                     LithuaniaIceland
                                                                            Singapore
                                                                              Argentina
                                                                                New Zealand
                                                                               Thailand       Brazil
                                                                                               Rus s
                                                                                         Netherlands  iaMexico
                                                                                                            France
                                                                                                                Germ any
                                     0




                                                         R om ania
                                                               Slovenia         Portugal
                                                                               Turkey Aus
                                                                                   Poland
                                                                                    N     tria
                                                                                         Switzerland
                                                                                      orway
                                                                                 Indones Sweden
                                                                                           ia
                                                                                      Denm ark        South   Korea
                                                         Slovak Republic C   HFinland
                                                                           zechungary
                                                                                    Ireland
                                                                                Republic
                                                      Latvia
                                                         Es tonia




                                                                                                         China
                                     -2
                                     -4




                                          -4               -2                    0                        2                      4
                                                           Log box-office revenues per US film




                                                                                                                                     54
                                                Figure 3: Movie imports and country size, 2001-2006
                                                         (a) Number of US movies imported




                                      4
Log number of US films imported
                                      2



                                                                                            Belgium Spain
                                                                              Philippines            AusMexicoC anada
                                                                                                           tralia  ItalyUKGerm any
                                                                           New  Singapore
                                                                                Malays
                                                                                Zealand ia   Argentina
                                                                                                Rus   s ia            France
                                                                                                             BrazilKorea
                                                     Iceland Lithuania               Thailand      Netherlands
                                      0




                                                                 Slovenia
                                                                        R om ania  Portugal
                                                                                          Aus tria
                                                                                          Turkey
                                                                                         Poland
                                                                                        NorwSwitzerland
                                                                                              ay
                                                                                            Sweden
                                                                                         Indones
                                                                                       Denm    ark ia    South
                                                                          Hungary    Finland
                                                                           C zech Ireland
                                                                 Slovak Republic   Republic
                                                       Latvia
                                                   Es tonia



                                                                                                                       China
                                      -2
                                      -4




                                           -4                -2                        0                       2                     4
                                                                                Log GDP
                                                               Actual values                      Fitted values

                                                        (b) Box-office revenues per US movie
                                      4
Log box-office revenues per US film




                                                                                                                     UK
                                                                                                                      Germ any
                                      2




                                                                                                                   France
                                                                                                            C anada China
                                                                                                     AusMexico
                                                                                                         tralia
                                                                                                        South
                                                                                                         SpainKorea
                                                                                                                Italy
                                                                                                 Rus s ia Brazil
                                                                                             Switzerland
                                                                                             Sweden Netherlands
                                                                                           Aus tria
                                                                                        Denm
                                                                                         Norw
                                                                                   Ireland      ark
                                                                                               ay
                                                                                          Poland
                                      0




                                                                                          Indones ia
                                                                                    Portugal
                                                                           New Zealand
                                                                           Hungary         Turkey
                                                                                      FinlandBelgium
                                                                                      ThailandArgentina
                                                                                 Singapore
                                                                               Philippines
                                                                            C zech  Republic


                                                     Iceland Slovenia           Malays ia
                                      -2




                                                   Es tonia      Slovak R om ania
                                                                        Republic
                                                       LatviaLithuania
                                      -4




                                           -4                -2                        0                       2                     4
                                                                                Log GDP
                                                               Actual values                      Fitted values




                                                                                                                                         55
                                                 Figure 3: Domestic movie production and country size, 2001-2006
                                                             (c) Number of domestic movies exhibited




                                            4
Log number of domestic films
                                                                                                                       France
                                            2

                                                                                       Philippines            Spain Italy Germ any
                                                                                                                         UKChina
                                                                                                            SouthC anada
                                                                                                                     Korea
                                                                                                     Rus s
                                                                                                  Argentinaia
                                                                                                 Switzerland
                                                                                                 Belgium        Brazil
                                                                                                 Sweden Netherlands
                                                                                          Thailand
                                                                                            Denm    ark AusMexico
                                                                                                              tralia
                                            0




                                                                                Hungary       Poland
                                                                                               Aus tria
                                                                                 C zech Republic
                                                                                               Turkey
                                                                                          Finland
                                                                                             Norw
                                                                                        Portugal   ay
                                                                                      Malays ia
                                                                              R om ania       Indones ia
                                                          Es tonia     Slovenia       Singapore
                                                                                 New Zealand
                                                            Iceland
                                                                       Slovak Republic Ireland
                                                                   Lithuania
                                            -2




                                                             Latvia
                                            -4




                                                 -4                   -2                     0                     2                   4
                                                                                        Log GDP
                                                                      Actual values                    Fitted values


                                                            (d) Box-office revenues per domestic movie
                                            4
Log box-office revenues per domestic film




                                                                                                              South Korea
                                                                                                                           UK
                                            2




                                                                                                                         France
                                                                                                 Indones ia Mexico          China
                                                                                               Denm   ark
                                                                                                    Sweden            Italy Germ any
                                                                                                Norw
                                                                                                  Turkey
                                                                                             Thailanday Aus tralia
                                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                   New Zealand
                                                                                             Finland             Brazil
                                                                                                 Poland Netherlands
                                                                                                       Rus s ia
                                                                                        Malays  ia
                                            0




                                                                                        Singapore
                                                                                      Philippines
                                                                                   C zech Ireland
                                                                                           Republic               C anada

                                                            Iceland                Hungary         Switzerland
                                                                                                   Argentina
                                                                                                Aus tria
                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                  Belgium
                                                          Es tonia
                                            -2




                                                                   Lithuania R om ania
                                                             Latvia Slovenia

                                                                           Slovak Republic
                                            -4




                                                 -4                   -2                     0                     2                   4
                                                                                        Log GDP
                                                                      Actual values                    Fitted values




                                                                                                                                           56
Figure 4: Relative average revenue per US movie and trade barriers, 2001-2006
                              (a) Distance to the US




                                            2
 Log relative box office revenue per film
                                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                                  Aus tria
                                                                                            Belgium
                                                                                         Portugal Slovak Republic
                                                                                             Germ any
                                                                                                                                       Aus tralia
                                            1
                                                                                                 Slovenia
                                                                                                       R us s Argentina
                                                                                                              ia
                                                                                           Spain
                                                                                     Ireland       Hungary              China
                                                                 Mexico                  UKFrance Italy Brazil
                                                                                           Netherlands
                                                                                                 LatviaR om ania
                                            0




                                                                                                  Lithuania
                                                                                                 Poland
                                                                                                Es tonia
                                                                                                Czech
                                                                                               Sweden  Republic
                                                                                                                                      Singapore
                                                                                                                                 Philippines
                                                                           Iceland           N orway                               N ew Zealand
                                                                                               Denm  ark
                                                                                                  Finland
                                                                                                                       South Korea
                                                                                                            Turkey              Thailand
                                            -1




                                                                                                                                        Indones ia

                                                                                                                                     Malays ia
                                            -2




                                                 -1                       -.5                     0                    .5                      1
                                                                                     Log distance to US
                                                                                (mean) lsd                  Fitted values


                                                                    (b) Linguistic dissimilarity with the US
                                                                                Canada
 Log relative box office revenue per film
                                            2




                                                                           Aus triaSwitzerland
                                                                                      Belgium
                                                                                            Slovak R epublic
                                                                                           Portugal
                                                                           Germ any
                                                            Aus tralia
                                            1




                                                                                                    Slovenia
                                                                                                       Rus s ia
                                                                                      Argentina
                                                                                          Spain
                                                                                                  Ireland                       Hungary
                                                                                                                                  China
                                                       UK                               Brazil FranceMexico
                                                                                            Italy
                                                                            Netherlands
                                                                                                 RLatvia
                                                                                                   om ania
                                            0




                                                                                      Poland     Lithuania
                                                                                      C zech Republic
                                                                                           Sweden                        Es tonia
                                                                                                                                Singapore
                                                                                                                                  Philippines
                                                                          New Zealand Norway
                                                                                      Denm ark                                  Finland
                                                                                                                                  South Korea
                                                                                                                                  Thailand
                                                                                                                              Turkey
                                            -1




                                                                                                                                  Indones ia

                                                                                                                                  Malays ia
                                            -2




                                                 -.4                      -.2                     0                    .2                      .4
                                                                          Log linguistic dissimilarity with US
                                                                                (mean) lsd                  Fitted values




                                                                                                                                                    57
                                               Figure 5: Rank-Size Relationship for US Movies

                                               1996                     1998                          2000




                              20
                              15
log gross box office revene
                              10




                                               2002                     2004                          2006
                              20
                              15
                              10




                                    0      2          4   6   0     2          4    6   0         2          4       6
                                                                   log rank
                              Graphs by Revenue Year




Frequency




                                                                                        κ1 > κ2



                                   Lower segment
                                   exponential with κ2
                                                                               Upper segment exponential
                                                                               with κ1
                                                              λT                                                 λ

                                               Figure 6: Two Segment Exponential Distribution




                                                                                                                         58
