NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHINA'S PARTICIPATION IN GLOBAL ENVIRONMENTAL NEGOTIATIONS
Huifang Tian
John Whalley
Working Paper 14460
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14460

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2008

We are grateful to the Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI) for financial support,
and to Sean Walsh, Tongsan Wang, Guoqing Cheng, Yiming Wang, Shunming Zhang, Xin Xian and
Ray Reizman, and to participants in a CESifo conference on Europe and Global Environmental Negotiations
held in Venice July 14/15 2008 and seminars at Xiamen University and the Development Research
Center, Beijing for comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Huifang Tian and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

China’s Participation in Global Environmental Negotiations
Huifang Tian and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 14460
October 2008
JEL No. Q54,Q56
ABSTRACT
In the paper we discuss China's participation in both the 2009 Copenhagen negotiations on a post-Kyoto
global climate change regime currently under way and out beyond Copenhagen in further negotiations
likely to follow. China is now both the largest and most rapidly growing carbon emitter, and has much
higher emission intensity relative to GDP than OECD countries. In the Copenhagen negotiation, there
will be strong pressure on China to take on emissions reduction commitments and China's concern
will be to do so in ways that allow continuation of a high growth rate and fast development. Central
to this will be maintaining access to OECD markets for manufactured exports in face of potential environmental
protectionism. Thus the broad approach seems likely to be to take on environmental commitments
in part in return for stronger guarantees of access to export markets abroad. This involves directly
linked trade and environmental commitments although how linkage can be made explicit is a major
issue. More narrowly, the issues that seem likely to dominate the climate change negotiating agenda
from China's viewpoint are the interpretation of the common but differentiated responsibilities (CBDR)
principle adopted in Kyoto, the choice of negotiating instruments and form of emission commitments,
and the size (and form) of accompanying financial funds for adaptation and innovation. We suggest
that a possible interpretation of CBDR reflecting China's desire to leave room to grow when undertaking
emission reduction commitments might be for China to take on emission intensity commitments while
OECD countries take on emission level commitments. Larger funds and flexibility in their use will
also raise China's willingness to make commitments.

Huifang Tian
Institute of World Economics and Politics, Chinese Academy of Social Science
Centre for International Governance Innovation (CIGI)
University of Western Ontario
tianhf@cass.org.cn
John Whalley
Department of Economics
Social Science Centre
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario N6A 5C2 CANADA
and NBER
jwhalley@uwo.ca

1. Introduction
A central element in global policy coordination over the next 20-30 years will
almost certainly be both the design and implementation of post-Kyoto arrangements
aiming to mitigate climate change. In the shorter term, these are to be negotiated by
the Committee of Parties (COP15) under the UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) with the negotiating process to conclude in Copenhagen in
November 2009. In the 2007 Bali meeting that launched this second round of global
climate change negotiations (after Kyoto in 1997), four negotiation areas of mitigation,
adaptation, innovation, and trade and finance were agreed on. The participation of
China both in this process and beyond is the focus of this paper.
China did not participate in the earlier 1997 Kyoto negotiations, and faces
decisions as to how actively and on what basis to involve herself in this second
negotiating round of climate change mitigation initiatives. China is still a low income
(even if rapidly growing) country, and the primary policy emphasis remains on
achieving growth and development and accompanying poverty elimination for the
bottom deciles of the Chinese population. China sees her need as having global
environmental arrangements in place that allow her to continue to grow, and key to
this is maintaining openness in the global economy, and without environmentally
motivated trade restrictions, so as to allow for continued high export growth and
continuing FDI inflows as she and others take on environmental commitments.
At the same time, China faces pressure to take on commitments as the largest and
most rapidly growing global emitter and there is growing recognition in China of the
potential damage China faces from climate change. China also has a significantly
larger share of GDP originating in emissions intensive manufactures and relatively
inefficient small coal burning power plants. China also has opportunities to influence
the outcomes of negotiations through coalitional activities with other lower income
and large population partners (India, Russia, and Brazil). Also the choice of approach
to the negotiations through the selection of negotiating instruments, dealing with

2

Kyoto non-compliance and other issues key to China such as carbon embedment in
exports will be critical.
The negotiating agenda agreed in Bali for conclusion in Copenhagen is
simultaneously extremely ambitious, vague and highly imprecise, and the time frame
for negotiation is short. For China, four issues seem likely to dominate the narrower
climate change negotiating agenda outside the broader trade linkage issues. One is the
interpretation of the common but differentiated responsibilities principle agreed in the
Kyoto negotiation for non-OECD economies. Here compensation and the form and
depth of emission reduction commitments enter as issues. A second is the choice of
negotiating instrument, with issues of negotiation on emission intensity rather than
emission level and embedment of emissions in exports. A third issue is the size and
form of the funds that will likely be created to facilitate adaptation and innovation. A
final issue is how to deal with non-compliance by key OECD countries with their
Kyoto commitments, which weakens the credibility of any commitments that might
now be made by OECD countries in a second round of global negotiations. China’s
interest is in dealing with Kyoto non-compliance through firmer environmental
dispute resolution for new Copenhagen commitments.
We suggest that a possible compromise interpretation of the common but
differentiated responsibility principle allowing negotiation to progress and reflecting
China’s desire to leave room to grow when undertaking emission reduction
commitments might be for China (along with India, Russia, and Brazil) to take on
emission intensity commitments while OECD countries take on emission level
commitments. Non-compliance with Kyoto commitments seemingly implies both
carrying forward and combining of levels of non-compliance from Kyoto into the post
Bali Copenhagen agreements and even beyond, but now with new firmer dispute
resolution and enforcement procedures. The size and form of accompanying financial
funds (for adaptation and innovation) are also key to China, and firmer arrangements
here also seem key.
It is clear that China now sees significant direct environmental benefit at home
from climate change mitigation and wishes to continue high growth without adverse
3

environmental impact. These perceptions will likely induce significant Chinese
participation in global Copenhagen negotiations, but China’s other interests in
maintaining openness and growth will be equally, if not more, important. China
differs sharply from the OECD countries in having much smaller cumulative
emissions, not having been a party to the first Kyoto negotiating round, having
potential coalitional partners outside the OECD, having high growth which is to be
maintained if development goals are to be met, and sharply higher emissions
intensities than OECD countries. All of these factors will also come into play in
negotiation.

4

2. Where current global environmental negotiations stand
Current climate change negotiations on a post-Kyoto world are driven by the
global growth of concern over the last few decades both broadly over environmental
issues and more specifically over climate change. In the immediate post World War
II period when our present global economic architecture was shaped, only trade and
finance issues entered debate since countries were seen as only linked by trade and
finance, not physically. Environmental policy concerns did not centrally emerge
until the 1960’s, and then only as localized domestic issues with Rachael Carson’s
book Silent Spring (1962).
In the 1980’s international environmental issues, in the form of ozone holes,
CFCs, and early concerns over global warming began to shape the global negotiating
agenda. These issues, in turn, were to lead to discussion of sustainability in
developmental policies and to the Brundtland Report of 1987, and the Rio Earth
Summit of 1991.
It was at the Rio summit that the present UN Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) was adopted which, through the resulting joint commitment by
all UN members to discuss carbon emission mitigation, was to provide the
negotiating mandate for the subsequent Kyoto Protocol detailing arrangements on
climate change mitigation out to 2012. Under UNFCCC auspices, the Bali
conference of December 2007 initiated negotiations on Post-Kyoto climate change
arrangements, and these negotiations are now under way following a negotiating
mandate adapted in Bali widely referred to as the Bali roadmap. These negotiations
are to conclude in Copenhagen in November 2009, with a midterm meeting in
November 2008 at Potsdam.
China along with most other developing countries did not participate in the
Kyoto negotiations and took on no environmental commitments as part of the Kyoto
agreements. Russia was the notable exception. A principle labeled common but
differentiated responsibilities covering the developing countries and giving them
imprecisely defined rights to special treatment in global environmental negotiation

5

was agreed to as part of Kyoto. For the purpose of the Kyoto arrangements this was
interpreted as agreement that developing countries would take on no commitments,
and effectively not directly participate in negotiation. Their participation was indirect
through the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) allowing them to sell emissions
reduction rights to producers in developed countries. But for Copenhagen the
participation of larger developing countries (especially China) is key, and so the
interpretation of this principle will be central to the negotiation.

2.1 The Kyoto Protocol of 1997
Even though China did not formally participate in Kyoto, the central building
block for the post Bali process is the set of agreements arrived at in the Protocol. The
Kyoto agreements to reduce greenhouse gas emissions worldwide were agreed to at a
1997 UN conference in Kyoto, Japan and came into force in February 2005. A total of
174 nations ratified the Protocol, but only a subset of countries (mainly developed
plus Russia) took on commitments. Importantly for the present discussion, China took
on no commitments to emission reductions.
Under an agreed principle of “common but differentiated responsibilities
(CBDR)2”, the Kyoto Protocol effectively divided the world into two groups: one
largely of developed countries who accepted mutual responsibility for reduction in
carbon emissions3, and one of largely developing countries who, in an ill-defined
sense , were granted rights to growth and development (again in some ill-defined
sense) over any responsibility they took on for emission reductions. There was no
precise statement of the principle or relative weighting on these two components
(Yoshiro, 2002).
The Protocol also developed three “flexibility mechanisms”: Emissions
Trading4, Joint Implementation and the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)5.
2

See the discussion in section 4 for some details.
The protocol required signatory developed countries to reduce their GHG emissions below the levels
specified for each of them in the Treaty by 2012. These targets were to be met within a five-year time
frame between 2008 and 2012, and yielded a total global cut in GHG emissions of 5% relative to a
baseline of 1990.
4
Kyoto is a 'cap and trade' system that imposes national caps on the emissions of Annex I (developed
3

6

These so-called market-based mechanisms allow Annex I countries to meet their
greenhouse gas emission commitments in part by purchasing GHG emissions credits.
These can be bought either on financial exchanges, from projects which reduce
emissions in non-Annex I economies under the CDM, from other Annex I countries
under the JI, or from Annex I countries with excess allowances. Only CDM executive
board-accredited Certified Emission Reductions (CER) can be bought and sold in this
way. These mechanisms were aimed to identify the lowest-cost opportunities
for reducing emissions and attract private sector participation in emission reduction
efforts. Developing countries were thought to benefit through technology transfer and
investment under collaboration with OECD countries. Whether all these mechanisms
remain in their current form in a post Kyoto arrangement is a Bali roadmap
negotiating issue.
An important feature of the Kyoto Protocol is that it represents only weak
international disciplines (Walsh and Whalley, 2008). This is because it has weak
enforcement mechanisms, effectively no dispute resolution6, and no joint mechanism
to deal with noncompliance. Unlike WTO agreements which cover complaints of
violation though notation, dispute resolution procedures, and (if necessary) retaliation
though withdrawal of equivalent concessions, Kyoto has no such structure.

plus Russia) countries. Article 6 of the Kyoto Protocol covers emissions trading among Annex I
countries. Any Party included in Annex I may transfer or acquire from any other Party emission
reduction units resulting from projects aimed at reducing emissions or enhancing emissions removals
by carbon sinks, provided that: any project has the approval of the Parties involved and any such
project provides a reduction in emissions, or an enhancement of removals by sinks that is additional to
any that would otherwise occur. The aim is that acquisition of emission reduction units shall be
supplemental to domestic actions for the purposes of meeting reduction commitments.
5
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI) projects are sources of Kyoto
emission reduction credits. The CDM is a scheme for encouraging Annex I countries to carry out
emission reduction projects in developing countries by providing credit for “certified emission
reductions” which can be used to meet the Annex I countries’ commitments. JI allows project-specific
credits to be gained from existing credits obtained within Annex I countries. CDM projects produce
Certified Emission Reductions (CERs), and JI projects produce Emission Reduction Units (ERUs).
CERs/ERUs are overwhelmingly bought from project developers by funds or individual entities, rather
than being exchange-traded allowances.
6
The legal structure is that under the Protocol's dispute settlement provision, states are free to settle
disputes by negotiation or by other peaceful means of their own choice. If the dispute is not settled by
negotiation, and if the parties have not agreed to submit the dispute to the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) or arbitration, either party may request the convening of a conciliation commission, which can
give a non-binding recommendation. Disputes arising in the course of flexibility mechanism
transactions, however, are likely to involve private entities and fall outside these provisions.
7

Kyoto also differs from WTO agreements in being the outcome of a
cross-country internalization negotiation which focused on offers to reduce emissions
by countries conditional upon the actions of other countries. Once proposed actions of
all parties are mutually agreed to, joint action can then proceed either globally as a
whole or sub-globally for a subset of countries. Given that for most countries, the
benefits of their own emission reduction efforts accrue to residents of other countries,
how to deal with non-participants, how to enforce agreements and how to provide for
modification of agreements in light of change remain as unresolved issues.
One can thus be skeptical of the ability of the post Bali process to yield further
substantive and enforceable international disciplines if it only seeks to build narrowly
on the Kyoto agreements. Whether the Kyoto Protocol represents a first step along a
path which will yield even more significant emission mitigation, or whether other
negotiating routes may need to be explored in the longer run is hence a key issue. For
China, the issue this raises from a Copenhagen negotiating stand point is how far to
seek to build on the initial cooperation established in Kyoto since focal points for
cooperation are different to establish, and thus how far and how quickly to try to
move the process down wholly new and different routes requires delicate judgment of
what is feasible to negotiate.

2.2 The Post-Bali roadmap process
The 2007 Bali meeting held as a conference of the parties (COP13) to the
UNFCCC was designed to shape a two-year negotiating process to finalize
arrangements for a post-2012 climate change regime. These negotiations are to
conclude by the end of 2009. Bali thus marked the start of a road aimed to lead (via
Poznan, Poland in December 2008 and COP14) to Copenhagen in December 2009
and decisions and agreements for an as yet to be specified period beyond the 2012
Kyoto commitments.
The elements of the Bali agreement (UNFCC, 2008) define both the key
negotiation areas and building-blocks for a potential global post-2012 treaty
arrangement. In contrast to the Kyoto process, the ‘Bali Roadmap’ process involves a
8

new body known as the ‘Ad Hoc Working Group on Long term Cooperative Action
under the Convention”. It is this group which has identified the key elements of
mitigation, adaptation, technology and financing for the Copenhagen negotiation.
Discussions in Bali on mitigation produced no agreement on the continued use of
previous mechanisms to achieve the mitigation objectives, but the phraseology of
deep and significant reductions was agreed. Adaptation was seen as necessary to
strengthen the ability of markets to respond to the impacts of the worst case scenario
impacts of climate change. Mitigation and adaptation were seen as complementing
each other, and if pursued together could significantly reduce the risks of adverse
climate change impacts. Basic research, technology development and transfer of
technology were thought needed to play a major role in improving the ability of
nations to adapt. And adaptation and clean technology were, in turn, to be dealt with
by establishing new international funds, whose size, function and oversight were not
specified. The finance component of negotiation was to build on estimates of global
financial flows supposedly needed to finance climate change initiatives, but how these
flows were to be achieved was not specified.
Bali also produced two further decisions. One was the adoption of an adaptation
fund to provide funding to the most vulnerable countries to help them adapt to the
inevitable impacts of climate change in the near term, and an agreement on a system
of payments for the conservation of tropical forests by developing countries. These
decisions effectively establish financial transfers as a supporting mechanism for
global agreements to climate change reduction, a key development for a Chinese point
of view.
The post-Bali process faces several challenges relevant to China. One lies in the
assignment of property rights, a general externality issue now applied to global
warming. This issue centers on who has the right to do what remaining carbon
emissions. Do developing countries have overriding rights to development and
poverty alleviation and hence should be compensated for restraint they take on
through environmental commitments or are decisions to undertake global
responsibilities equally accepted by all, so that all must alleviate damage no matter
9

how rich or poor. These property right issues are central to both China and the global
negotiating process since developing countries have in the past been forceful in
stating their rights to growth and development over responsibility for emission
reductions, and their view that the emissions currently affecting global climate have
been largely discharged by developed countries over the past 200 or so years since the
industrial revolution began.
In addition to the issue of property rights there are the issues of free riding and
coalition activity in these negotiations. Barrett (2007) notes that small countries have
few incentives to agree to emission cuts that constrain their economy activities if the
direct benefits are small and larger countries agree on arrangements mutual reductions.
This generates incentives for free riding and incentives for sub-groups of countries to
agree independently of others, as happened in the 1997 Kyoto negotiation.
As a result, coalitional activity will likely be central to the post Bali process and
how China positions herself will be pivotal. The 48 countries comprising the Least
Developed Countries (LCD) in the UN have been active in climate change negotiation.
The fifteen members of the EU also agree common positions in negotiation. China
thus has an incentive to explore coalitional activity with other rapidly growing large
population low wage economies including India, Russia, and Brazil.
How final decisions can realistically be reached in this post Bali negotiation in
the timeframe is a further issue. In the case of WTO, closure has effectively been
achieved in pre Doha rounds by the granting of time-linked fast-track authority by the
US congress to the executive branch. Negotiating activity is thus granted along with
the clear understanding that termination of fast-track negotiating authority will cease
and should negotiations continue beyond a specified deadline. No such similar
structure or timeframe exists for the post Bali process. The declaration launching
negotiations in Bali expressed the hope of completion in two years, but the absence of
a mechanism for forcing a decision is notable.
There is also an issue of whether post Bali negotiations can realistically take
place solely between nation states. This is because of heterogeneity within nation

10

states by region and across firms and even across sub-regional group in terms of their
differences in impacts which will occur within countries.
All of these issues will arise in the post-Bali process and suggest careful
consideration of the best approach to each by China in moving forward towards a new
global environmental negotiation defining a post-Bali world. However, establishing
and building on a focal point of cooperation in international negotiation is both
difficult and time consuming, and 2007-2009 is a very short timeframe for negotiation
with a mandate as extensive as the Bali roadmap. China is a key part of this process,
and her negotiating decisions will help shape and define the outcome.

11

3. China’s broader objectives in global environmental negotiations
China is a rapidly growing, large population and relatively low wage economy
which has in the last two decades become heavily trade and FDI dependent. WTO
data (WTO trade profiles statistics, 2008) show the share of imports and exports
combined relative to GDP in China as 69% in 2006, up from 49 % in 2000. China’s
exports are growing at approximately 30% per year, as are imports. Foreign invested
enterprises (financed by FDI flows) account for 60% of both exports and imports, and
also account for over one half of all OECD FDI flows to non-OECD countries.
China’s position in global climate change negotiation therefore has to been seen in
light of the need perceived by Chinese policymakers to continue her ever deeper
integration into the global economy as a prime driver of future growth and ultimately
further poverty alleviation.
China’s global environmental negotiating objectives can thus be discussed both
narrowly in terms of the details of any environmental commitments that may be
undertaken both by China and by other countries, and also more broadly in how non
environmental developmental objectives for China may be impacted. China’s
objectives in current and prospective future global environmental climate change
negotiations will thus reflect both narrower special characteristics of China’s climate
change situation and also China’s broad developmental aims.
Chinese policy makers clearly see China as following a long term high growth
trajectory which is to lead to significant poverty alleviation and improved well being
for the majority of China’s population. Any commitments made by China in a global
climate change negotiation will thus inevitably be crafted as far as possible to allow
for continued high growth performance. This objective is the central friction between
China’s negotiating strategy for a post Bali world and OECD objectives, in large part
because of the numerical implications of China’s growth.
China has experienced a 4 fold increase in GDP/ Capita since 1978 and 10%
growth between 2000 and 2050 implies a 30 fold increase in GDP/capita. This
inevitably implies a very large increase in Chinese emissions if high growth continues,

12

even if the effects of growth on emissions are partially affected by more efficient coal
burning, major adoption of renewables, energy conservation and other measures. The
dilemma for China is that her large manufacturing sector activity already makes China
the largest incremental source of emission globally, even before future growth is
factored in.
China accounted for 17.5% of global CO2 emissions in 2004, second only to the
US of 22.0 % (see Table 1). China will seemingly inevitably pass the United States in
a few years and become the largest country emitter by 2010(also Table 1). This will
likely occur even if major conservation measures are introduced. Between 1990 and
2004, China’s carbon emissions increased by 108% percent reflecting strong
economic growth, and China substantially underperforms the OECD countries in
terms of emission intensity (emission /GDP) by a large margin, although this gap is
significantly reduced by using Chinese GDP in US$ at PPP exchange rates rather than
at current rates, also emissions intensity measures are falling much faster in China
than in the OECD (see Table 2).

Table 1 Relative Annual CO2 Emissions by Country (1990-2030)7
(% of worldwide emissions)

1990

2004

2010

2020

2030

United States

23.5%

22.0%

20.1%

18.8%

18.5%

OECD Europe

19.3%

16.3%

14.6%

12.4%

10.9%

Japan

4.8%

4.7%

4.1%

3.5%

3.0%

China

10.5%

17.5%

21.1%

23.9%

26.2%

India

2.7%

4.1%

4.2%

4.7%

5.0%

Source: Cass (2007)

7

See Cass (2007) Table 8
13

Table 2 Changes in Carbon Emissions and Emission Intensity by Country8

Countries

% change in emission
(CO2 only)
1990-2004

GHG Intensity
(Tons of CO2 eq./
$mil. GDP-PPP)

2000

% change in intensity
(CO2 only)
1990-2002

% change in
GDP
1990-2002

Ukraine

-47.1%

2369

-6

-50

Russia

-24.8%

1817

-5

-26

Germany

-12.2%

471

5

37

EU-25

1.6%

449

-23

27

U.S.

19.8%

720

-17

42

Brazil

67.8%

679

17

35

India

87.5%

768

-9

87

China

108.3%

1023

-51

205

Notes: GHG intensity covers emissions from six gases. GHG intensity and CO2 intensity exclude CO2 from
international bunker fuels and land use change and forestry. GDP is measured in terms of PPP
(constant 2000 international dollars).

Source: Cass (2007) and World Resources Institute (WRI), 2005

China’s 11th five year plan (2006-2010) set out targets for a minimum annual
growth rate of 7.5 percent for the national economy, a doubling of GDP and a 20
percent reduction in energy consumption over 5 years. Ecological and environmental
degradation is also to be curbed, and the emissions of major pollutants reduced by
10%. In cities, 70% of wastewater and 60% of residential garbage are to be treated.
Forest coverage rate is expected to reach 20%. 100 million rural residents will be
provided access to safe drinking water, and 1.2 million kilometers of rural roads will
be newly built and upgraded. Most towns and administrative villages will be given
access to highways. China’s development plans thus already embody some degree of
environmental restraint, but China’s modernization and development will nonetheless
increase emissions levels.
More broadly, China’s growth blueprint has been characterized by two steps:
Step one was quadruple 1980 GNP by the end of 1990s. This was fulfilled by 1995.
Step two was to raise per-capita GNP to the level of a medium-developed countries by
8

See Cass (2007) Table 5 and also see WRI 2005, Chapter 5 Figure 5.1.
14

the mid-21st century. The Asian Development Bank forecast that China will be the
world’s largest economy, surpassing the U.S. by 2025(Asian Development Bank,
2007).
This growth performance implies that there have to be large major reductions in
emissions intensity in China to offset the effects of growth on emissions. This
seemingly needs to occur through the use of relatively more efficient coal burning
power plants, and significant moves to renewables and nuclear.
When China first entered Climate Change Negotiations in 1990, China made no
offers to take on emissions reduction commitments. Since then, China’s attitude
towards international climate negotiations has become more proactive. Abatement
costs, ecological vulnerability and principles of equity are now major points of
internal debate on China’s position (Zhang Haibin, 2006). If negotiations help to
reduce China’s abatement costs or helps make emission reductions possible, then
China will adopt a more cooperative approach. The stress in Chinese debate is on
accompanying transfer of technology and funds for innovation and adaptation along
with emissions reduction commitments.
China also accepts that she has to achieve a balance between future growth on
the one hand and the reality of being the largest emitter of carbon globally on the
other hand. China likely will seek to maintain its high growth opportunity by stressing
negotiation on emission intensity reductions rather than emission levels and also
raising further carbon embedment issue. The treatment of emissions associated with
Chinese exports.
China’s size and influence in the G77 also makes it a key country in global
climate negotiations from a coalitional perspective. As the world’s largest developing
economy and with an influential voice in the United Nations, China will play an
important role in leading developing countries in shaping a future climate regime.
China will see it as inevitable that environmental commitments are made as a part of
global rule regime going beyond the trade and finance components of the 1944 Breton
Woods’ arrangement to now span trade, environment and finance. But maintaining
openness in the trade regime so as to prevent closure of markets to China on
15

environmental grounds, as with carbon linked border tax adjustment prepossess will
be key to China.
An equally central part of the negotiation strategy for China will be the
interpretation of the CBDR commitment undertaken by developed countries as part of
the Kyoto negotiations. There are different interpretations of this principle, and the
Kyoto text is unfortunately vague in its strategy. But this principle will almost
certainly be appealed to support augments that China should take on different forms
of commitments from those undertaken by the OECD.
For now, the internal debate in China on climate change negotiation positions is
still distinct from debate on domestic policy issues, and has yet to forcefully enter
discussion on developmental priorities for China. But development priorities will
nonetheless likely frame the climate change debate in China, and with China’s
increasing emissions and its position as a growing global economy, the pressure will
also be on China to take on commitments. The likely outcome will be China taking on
a more active and positive role in climate change negotiations, which may then also
result in greater involvement by other major developing countries.

16

4 Key negotiation issues for China in Copenhagen
We now turn to more in depth discussion of key negotiating issues in Copenhagen
stressing China’s interest in each.

4.1 The interpretation of common but different responsibilities
In the Kyoto negotiations, common but differentiated responsibility (CBDR)
ended up being interpreted as non-participation by developing countries in global
emission commitments, even though the principle lacked a specific statement. In the
Copenhagen negotiation, the expectation is that there will be active participation by
China, along with India, Brazil, Russia, Indonesia and other larger low wage rapidly
growing economies. CBDR will be taken by them as a prior core principle that these
countries will participate in ways different from higher wage OECD countries, but
exactly what these differences will be remains to be determined. The interpretation of
CBDR that is agreed by parties to the negotiation is therefore the key to China’s
participation in the post Bali process.
CBDR as a principle has origins in terms of reference of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development Convenes (UNCED). Principle 7 of the
1990 Rio Declaration simply states that “in view of the different contributions to global
environmental degradation, States have common but differentiated responsibilities. The developed
countries acknowledge the responsibility that they bear in the international pursuit of sustainable
development in view of the pressures their societies place on the global environment and of the
technologies and financial resources they command”. This statement also finds its echo in

the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of 1992 in Article 3, 4
and 12, and also reflected in Kyoto Protocol Article 10 with the acknowledgements
that (1) the largest part of historical and current global emissions of greenhouse gases
originate in developed countries; (2) per capita emissions in developing countries are
still relatively low, and (3) the share of global emissions originating in developing
countries will grow but this is an inevitable accompaniment to their social and
development needs.

17

This concept is somewhat analogous to the concept of special and differential
treatment (SPT) for developing countries in the charter of WTO which first came into
the GATT in 1960s. In those days, the trade and trade policy problems of developing
countries were seen as common to all developing countries but different from those of
developed countries, motivating special elements in the international trade rule regime
in the GATT. These involved special rights for developing countries to protect other
own industries and preferential rights of access to developed country’s market. This in
turn led to special rules for developing countries within the GATT (and later WTO
rule regime (Whalley, 1990).
However, the analog of CBDR has not been clearly defined in term of elements
of a climate change rule regime, other than in its initial Kyoto interpretation of
non-participation. The principle only loosely embodies asymmetric responsibilities
and participation without spelling out specifics and as a result there has been ongoing
debate surrounding its interpretation.
Two different broad interpretations of CBDR currently circulate for the post Bali
negotiation. One is that developing countries have rights to development and that they
should receive financial compensation for any restraint on their growth and
development that is implied by climate change commitments. The second is that the
form of commitments should be different for developing countries compared to
developed countries. Both interpretations can simultaneously apply in negotiation.
The concept is also discussed in Yoshiro (2002) in term of double standards in
favor of developing countries, and the responsibility of developed countries to assist
developing countries. Double standards in this context imply different environmental
commitments for developed and developing countries. These may involve different
rights and obligations, and timing in the application of disciplines, giving more
flexibility for developing countries in negotiation. “Double standards” also involved
developed countries agreement in Kyoto to assist developing countries’ development.
Yoshiro argues that such assistance can take various forms, but can be interpreted
broadly as financial transfers, trade preferences or technical assistance. Developed
countries may seek to interpret CBDR commitments more narrowly as only technical
18

assistance related to the sustainable development implications of environmental
commitments.
These various interpretations of CBDR are central to China’s participation in the
post Bali negotiation as they determine the broad contours for the more detailed
negotiation to follow. China, India, and other developing countries were not included
in agreed numerical limits on emissions in the Kyoto Protocol, in part because they
were viewed as not being the main contributors to the greenhouse gas emissions
during the pre-treaty industrialization period. It was also because of the
acknowledgement by developed countries that developing countries’ need for growth
and development has to be weighted alongside environmental commitments. CBDR
thus seemingly endorses the important distinction between emissions that China
creates to develop and Western’s mature or luxury emissions, and implies developing
countries’ rights to growth and development to achieve income levels comparable to
those to OECD.
CBDR also seemingly implies different commitments by parties to the
negotiation, independently of financial compensation. Thus, one outcome consistent
with CBDR would be that OECD countries take on commitments on reductions of
emission levels, while China, India, Russia and Brazil take on commitments on
reductions in emissions intensity relative to GDP. Also if China and other lower
income countries can establish that they have rights granted by UNCCD and the terms
of the Kyoto Protocol to achieve growth and development comparable to that of the
OECD before taking any environment obligation, then China would seemingly have
to be financially compensated for any environmental restraint they accept. This would
suggest large and significant transfers being made to China as part of participation if it
can be established that growth levels in China are significantly lower by
commitments.
In the Copenhagen negotiations, it will also be argued by China and other
developing countries that the Kyoto Protocol only relates to actions up to 2012 and
establishes no precedents beyond 2012. New arrangements consistent with CBDR will
be argued for. Under CBDR, China could still take on similar emission reductions
19

commitments to OECD countries, but would likely only do so if financial
compensation and technical assistance was agreed and with China’s current growth
profile the compensation would presumably be large. With the four pillar structure
agreed for the Post Bali roadmap process, the adaptation and innovation funds
effectively act as a system of payments implying side financial compensation. This
structure could thus be the basis for a concrete interpretation of what CBDR means
also in terms of financial transfers.

4.2 The choice of negotiating instruments
A further central issue for China is the choice of negotiating instruments. These
relate to the agreed mechanisms to be used to reduce carbon emissions, what are to be
the base target years and what form commitments take. China’s commitments
regarding emissions could comprise a package of policies and measures more so than
a single target.

4.2.1 Emission intensity versus emission targets
Absolute emissions targets involve the amount of carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases produced and target for reductions by some specified date relative
to a base date. These mechanisms were used in Kyoto and also widely used in other
protocol and treaty arrangements. The target date for Copenhagen commitments is at
this point imprecise. In the G8, there has been discussion of 50% cuts by 2050.
Chancellor inertial has also been associated with targets for maximum temperature
change (2℃) by 2050. 2050 targets might also be accompanied by intermediate targets,
say 30% cut by 2030, and a 20% cut by 2020.
Relative emissions intensity targets focus on the amount of emissions relative to
some unit of economic output, usually stated in dollar or local currency terms.
Intensity targets can be interpreted as performance standards. For a company, targets
maybe relative to company total sales or relative to units of a good produced. For a
country, emissions intensity is typically calculated as tons of carbon dioxide relative
to the country’s GDP. The choice of exchange rate if emissions intensities across
20

countries are converted into tons of carbon per dollar of GDP becomes a critical issue.
This is especially important for China due to large differences in China’s dollar
measure of GDP depending upon whether or not purchasing power exchange rates are
used.
While departures from emission level targets may be viewed as inconsistent with
arrangements under the Kyoto Protocol, there is no reason in principle why the form
that targets take can not be changed from one environmental negotiation to the other,
as has occurred with tariff commitments in GATT/WTO across trade rounds. Also
Pizer (2005) has argued that absolute emissions targets are be too constraining in face
of unexpectedly high growth and too lax in face of unexpectedly low growth, and that
intensity targets better accommodate unexpected growth.
For China, using emissions level targets with rapid economic growth can quickly
lead to higher costs, even if new, low-carbon technologies are developed and
deployed, while intensity targets may not—making intensity targets more attractive
for China in the near term (Ellerman and Wing, 2003). Also since 1980 Chinese
emissions intensity has been declining (see Figure 1)considerably faster than that of
the US and the EU and is forecast to continue to do so with predicted declining energy
intensity (Hu Xiulian, 2005).
Shifting negotiations toward intensity targets for China may also make
negotiations easier by allowing a range of variants on the central target—including
slowing, stopping, and reversing emissions growth—to be discussed. The
conventional belief however, remains that intensity levels are difficult to compare
across countries due to the issue of at which exchange rates to use, and specifically
purchasing power parity exchange rates. Ahmad (2005) shows how the use of the
latter greatly reduces emissions intensity in China.

21

Carbon emission

2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Carbon intensity

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Carbon Intensity (kgC/US$)

Carbon emission (GtC/year)

Figure 1 Carbon Emissions and Carbon Intensity for China (1980-2006)

2005

Source: Ning Zeng & Jiahua Pan (2008)

4.2.2 Annual or cumulative emissions
Another key negotiating issue in the Post-Bali process for China is whether
emissions are to be calculated on an annual or cumulative basis. Over the last century,
China has contributed only 8% of global emissions, while the U.S. with far fewer
people has emitted over 4 times the cumulative CO2 emissions of China during
1900-2005(see Table 3). Estimates by the World Energy Agency are that around 60%
of the global increase in emissions in 2006-2030 will come from China & India, but
their total cumulative emissions till 2030 are still behind U.S. and EU (see Table 3).
If we instead focus on annual emissions in 2004(Table 1) and take expected
incremental emissions between 2006 and 2030 (Table 3), Chinese emissions will be
significantly greater than these of the U.S. and EU in this period, despite per capita
emissions by China remaining below them.
Table 3 Cumulative Emissions by Country (1990-2030)
Cumulative carbon
emissions (1990-2005)
(Billion tones)

% in cumulative global
emission (1990-2005)

Predicted cumulative carbon
emissions (2006-2030)
(Billion tones)

U.S.

320

30%

160

EU-25

250

23%

90

Japan

50

4%

30

China

90

8%

230

India

25

2%

55

Source: World Energy Outlook 2007

22

These data also imply that actions necessary to limit emission will not be
achieved without cooperation among all large emitters, especially China and India, as
their incremental emissions from 2006 through 2030 are likely to be as large as those
from EU and the United States (see Difiglio, 2007). Thus, from a negotiating point of
view China has an incentive to make the argument that whatever emissions targets are
agreed to as part of the Copenhagen process (and whether they involve absolute or
relative targets) they should be based on cumulative emissions by countries over long
periods of time, and not on the current annual flow of emissions.

4.2.3 The choice of base year and length of commitment
Another set of issues central to China is the choice of base year for emission
reductions and the length of any commitment period implied by the choice of the
target year. For China, it makes a significant difference how long the commitment
period is. The choice of base date is critically important in different ways for different
countries.
Under the Kyoto Protocol emissions levels in the 'base year' are the starting
points for tracking of domestic emissions for countries for their emissions reduction
target. The base year is not a 'year' per se, but the emission level from which emission
reductions will take place. In case of EU, the EU-27 does not have a Kyoto target and
an aggregated base year. For carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide 1990 is used
as the 'base year' for all EU-15 Member States. But for fluorinated gases, the EU-15
Member States can choose to use the emission levels in 1995 instead. Twelve of the
15 Member States have chosen to use 1995 as their base year for fluorinated gas
emissions. In practice, EU-15 base-year emissions can be considered close to 1990
emissions.
Russia for instance, has already indicated their negotiating position to maintain
1990 as the “base year”, because of the negative growth in Russia between 1990 and
1998 makes it much easier to meet emission reduction targets (Figure 2). Used of this
year, on the other hand, for China, would be a major negative given the rapid growth
which has occurred since the 1990s.
23

Figure 2 China and Russia’s GDP Growth Rates From 1991 to 2007
20
15
10
5
Russia
China

0
1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

-5
-10
-15
-20

Source: China Data from National Bureau of Statistics, China Statistical Yearbook;
Russia Data from: http://www.swivel.com/data_sets/show/1004019

At this point in the negotiation the target year remains unclear. The G8
discussion of a 50% reduction by 2050 points to a long commitment period. This
could be accompanied by intermediate commitments such as by 2020 or by 2030. The
longer the timeframe, the larger the negotiating leverage for China given her growth.
But equally, the longer the period, the more uncertainty as to cost will be associated
with commitments to emission levels.

4.2.4 Innovation and transfer of technology
The post Bali Roadmap process establishes two further negotiations on
adaptation and innovation, but both of which involve the establishment of funds. The
size of the funds and the criteria to be established for their use and administration are
key issues for China. Under the Copenhagen mandate, the following items are
negotiable: technology diffusion, technology deployment, technology transfer,
technology development and joint technology development. The issue is to precisely
define these terms, and in ways which lead to negotiable instruments and concrete
agreements. Given its current stage of development, China needs new technologies
that can provide for emission reductions in energy and carbon intensive industries in
the chemical, steel and concrete sectors. Technological advances are also required in

24

energy efficiency, renewable energy, hydrogen fuel cells, clean coal and carbon
capture and storage. In tackling climate change and reducing emissions, technology is
not a solution in itself, but it is an important means to the end.
Development and transfer of technology has been, and is, one of the most
difficult issues related to climate change to negotiate on. The COP14 established a
consultative process to find a meaningful framework for development and transfer of
technologies under Article 4.5 of the Convention. During the consultative process it
became clear that developing countries may also have to contribute to the
development and transfer of technology. It is also clear that technology transfer under
the Convention is quite different from transfers in open markets and distinct from
technology transfer that may occur under a CDM project. Technology transfer is,
however, aimed at providing opportunities for the private sector to access better
technologies leading to GHG emission reductions and also higher production.
Negotiating the provision of relevant technical information is seen as one avenue for
China to take, but for now, negotiating concrete aids in this area seems lacking.
Another set of issues raised involve special rules on Intellectual Property Rights
(IPR). The question being whether special IPR arrangements in the context of climate
change are needed remains. What special arrangements might be and how they would
operate is unclear. It is also under how the WTO TRIPS agreement can be amended
without the participation of the WTO. These issues need to be addressed by parties in
the two year negotiating process up to Copenhagen. Developing countries like China
need to be able to use the best available technology to adapt to climate change to
further damage. They don’t want to have to rely solely on open source technologies,
but be able to access patented technologies in a flexible and affordable manner
(Sabina and Oxfam, 2008). How such arrangements are worked out is clearly
problematic, as has been also seen in the HIV/AIDS area.
Other issues include facilitating changes in technology, the role of tacit
knowledge in the transfer of technologies and the role of subsidies in technology,
trade, and sustainable development negotiations. In any discussion of the development
and dissemination of environmentally friendly technology, it seems unavoidable to
25

consider subsidies. As Freymond (2007) notes, subsidies may be non-tariff barriers
(NTBs) and impede the flow of technology across borders. Developing countries,
which often lack the resources to provide subsidies, may seek financial support for
transfer of certain technologies.
In the Post Bali process, the focus is on a new technology fund and on the size
and administration of such fund. The perceived need for China is to negotiate
arrangements for specific industries and technologies according to China’s stage of
development. However, China is also not clear exactly what its technological
requirements are, and does not have clear knowledge of the technologies that are
needed.

4.2.5 Accompanying funds and financing
Financial transfers to China will aid in achieving emission reductions and act as
compensation for any environmental restraint that China agrees. These are thus
central to China’s post-Bali negotiating position. It is also argued that compensation
payments will raise the participation of developing countries by lowering their
marginal abatement costs (Eyckmans & Michael, 2003). In order to reach an
agreement in Copenhagen, developing countries like China will almost certainly call
on developed countries to finance technology transfer, this will include well-governed,
adequate, predictable and sustainable funds.
Independently of the post Bali process, the World Bank plans to establish a
portfolio of climate investment funds (CIFs). Transfer thus is mainly on the basis of
joint initiatives of the US, UK and Japan. One of those funds is the Clean Technology
Fund. But the CIFs largely focus on mitigation, not on adaptation technologies and are
to provide loans as well as grants to eligible developing countries. There are also
‘sunset clauses’ proposed for the CIFs, a tying the CIFs’ termination to the creation of
financial mechanisms under the UNFCCC. They are thus seen as interim measures to
assist in filling immediate financing gaps with the insertion of ‘specific sunset
clauses” linked to agreement on a future climate change regime. There is no fixed date
for the cessation of the CIFs, rendering the existence of a ‘sunset clause’ vague.
26

For China, it will be a priority that efforts be focused on developing genuine
multilateral and bilateral funds. Multilateral funds would give developing countries
representation and voice within the global governance structure and ensure that
resources for climate change are used in accordance with internationally agreed
principles and meet the objectives of the multilateral climate change regime (Sabina
and Oxfam, 2008). Management and coordination of multilateral funds are more
difficult. Bilateral funds are more manageable, but are often small and hence limited
in what they can achieve.
During a roundtable discussion in Bonn on June 3, 2008 (Bonn Climate Change
Talks, Zou Ji, 2008), China proposed setting up a multilateral technology acquisition
fund for climate technologies and argued that the fund could be based on a public
private partnership work to financing the development, diffusion and transfer of
environmentally sound technologies by linking private and public financing. It was
also argued that financial transfer to China need to be tied to the speed of emission
reductions, giving incentives to China to achieve such reductions (Kiang and Guan,
2007). China could use such incentives at firm level and also tie them to FDI
approvals. Funding for dealing in China with climate change would need to come
from the national budget and specialist funds.
In October 2007, China also approved the establishment of a Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM) fund. By the end of the same month, the National Development
and Reform Commission had already approved 885 CDM projects. If all of these
projects are implemented, total emissions reductions due to CDM projects in China
will total 1.5 billion tones, and cost US$15 billion. Over US$3 billion of this will go
into a China CDM Fund. This provides a starting point for funding targeted
specifically at tackling climate change. These will need to go well beyond Bali
process for the Kyoto Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).

4.3 Non-compliance with Kyoto targets and coalition activity in Copenhagen
A further issue for China in Post-Bali negotiation and seemingly central to the
Chinese position concerns the likely non-compliance with Kyoto reduction targets by
27

a number of OECD economies. In aggregate, the parties of Kyoto Protocol will likely
meet their emission reduction targets, but this is in large part because of the
substantial compliance by Russia because of the sharply negative growth between
1990, 1991 and 1997, 1998(Figure 2). Individually, a number of key OECD countries
will be in significant degree of non-compliance. The most extreme cares probably will
be Spain, Portugal9, Australia10 and Canada11 which have each increased emissions by
as much as 30% over their target decrease by the end of 2012. For these countries
such as Canada, this could imply larger commitment being made to implement Kyoto
commitments than commitments possibly undertaken as part of the post Bali and
Copenhagen processes.
In turn, a related issue is the lack of enforcement mechanisms in the Kyoto
Protocol under the first round of negotiations. Kyoto doesn’t set out a procedure for
determining non-compliance (which is a huge problem). In UNFCCC, Most of their
300 people spend their time monitoring data form countries as to what their emissions
actually are. They consult, examine data, comment and make repeated visits. But at
the end of the day there is no mechanism for determining exactly what emissions are
and so it will not be possible under Kyoto for there to be a clear determination as to
who has met which target and by how much.
This non-compliance and non-enforcement with Kyoto targets represents both
major problems for the negotiation and posed issues for china in the development of
negotiating positions. In Bali conference, when the draft summit text asked
developing countries to make "measurable, reportable and verifiable" cuts in their
greenhouse emissions, China and the G77 (a coalition of 132 developing countries)
9

Spain and Portugal had targets of an 8% decrease, but both have increased emissions by about 40%.
Australia was granted a limitation of an 8% increase which is specified in Article 4, section 8(h) of
the Convention, but only ratified on 3 December 2007 by the new government and took effect in March,
2008. Analysis has projected Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions at 109% of the 1990 emissions level
over the period 2008–2012, calculated including the effects of Land use, land-use change and forestry
(LULUCF). This is slightly above its 108% Kyoto Protocol limitation. As of 2007, the UNFCCC is
reporting that Australia's 2004 greenhouse gas emissions were at 125.6% of 1990 levels, calculated
without the LULUCF correction.
11
On December 17, 2002, Canada ratified the treaty that came into force in February 2005, requiring it
to reduce emissions to 6% below 1990 levels during the 2008-2012 commitment periods. As of 2003,
the federal government claimed to have spent or committed 3.7 billion dollars on climate change
programmes. By 2004, CO2 emissions had risen to 27% above 1990 levels (which compares
unfavorably to the 16% increase in emissions by the United States during that time).
10

28

argued that technology and financial support from developed countries should also be
"measurable, reportable and verifiable" and China's commitment, along with other
developing countries, to discuss adopting "measurable, reportable and verifiable"
measures to slow its emissions is not equivalent to developed nations' undertakings on
binding emissions cuts. In Copenhagen, we can imagine that China’s argument will
still likely be that negotiation on future emission reductions is simply not credible
negotiation if targets for the first-round commitments have not been honored.
It is true that there is no enforcement mechanism in Kyoto but here is a provision
for carrying forward of any deficit to future negotiations and this has a penalty factor
which increases the carrying forward by a further 30%. Hence, the argument for
countries in the position of non-compliance with targets from first round would be to
find some mechanism to meet these targets as well as taking on fresh commitments as
part of Bali and Copenhagen process. From a Chinese perspective, the focus on
effective enforcement mechanisms in the negotiation must be a significant element of
the negotiation process.
Another issue concerns individual country targets and the EU binding
commitment targets. Under the Kyoto Protocol, the EU is required to reduce its
greenhouse gas emissions by 8 per cent from 1990 levels during the first commitment
period from 2008 to 2012. Member States’ commitments of minus 8 per cent in
Annex B of the treaty were amended in an EU burden sharing agreement to give
national targets (see Table 4). Within the shared Kyoto target, each EU-15 Member
State has a differentiated emissions target. The 12 new EU Member States are not part
of the joint EU-15 target but all, except Cyprus and Malta, have individual targets
under the Kyoto Protocol (see Table 5).
But for all their intense activity such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme12,
countries are finding it challenging to implement the EU Directive (Table 5). Practical
problems remain over data availability, capacity and timing (RIIA Report, 2003).
12

EU Emissions Trading Scheme is the European Union's climate change policy tool, which helps
industries to cut their CO2 emissions in a cost-effective way. It requires a cap on emissions for all large
CO2 emission sources. In the EU-15, the ETS is estimated to cut 3.4 % from base-year emissions.
29

Table 4 Annex B Countries to the Kyoto Protocol and Emissions Targets
(% change in emissions for 2008–12 relative to 1990 base-year levels)13
Country

Phase 1 Emission reductions targets

EU*

-8%

US

-7%

Canada, Hungary, Japan, Poland

-6%

Croatia

-5%

New Zealand, Russian Federation, Ukraine

0

Norway

1%

Australia

8%

Iceland

10%

Notes: EU includes EU-15, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Monaco, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland.

Source: UNFCCC

Table 5 EU Member States’ Individual Kyoto Targets and the Projected
Gap with GHG Emission in 201014

EU Member states

Individual Kyoto Targets

Gap between Kyoto commitments
and projected GHGs in 2010*

Germany

-21

-12.7

Sweden

4

-3.3

UK

-12.5

-1.4

Denmark

-21

3.4

Greece

25

3.9

luxembourg

-28

5.1

France

0

9

Netherlands

-6

12.1

Italy

-6.5

14.6

Finland

0

16.6

Belgium

-7.5

22.9

Austria

-13

24.5

Ireland

13

26.8

Portugal

27

31.1

Spain

15

33.3

Note*: Negative figures represent over-delivery, positive figures show shortfall from emissions target.

Source: Royal Institute of International Affairs (RIIA) Report 2003
13

These targets, which range from –8% to +10%, represent either an outright cut in emissions levels for
industralised countries, or a lower level increase from current levels compared to an expected 'business
as usual' scenario for less developed countries.

14

See RIIA Report 2003 Table 2.1 and Figure 2.1.
30

Thus this raises possibilities for Copenhagen similarly to Kyoto that the EU
Commission first negotiates a target(say 10% cut) and then under burden sharing
arrangements these get translated into higher targets for some and lower targets for
others(say 5%,15%). As a result both EU and individual country targets exist. Both
are in the treaty as both are signatories. Another possibility could be that the parties to
the Bali and Copenhagen make commitments to funds to be held in central account by
an international agency. At the end of the commitment period, if commitments were
not be horned, the funds of those countries violating their commitments will not be
returned to those countries, and would instead been divided between those countries
whose commitments had been met. The majority of the funds would come from the
OECD countries, given the sharp differences in income well and capital.
As long as the key negotiation issues concern under matters, China, India and
Brazil may have the common interest of not having being in participation in the first
round of negotiations and seeking to have growth and development and hence
negotiation on emission intensity. They also will jointly focus on the issue of
compliance, and dealing with non-compliance and effective dispute settlement
procedures. All of these will be central issues for China in dealing with the countries
participated in the Kyoto negotiation given that China had taken no commitments.

4.4 Other issues concerning China’s participation
The Chinese negotiation position post Bali will also reflect domestic policy
initiatives. China is now renewing emission related potential damage from global
warming and taking own internal measures to reduce the contributions China makes
to global damage through incremental growth of emissions. So, how China wants to
go in any unilateral measures and related questions of the costs involved for China
incline to global emission targets is the issue. Actually, there is a long way to go for
China, and the most difficult part still remains actual implementation of
environmental policy. So far, China has been successful in creating an environmental
apparatus and has issued environmental policies, laws and regulations. Where it has
not been successful is in carrying out policies—there is still a big gap between words
31

and action. Identifying mechanisms and policy tools to ensure efficient
implementation of policies and enforcement of legislation should be a priority both
for the Chinese authorities and the UN bodies engaged in environmental efforts in
China (Gørild and Ellen, 2007).
A related issue is how other parties grant credit for unilateral actions in the
multilateral Copenhagen negotiation. China’s commitment to a 20% reduction in
energy consumption relative to GDP by 2020 and a 20% target for use of renewable
from current of 1% of energy consumption figure are the issue. To some extent, these
unilateral measures can be viewed as instruments which can be used to meet
multilateral agreed targets, but on the other hand, multilateral targets in emission
reduction intensity are different, hence China can be argued to be given some degree
of credits for such commitments, particularly commitments on renewable. How that is
done and how the credit will be given need negotiation in the round.
Furthermore, how to maintain openness to markets is also a central issue given
the pressures now emerging from Europe and else where for systems of adjustments
to company significant global environmental commitments. These are based on the
argument that environmental commitments raises the cost for domestic producers who
need to have offsetting adjustments involving tariff on import and export subsidies.
The prospect for China therefore is a global structure in which global markets
potentially become closed as environmental commitments are undertaken to offset the
cost implications for the domestic producers. How China deals with non
environmental but environment induced difficulty is crucial for China. This is also
potentially a major negative for China through export growth and FDI impacts linked
to these form of trade measures tied to global environmental arguments (see also
Lochood & Whalley 2008).

32

5. Concluding remarks and implications for China’s participation in
global environmental negotiations beyond Copenhagen
In this paper, we discuss a range of issues concerning China’s participation in
Post-Bali process One is that a interpretation of CBDR which reflects developing
countries’ desire to leave room to grow will be needed for the negotiation to be
fruitful. Another is that choices of instruments will be central in the negotiation.
Emission intensity, effective technology transfer and financial support and other
related issues will be raised by China. Also non-compliance and collative activities
will be issues for the Post-Bali process and need to be dealt with in the negotiation.
Globally, we see an emerging structure of a sequence of global environmental
negotiations which has parallels to trade negotiations in the GATT and WTO. In the
WTO case, the ninth rounds of negotiation of GATT/WTO negotiations since 1947
have sequentially moved forward. In the environmental area, we effectively have two
rounds negotiation from Kyoto to Bali and Copenhagen. Seemingly inevitably these
negotiations will continue with deeper and deeper commitments and the emergence of
a more global environmental regime. This global environmental regime is in our view
likely to be increasingly linked to other dimensions of international policy coordinated
with trade and finance. The result may eventually be linked negotiations between
trade, finance and environment, and even potentially a new institution format that
goes beyond the current WTO structure and the patchwork quilt of arrangements in
the environmental area. For China, therefore, the prospect is of ongoing negotiations
after the Bali and Copenhagen which broadly expand on the existing coverage and
commitments and also growing linkage to trade and finance. Eventually linkage could
be such as to yield a new global organization or body. What the broadening of these
negotiations will be at this point is hard to say but could include broadening to other
environmental issues including biodiversity and other matters added into broadened
climate change negotiations. It could also involve broadening to energy and energy
security issues, including nuclear and other matters. The positions that China takes on

33

in the Copenhagen negotiation thus potentially affects their position in future
negotiating rounds.
On the broadening of coverage and linkage to trade and finance, the issues here
basically reflect the time warp that global institutional structure of policy coordination
currently find itself in. Since the Breton Wood Conference in 1944, through trade and
finance arrangements in the GATT/WTO and in the IMF, global activities have been
based on the premise that the only links between national economies care those
involved in the trade and finance in physical linkage. These physical linkages are now
the global emissions which are to be addressed through climate change and global
environmental negotiations. The prospect therefore is eventually one of environmental
negotiation growing in significance and linkage will thus likely become lager and
larger, to the point that these separate negotiations eventually become directly linked.
From China’s point of view, linkage is central because the need to maintain
growth and development policy is orientated to growth based on trade and FDI. At the
same time, commitments made on global environmental negotiations will be central to
this. In turn, China will have major role to play in any institutional evolution. There
are now arguments being made that the World Trade Organizations are viewed not as
a bargaining organization just on trade policy, but effectively a photo type of a global
bargaining organization worldwide for all forms of policy coordination including
environmental area (Whalley, 2008). Hence the World Trade Organization may
evolve as a World Bargaining Organization which encompasses environmental
bargaining as well as trade bargaining. China’s participation in the potential
emergence of such an organization may thus also be on issue in current global
environmental negotiations.

34

References:
Asian Development Bank, Asian Development Outlook 2007, March 2007
Auditoire Jacques Freymond, 2007, “who negotiations on Environmental goods:
promoting transfer of technology for sustainable development”, Economics
Occasional Papers series, No. 07-01, http://www.ecolomics-international.org/
Barrett, Scott (2007), “Why Cooperate? – The Incentive to Supply Global Public
Goods”, Oxford University, Press, New York, U.S.A.
Carmen Difiglio, “Challenge of GHG Emission Reductions - The IEA 450 Scenario”,
Scientific Session on the WFS Planetary Emergencies, 2007.
Cass R. Sunstein, 2007, “The Complex Climate Change Incentives of China and the
United States”, AEI-BROOKINGS Joint Center working Paper 07-14,
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1089143
CS Kiang and He Gang, 2007, “China, climate change and the equity principle”,
http://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/
Denny Ellerman and Ian Sue Wing, 2003, “Absolute vs. Intensity-Based Emission
Caps”, MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, MIT Report
No. 100, http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt100.pdf
Hu Xiulian, Jian Kejun, Liu Qiang, 2005, “Development of china carbon emission
scenarios toward 2050”, Energy research institute (ERI), National Development and
Reform Commission of China. http://2050.nies.go.jp/sympo/cop11_side/Hu_COP11.pdf
Heggelund, Gørild and Ellen Bruzelius Backer, 2007, “China and UN Environmental
Policy: Institutional Growth, Learning and Implementation”, International
Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and Economics, volume 7, issue 4.
International Energy Agency, “World Energy Outlook 2007: China and India
Insights”. http://eneken.ieej.or.jp/en/data/pdf/412.pdf
Jarrod Hepburn and Imran Ahmad, 2005, “The Principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities”, Working Paper in the CISDL, Recent Developments in International
Law
Related
to
Sustainable
Development”
Series,
http://www.cisdl.org/pdf/sdl/SDL_Common_but_Diff.pdf
Johan Eyckmans & Michael Finus, 2003, "New Roads to International Environmental
Agreements: The Case of Global Warming," Energy, Transport and Environment
Working Papers Series ete0318, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.
Lockwood B. & Whalley J.
Adjustments” (unpublished).

(2008) “Climate Change-Related Border Tax

35

Ning Zeng, Yihui Ding, Jiahua Pan, Huijun Wang, Jay Gregg, 2008, “Sustainable
Development: Climate Change--the Chinese Challenge”, Science Magazine, Vol. 319.
no. 5864, pp. 730 - 731
Royal Institute of International Affairs, “EU Emissions Trading: Challenges and
Implications of National Implementation”, RIIA Report, November 2003.
Sabina Voogd and Oxfam Novib, 2008, “Technology Transfer and Climate Change:
Options for a Long term Policy Making”, 28th sessions of the SBs
http://unfccc.meta-fusion.com/kongresse/SB28/downl/080607_SB28_3_SabinaVoogds.pdf

United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Climate
Change Talks 2008, http://unfccc.int/2860.php
Walsh S. & Whalley J. (2008) “The Global Negotiating Framework for Climate
Change Mitigation” (paper prescribed at CESifo conference on Europe and global
Environmental Negotiations, July 14/15, 2008).
William Pizer, 2005, “The Case for Intensity Targets”, Resources for the Future,
http://www.rff.org/rff/Documents/RFF-DP-05-02.pdf
Whalley J. (2008b) “The Coverage, Form and Content of WTO Policy Bargaining
beyond the Doha Round” (mimeo).”
Would Resource Institution report by Kevin A. Baumert, Timothy Herzog & Jonathan
Pershing, 2005, “Navigating the Numbers: Greenhouse Gas Data and International
Climate Policy”. http://pdf.wri.org/navigating_numbers.pdf
WTO trade profiles statistics 2007
http://stat.wto.org/CountryProfile/WSDBCountryPFView.aspx?Language=E&Country=CN

Yoshiro Matsui, “Some Aspects of the Principle of “Common but Differentiated
Responsibilities””, International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and
Economics 2: 151–171, 2002.
Zhang Haibin, 2006, “China’s position in International Climate Change Negotiations:
Continuities and Changes”, first China-US Climate Change Forum, University of
California at Berkeley.
http://www.seoulpeaceprize.or.kr/file/zhangHaibin276-314.PDF
Zou Ji, 2008, “Innovative Financing for International Development and Transfer of
Climate Sound Technologies: China’s Perspectives”, Bonn Climate Change Talks
2008, ttclear.unfccc.int/ttclear/presentations/Bonn/China.ppt

36

