NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EFFECTS OF WELFARE REFORM ON EDUCATIONAL ACQUISITION OF YOUNG
ADULT WOMEN
Dhaval M. Dave
Nancy E. Reichman
Hope Corman
Working Paper 14466
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14466

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2008

The authors are grateful for valuable research assistance from Natasha Pilkauskas and Afshin Zilanawala;
for helpful comments from Julie Hotchkiss, Robert Kaestner, and Sanders Korenman; and for helpful
information on welfare policies vis-à-vis education from Julie Strawn and Elizabeth Lower-Basch,
as well as Gilbert Crouse and Don Oellerich of the Department of Health and Human Services' Office
of The Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy E. Reichman, and Hope Corman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Effects of Welfare Reform on Educational Acquisition of Young Adult Women
Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy E. Reichman, and Hope Corman
NBER Working Paper No. 14466
November 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. H52,H53,I21,I28,I38,J18,J24
ABSTRACT
Education beyond traditional ages for schooling is an important source of human capital acquisition
among adult women. Welfare reform, which began in the early 1990s and culminated in the passage
of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act in 1996, has promoted work
rather than educational acquisition for this group. Exploiting variation in welfare reform across states
and over time and using relevant comparison groups, we undertake a comprehensive study of the effects
of welfare reform on adult women’s educational acquisition. We first estimate effects of welfare reform
on high school drop-out of teenage girls, both to improve on past research on this issue and to explore
compositional changes that may be relevant for our primary analyses of the effects of welfare reform
on the educational acquisition of adult women. We conduct numerous specification checks and explore
the mediating role of work. We find robust and convincing evidence that welfare reform significantly
decreased the probability of college enrollment among adult women, by at least 20 %. It also appears
to have decreased the probability of high school enrollment on the same order of magnitude. These
results suggest that the gains from welfare reform in terms of increases in employment and reductions
in caseloads have come at a cost in terms of lower educational attainment among adult women at risk
for relying on welfare.

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Hope Corman
28 Suffolk Lane
Princeton Junction, NJ 08550
and NBER
corman@rider.edu

Nancy E. Reichman
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
97 Paterson St., Room 435
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
reichmne@umdnj.edu

3
Introduction
A major goal of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) of 1996 was to move recipients and potential recipients of cash assistance into the
labor force. The legislation ended entitlement to welfare benefits under Aid to Families with
Dependent Children (AFDC) and replaced AFDC with Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF) block grants to states. Among the features of TANF and many pre-PRWORA
state waiver programs,1 which together constitute “welfare reform,” were time limits on the
receipt of welfare benefits, work requirements as a condition of receiving welfare, and sanctions
for non-compliance with program rules. PRWORA also strengthened child support enforcement
and made it easier for married and cohabiting couples to qualify for welfare benefits. These
sweeping changes ushered in a new “work first” era that de-emphasized education for adult
women. The PRWORA legislation granted considerable discretion to states in establishing
welfare eligibility and program rules. As a result, there is substantial state policy variation within
the broad national regime of time-limited cash assistance for which work is required.
In terms of reducing caseloads, welfare reform (including the pre-PRWORA waivers) has
been successful; welfare rolls have declined by over 50% since their peak in 1994 and at least
one-third of the caseload decline can be explained by welfare reform (see Grogger & Karoly
2005). At the same time, employment rates of low-skilled mothers rose dramatically (Ziliak
2006), and at least some of that increase was a result of welfare reform (Schoeni & Blank 2000).
The effects on family structure are less dramatic. A large literature on the effects of welfare

1

Although welfare reform is often dated to the landmark 1996 PRWORA legislation, reforms actually started taking
place in the early 1990s when the Clinton Administration greatly expanded the use and scope of “welfare waivers”
to allow states to carry out experimental or pilot changes to their AFDC programs, with random assignment required
for evaluation. Waivers were approved in 43 states, ranging from modest demonstration projects to broad-based
statewide changes, and constituted the first phase of welfare reform. Many policies and features of state waivers
were later incorporated into PRWORA.

4
reform on marriage and a smaller one on cohabitation reveal mixed findings, and the literature on
non-marital childbearing and female headship indicates slightly negative but inconsistent effects
of welfare reform (Blank 2002, 2007; Moffitt 1992, 1995, 1998; Grogger & Karoly 2005;
Gennetian & Knox 2003; Peters, Plotnick & Jeong 2003; Ratcliffe et al. 2002).
The vast majority of mothers on welfare are adults (USDHHS 2008), and education
beyond traditional ages for schooling is an important source of human capital acquisition among
adult women. Almost 30% of adults in the U.S. engaged in some form of work-related education
(broadly defined to include courses at the workplace or courses and degree programs in other
locations) in 2004-2005, and those in their childbearing years were more likely than older adults
to engage in such activities (O’Donnell 2006). In 2000, 7.7% of females enrolled in grades 9-12
were age 21 or older (U.S. Census Bureau 2008a); in 2005, 80% of females taking vocational
courses were age 25 years or older (U.S. Census Bureau 2008b); and in 2006, 40% of all female
college students were age 25 years or older (U.S. Census Bureau 2008c).
Postsecondary education is not a rare event among welfare recipients. For the last school
year before PRWORA (1995-1996), unpublished Department of Education reports indicate that
about 650,000 welfare recipients were enrolled in post-secondary education (Price 2005). Using
the 1979 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), a pre-PRWORA cohort, London
(2006) found that almost 14% of all welfare recipients and 17% of high school graduate welfare
recipients attended college during a spell of welfare receipt. According to U.S. Census Bureau
(2000), almost 23% of TANF recipients in 1998 had at least one year of college.
The work first approach under welfare reform has been targeted to adult mothers, for
whom education and training generally do not count as required work activities. In contrast,
minor mothers are subject to a broader human capital approach. In particular, PRWORA requires

5
minor mothers to attend high school or training in order to receive TANF and does not impose
time limits or work requirements if they are full-time students. On the surface, these differential
incentives suggest that welfare reform decreased educational acquisition among adult women
and increased school enrollment among teenage girls.
Relatively few studies have investigated the effects of welfare reform on educational
acquisition, and all but one of those focused exclusively on teenage girls. Exploiting variation in
welfare reform across states and over time and using relevant comparison groups, we undertake a
comprehensive study of the effects of welfare reform on adult women’s educational acquisition.
We first estimate effects of welfare reform on high school drop-out of teenage girls, both to
improve on past research on this issue and to explore compositional changes that may be relevant
for our primary analyses of the effects of welfare reform on the educational acquisition of adult
women. We then conduct comprehensive analyses of the effects of welfare reform on adult
women’s educational enrollment. A number of alternative models are estimated as specification
checks, and the mediating role of work is explored. The results indicate whether the work first
approach targeted to adult mothers has increased employment at the possible expense of future
earnings and productivity, or whether it has actually encouraged education by making welfare
less of a long-term option.
Background
Theoretical Framework
We base our analyses on Becker’s classic work, Human Capital (1975), in which
schooling is an investment undertaken if the present value of the future stream of benefits
exceeds the present value of the current and future costs. In Equation 1 below, YEd represents the
benefits of education, which may include not only increased wages, but also greater productivity

6
in the home and increased nonpecuniary benefits in the labor market. Additionally, the extent to
which the individual finds schooling enjoyable (or unpleasant) is factored into the net
consumption benefits. YNoEd denotes the income/benefit stream if the educational activity had not
been undertaken. The costs of education, C, include both the opportunity cost of the individual’s
time and the out-of-pocket expenses of schooling such as tuition, books, transportation, and child
care. T is the total number of years the woman will benefit from the investment, and r refers to
the discount rate, which incorporates both the market interest rate and individual’s rate of time
preference. Looking forward, the individual will engage in an educational activity if the net
present value (PDV) is positive.

[(

)

]

t

(1) PDV = ∑t =1 Yt Ed − Yt NoEd − Ct / (1 + r )
T

This model implies that individuals are more likely to invest in education when they are
young, are likely to be successful in school, enjoy schooling, have a low opportunity cost of
time, and have a low rate of time preference (i.e., tend not to “live for today”). Welfare reform
could affect several of the arguments in Equation 1. For adult women, work requirements would
increase the time cost of attending school (in C), which would decrease schooling. However,
there are potential opposing effects that could increase schooling: (1) By shortening the length of
time a woman can expect to receive welfare and by requiring her to work as a condition of
receiving benefits, the length of time (T) for which higher market wages associated with
schooling (in YEd) are earned will increase. (2) Welfare reform could result in a lower rate of
time preference (which would be consistent with “culture of poverty” arguments). (3)
Employment may provide access to educational opportunities, decreasing the costs and
increasing the benefits of pursuing education.

7
The Evolution of Educational Policy under Welfare
Traditionally, mothers on AFDC were able to spend their time as they chose; this
included attending college, for which tuition assistance was potentially available from Pell
grants, scholarships, and student loans. The situation changed for some mothers under the Job
Opportunities and Basic Skills Training (JOBS) program, which was created under the Family
Support Act of 1988 and required states, to the extent resources allowed, to engage mothers with
no children below age 3 in education, work, or training activities. However, many women were
exempt from participation in JOBS, and between 1992 (just prior to the first statewide AFDC
waiver program) and 1996 (enactment of PRWORA) only 10% of all welfare recipients in the
U.S. participated in the JOBS program.2
Major statewide AFDC waiver programs, first implemented in late 1992, substantially
altered the nature of welfare by imposing time limits, significantly reducing participation
exemptions, imposing sanctions, increasing earnings disregards, imposing family caps, and/or
implementing work requirements. Compared to JOBS programs, statewide waivers were broadbased in that they applied to large proportions of welfare recipients. While states were required
to provide many specifics of their programs in their waiver plans, they were not required to
report policies vis-à-vis educational activities. Complicating the picture, states could change their
policies without having to amend their waiver plans (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services 1997). The situation changed notably under TANF, which required states to file detailed
program specifics (including educational policies) at the outset as well as any intended changes
to those policies. That is, under TANF, the extent to which educational activities could count

2

Committee on Ways and Means, U.S. House of Representatives, “Overview of Entitlement Programs” for 1994
and 1998 (Green Books). Available at:
http://aspe.hhs.gov/94gb/sec10.txt and http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=105_green_book&docid=f:wm007_07.105.

8
toward work requirements was more explicit. Because of the reporting issues under the waivers,
it is difficult to compare educational policies under AFDC waivers and TANF, even in a given
state. However, it is clear that under both AFDC waivers and TANF, work and other
requirements gave women less flexibility in deciding how to spend their time and many welfare
recipients could attend college or other schooling only after fulfilling work requirements.
The work first paradigm may have emerged because few evaluations of welfare-to-work
experiments indicated that an education based approach was more successful than the work first
strategy in advancing self-sufficiency. However, some have questioned whether those results
pertained to formal education, particularly college education, as those programs generally
provided basic skills, job-seeking skills, or vocational training rather than formal education
(Shaw et al. 2006). In a rigorous re-evaluation of a major welfare-to-work program, Hotz,
Imbens & Klerman (2006) found that the short-run employment advantages had been overestimated and that the education-based approach was more effective in the longer-term. The
authors concluded that the work first approach appears to provide a "quick fix," but is not
necessarily the better long-term strategy for promoting self-sufficiency.
Returns to Education for Adults and Welfare Recipients
Corman (1983) pointed out decades ago that the human capital literature tended to
(incorrectly) assume that individuals attend school as early as possible and that adult education is
an anomaly. Since then, there have been several studies focusing on education of non-traditional
aged students. Particularly relevant to our study, Boudett, Murnane & Willett (2000) found that
almost two-thirds of female high school drop-outs receive some form of education in the decade
following drop-out and that adult education has a positive effect on earnings for this group, and.
Leigh & Gill (1997) found that the returns to community college education (both degree-granting

9
and vocational programs) are about the same for returning adult students as for traditional-age
students.
Welfare recipients are more likely to attend two-year rather than four-year colleges
(London 2006). According to a review by Kane & Rouse (1999), each year of credit at a
community college yields, on average, a 5 to 8% increase in annual earnings—a return similar to
that from one year of a four-year college. Kane & Rouse also found that evaluations of
experimental programs supported by the Job Training Partnership Act tended to underestimate
the returns to community college education, since many in the control groups also attended
school. This finding is consistent with that of Hotz, Imbens & Klerman (2006) in that it suggests
that at least some experimental studies that were influential in shaping welfare policy
underestimated the value of education to welfare recipients. In sum, the literature suggests that
education has been and is a worthwhile human capital investment for many welfare recipients.
Effects of Welfare Reform on Educational Acquisition
Hao & Cherlin (2004), Kaestner, Korenman & O’Neill (2003), Offner (2005), and Koball
(2007) all estimated difference-in-difference models to assess the impact of welfare reform on
high-school attendance or drop-out among female teens. Offner, using the March Current
Population Surveys (CPS) from 1989 to 2001 and comparing female teens in low and higher
income families, found that welfare reform resulted in increased high school attendance. The use
of income to define target and comparison groups is potentially problematic, however, because
welfare reform could have affected income and therefore changed the composition of the target
and comparison groups over time. Kaestner and colleagues, using the NLSY to compare teens in
1979 and 1997, found that welfare reform reduces drop-out. Hao & Cherlin, concerned about
cohort effects in the Kaestner study, compared older and younger teens (who had different

10
exposure to the legislation) in the 1997 NLSY and found no effect of welfare reform on dropout. Both studies used multiple sets of reasonable target and comparison groups, but the timing
of the NLSY makes it less than ideal to study welfare reform, as it predates most reforms by
almost 15 years (1979) or takes place very soon after PRWORA (1997). As a result, the
comparison groups either have to be from very different cohorts as in the Kaestner study or from
very similar cohorts as in the Hao study, likely “contaminating” the control group. Koball
examined two cohorts closer in time, by combining a pre-welfare cohort from the National
Education Longitudinal Study and a post-welfare cohort from the NLSY. However, she focused
on teen mothers rather than all teenage girls. Her results were consistent with those of Offner and
Kaestner et al. in that she found that welfare reform significantly reduced drop-out. Overall, the
available evidence suggests that welfare reform has had favorable effects on educational
enrollment of teenage girls.
The potential effects of welfare reform on education among adult women have been
largely neglected by the research community. The lone (published) exception is a study by
Jacobs & Winslow (2003) that examined the effect of welfare receipt and parenthood/marital
status on college attendance at two points in time, using two different data sets. First, the authors
used data from the 1995 and 2000 March CPS to study young (< 25 year old) female high school
graduates. A positive feature of this set of analyses is that TANF policies vis-à-vis education
were incorporated. A drawback is a data constraint that allowed the authors to study only young
women. Second, the authors used data from the 1995 and 1999 National Household Education
Surveys (NHES) to study female high school graduates of all ages. Drawbacks of the NHES
analyses, which were acknowledged by the authors, are a lack of state identifiers in the data and
a poorly measured parenthood status variable. Drawbacks of both sets of analyses are the use of

11
widely spaced cohorts (increasing the likelihood that the effects of other changes not related to
welfare reform are attributed to welfare reform) and the use of 1995 as the base year (when prePRWORA waivers had already been implemented in 19 states).
In the CPS analyses, Jacobs & Winslow did not find changes in the effects of welfare
receipt on college attendance between 1995 and 2000 but did find that, holding welfare receipt
constant, single mothers were less likely to attend college in 2000 than in 1995. Particularly
relevant for our analyses, they found that women living in states that were more supportive of
college attendance for welfare recipients were more likely to attend college. The NHES results in
this study contradict those from the CPS. In the NHES analyses, the authors found that welfare
recipients were significantly less likely to go to college in 1999 than in 1995, but that holding
welfare receipt constant, single mothers were more likely to attend college in 1999 than in 1995.
While this study provides some insights, it only considers college enrollment and does not
present definitive findings on the effects of welfare reform on that outcome. Finally, it does not
account for major standards-based reforms in education that occurred during the same time
period may have changed the composition of high school graduates. The No Child Left Behind
Act of 2001 strengthened a two-decade trend in state implementation of minimum standards for
high school graduation. By 2005, almost half of the states implemented “exit exams” for high
school students. According to Dee & Jacob (2007) these exams resulted in some students
dropping out of high school who would have otherwise received a diploma, while improving the
academic performance of other students. A rigorous study of the effects of welfare reform on
education must account for these changes.
In sum, there is a dearth of existing work on the effects of welfare reform on adult
women’s education despite the facts that: (1) the vast majority of mothers on welfare are adults,

12
(2) educational acquisition is commonplace among young adult women and welfare recipients,
(3) economic theory suggests that broad-based work requirements and the de-emphasis on
education and training would alter the costs and benefits of pursuing education for this group,
and (4) even modest increases in education raise earnings. It is important to investigate not only
basic skills programs for long-term welfare recipients, but also enrollment in formal education,
including post-secondary school. Finally, relevant trends besides welfare reform must be
accounted for when examining the effects of welfare reform on adult educational acquisition.
Data
We use data from the Current Population Survey (CPS), a large-scale nationally
representative monthly survey of approximately 57,000 households that is conducted by the
Bureau of the Census for the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The CPS is a consistent source of
information on employment, demographic factors, education, family relationships and other
characteristics of the civilian non-institutionalized population. The October CPS contains
information on current high school enrollment, current college enrollment (full- and part-time),
and current enrollment in trade school, General Education Development (GED) preparatory
programs, and other educational activities. We use October CPS data from 1992 through 2001,
which spans the period of welfare reform, to estimate the effects of the reforms on high school
enrollment, college enrollment, full time college enrollment, and any educational enrollment
(high school, college, trade school, GED preparatory programs, and other educational
activities).3 For analyses of high school drop-out, high school enrollment is the relevant outcome.
For analyses of adult women’s educational acquisition, we focus on current high school
3

We limit our analysis up to 2001 to minimize the potential of introducing confounding differential trends (from the
effects of the 2001 recession, No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, etc.) as we increasingly move further away from
the AFDC waivers and TANF legislation, since the last set of states implemented TANF in 1997 (CA on January 1,
1998). As a sensitivity check, limiting the analysis up to 2000 or going up to 2005 does not materially change the
results (available upon request).

13
enrollment and any school enrollment (for those with less than a high school degree) and current
college enrollment and full-time college enrollment (for those who graduated high school but not
college).
Our research design exploits the substantial variation across states in the timing of the
enactment of pre-PRWORA waivers and TANF. We follow the convention in the prior literature
with respect to the construction of the key independent variables capturing the shifts in welfarerelated policies (reviewed in Blank 2002). The welfare reform measures can be classified into
two phases. The first represents federal waivers granted to states to experiment with AFDC rules
prior to PRWORA. Since 1962, the Secretary of Health and Human Services has had the
authority to waive federal welfare rules if a state proposed experimental or pilot programs that
furthered the goals of AFDC. Some waivers increased the amount of earnings that recipients
were allowed to keep while maintaining welfare eligibility; others expanded work requirements
to larger groups, established term limits for cash assistance, permitted states to issue sanctions to
recipients who failed to meet work requirements, or allowed states to eliminate increases in
benefits to families who had additional children while on welfare.
We construct an indicator to reflect the fraction of the year that a given state in time
period t had a statewide waiver in place that substantially altered the nature of AFDC with regard
to time limits, Job Opportunities and Basic Skills training (JOBS) work exemptions, JOBS
sanctions, increased earnings disregards, family caps, and/or work requirements.4 The second
welfare reform construct represents the implementation of TANF programs post-PRWORA.

4

For instance, the indicator for Maryland, which enacted a major waiver on March 1, 1996, is coded as 0.667 for
1996 to reflect the eight months that the waiver was in place for that year (using October as the reference month,
since the analyses are based on the October CPS). 29 states enacted such waivers, across various months, between
1992 and 1996.

14
Similar to the construction of the indicator for an AFDC waiver, an indicator will reflect the
fraction of the year that a given state had implemented TANF in time period t.5
Since the welfare indicators are measured at the state level, we incorporate additional
state-specific socioeconomic measures in the analyses to capture time-varying trends within
areas. State unemployment rate and per capita personal income are derived from figures provided
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Welfare caseloads, defined as the total number of welfare
recipients in a state, are obtained from the Department of Health and Human Service’s
Administration for Children and Families Office of Family Assistance.6 All models further
include indicators for whether a given state in a given year had a strict high school exit exam
(testing material at or above the 9th grade level) or a less strict exam (below the 9th grade level),
with the reference category being no high school exit exam. For women who completed high
school, we use the existence of the exam during their eighteenth year. For those who did not
complete high school, we use the contemporaneous existence of the exam in their state. These
data are derived from the Appendix provided by Dee & Jacob (2007). Information on the
maximum state-mandated age for compulsory school attendance is used to restrict the sample for
the models of high school drop-out, and is obtained from the Education Commission of the
States and the National Center for Education Statistics.7 Indicators for the maximum statemandated age for compulsory school attendance are also included in all models to further capture
any shifts in state policies relating to education.

5

States enacted TANF differentially throughout 1996 and 1997, with California being the last state to implement on
January 1, 1998. Information on state implementation of major AFDC waivers and TANF is obtained from the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services:
http://aspe.hhs.gov/HSP/Waiver-Policies99/policy_CEA.htm.
6
Specifically, the data can be found at: http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/caseload/caseloadindex.htm.
7
Specifically, the data can be found from the Education Commission of the States' Clearinghouse Notes,
"Compulsory School Age Requirements," March 1992, March 1994, March 1997, and 2005, and from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d04/tables/dt04_148.asp

15
Methods
The primary aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of welfare reform on adult
women’s educational acquisition. We employ a difference-in-difference-in-differences (DDD)
framework – akin to a pre- and post-comparison with treatment and control groups – in
conjunction with multivariate regression methods, which is standard in the economics literature
on evaluating the effects of welfare reform and other state policies (e.g., Kaestner & Tarlov
2006; Bitler, Gelbach & Hoynes 2005; Blank 2002). Under certain conditions, described below,
this quasi-experimental research design will yield causal estimates of the effects of welfare
reform on our outcomes of interest. We conduct various specification and robustness checks to
assess the validity of the identification assumptions underlying this methodology.
Consider the following DDD model which relates changes in educational outcomes to
state and federal welfare policies for the target group relative to a comparison group:
( 2)

E ist = α ' + (α 1 − α 1* )Target i + (π 1 − π 1* )( AFDCWaiverst * Target i ) + (π 2 − π 2* )(TANFst * Target i ) +

π 1* ( AFDCWaiverst ) + π 2* (TANFst ) + X ist β ' + Z st δ ' + State s λ' + Yeart ϕ ' + ( State s * t )φ ' + η ist
Equation 2 posits that the educational outcome (E), for the ith woman residing in state s during
year t, is a function of welfare policy, measured here by indicators reflecting the fraction of the
year that a given state has enacted a major AFDC Waiver and TANF. In addition, educational
acquisition depends on a vector of individual characteristics (X) such as age, race, ethnicity,
highest grade completed, and urban residence, a vector of time-varying state characteristics (Z)
such as economic conditions and educational policies, state fixed effects (States), year fixed
effects (Yeart), and state-specific time trends (States* t). The parameter μ represents an individual
classical error term.
There are several benefits to estimating Equation 2. It bypasses having to estimate the
structural model relating welfare reform to welfare caseloads, which has been problematic in the

16
literature (Kaestner & Tarlov 2006; Blank 2002).8 Equation 2 is also more policy relevant as it
represents the reduced-form model directly linking welfare policy measures to key outcomes,
and therefore accounts for any and all mechanisms through which welfare policy may be
affecting educational acquisition.
The direct focus on AFDC Waiver and TANF also underscores the point that the
population of interest, that which is affected by welfare reform legislation, is all women at risk of
being on public assistance, and not just current or former program participants (Kaestner &
Tarlov 2006). Welfare reform can affect exit rates as well as entry rates. Considering all women
at risk addresses some of the limitations from leavers’ studies, which focus solely on individuals
who have left welfare. These studies find it difficult to differentiate individuals who leave public
assistance voluntarily from those who left because of welfare reform policies. They also do not
consider the experiences of individuals who have been diverted from public assistance as a result
of policy shifts. Potential welfare recipients are shown to behave strategically in their use of
welfare benefits when faced with time limits and other regulatory constraints (DeLeire et al.
2006; Grogger 2004). Thus, in order to identify the population effect of welfare reform on key
outcomes, the appropriate sample is all women at risk of being on public assistance.
Traditionally, the welfare caseload has consisted primarily of low-educated, unmarried
mothers. This at-risk population group is the target group, for whom welfare policy would be
expected to have the largest behavioral effects. While interactions between the state indicators
and linear time trends in general will control for systematically-varying unobserved state-specific
factors, the possibility of omitted variables remains. This problem is addressed in the DDD

8

Changes in welfare caseloads are not due solely to welfare policy. Research suggests that much of the drop in
caseloads, especially prior to TANF implementation in 1996, was not policy-related. While the welfare caseload fell
dramatically in the 1990s, only part of the decline (≤ 50 %) was due to welfare reform legislation (Blank 2002).
Changes in economic conditions and other factors also played an important role.

17
framework by considering a comparison group – individuals who are similar in many ways to
the target group but are unlikely to participate in public assistance programs and therefore not
likely to be affected by welfare reform policies. In the above equation, Target represents a
dichotomous indicator equal to one if the individual is in the target group (population at risk of
being on welfare) and zero if the individual is in the comparison group (population not at risk of
being on welfare). The DDD estimates of the effects of welfare reform are the coefficients of the
interaction terms between the policy measures (AFDC Waiver and TANF) and the Target group
indicator.9 The impact of welfare reform is identified using the substantial variation in the timing
and incidence of welfare reform across different states over time, comparing changes in
outcomes between target and comparison groups.
The assumption necessary for the DDD effect to represent an unbiased estimate is that in
the absence of welfare reform, unobserved state-varying factors would affect the target and
comparison groups similarly. We implement several checks to assess the validity of the
comparison groups. Ideally, the target and comparison groups would look similar prior to the
policy shift, after controlling for all observed individual and state-level characteristics. The
adjusted (conditional) difference in the level of educational outcomes for the two groups prior to
welfare reform is given by the coefficient (α1 - α1*) of the Target indicator in Equation 2.
Checking the magnitude and statistical significance of this coefficient serves as a test of the
similarity between the target and comparison groups prior to the policy shift. By definition, the
comparison group should also not be affected by the welfare policies. Thus, the coefficients of
9

For parsimony, Equation 2 imposes the restriction that, within states, the effects of the non-welfare reform
measures (vectors X, Z, Year and State*t) are similar for the target and comparison groups. Thus, the treatment
effects (π1 - π*1) and (π2 - π*2) would not be identical to those obtained from estimating specification (2) separately
for the target and comparison groups, and then differencing the estimates. We estimated all models allowing the
effects of X and Z to differ across target and comparison groups, by including interactions between the target
indicator and X and Z. Coefficient magnitudes are not materially affected, though standard errors are inflated
somewhat due to reduced degrees of freedom.

18
AFDC Waiver and TANF (π*1 and π*2), which reflect the impact of welfare reform on
individuals who are at low-risk of being on welfare, should also be relatively small in magnitude
and insignificant.
The choice of target and comparison groups is integral to a valid implementation of the
DDD methodology. Following the literature, we employ target and comparison groups that are
conventionally defined. Identifying the target group for our analyses—individuals who are at risk
of relying on public assistance—is relatively straightforward. As indicated earlier, welfare
reform is likely to have its strongest behavioral impacts on unmarried mothers with low levels of
education and their children. The exact specifications of the target and comparison groups that
we use for various educational outcomes are described below.
Our analyses consist of several steps. First, we consider how welfare reform affected high
school drop-out among teenage girls. PRWORA likely had direct effects through its minor parent
provisions requiring school attendance. In addition, the new regime may have encouraged
teenage girls from disadvantaged families, who have traditionally been at risk for future welfare
receipt, to complete high school in order to reduce their risk of needing cash assistance in the
future (Kaestner, Korenman & O’Neill 2003). Finally, we allow for the possibility that welfare
reform increased the probability that young women continued schooling even after the age of 18,
as they may recognize that there is a lower return to not graduating from high school in the postreform period. As such, we define the target group as single females between the ages of 15 and
20 living in a non two-parent household (that is, one or no parent) where the highest grade
attained by anyone in the household is less than a bachelor's degree. As an alternative, we narrow
the age range to 15 to 19.10 The comparison group consists of similar males.11 As indicated

10

It is possible that some teens and young adults may have left home by the time they are 20. To avoid possible
sample selection issues, we include all single youth living in non-two parent households. In additional analyses, not

19
earlier, while there is some literature on how welfare reform has affected teenage high-school
drop-out rates, previous studies have used potentially problematic target groups (Offner 2007) or
comparison cohorts that were very widely spaced (Kaestner et al. 2003), very narrowly spaced
(Hao & Cherlin 2004), or excluded potential recipients (Koball 2007).
Next, we address the primary research question of this paper: What are the effects of
welfare reform on adult women’s educational acquisition? To investigate how welfare reform
has affected adult women’s high school enrollment, we compare unmarried mothers ages 21 to
49 years with less than a high school education (target group) to unmarried women in the same
age and education groups who have no children (comparison group). We focus on women ages
21 and older since, as discussed earlier, the incentives to attend and finish high school are very
different for this group than for younger women.12 To investigate how welfare reform has
affected college enrollment among adult women who are at risk of being on welfare, we compare
unmarried mothers ages 24-49 years with less than a college education (target group) to
unmarried women in the same age range and educational group who have no children
(comparison group).13
The third step of the analysis involves an extensive set of model specification checks and
an exploration of potential mechanisms. Before undertaking any of the analyses, however, it was
necessary to establish the validity of our comparison groups.

shown, we include only individuals who live with one parent. In these additional analyses, results are very similar to
those shown in Table 3.
11
For all sample restrictions, unmarried is defined as widowed, divorced, separated, never married, or other nonmarried; for married, the spouse can be present or absent.
12
We specifically exclude women who are 19 and 20 years of age from this analysis of older adult women, since
some of those young adults may have repeated a grade or enrolled in school at a later age and therefore still be in the
process of completing high school. We modify the samples to exclude and include 20 year old women to gauge the
sensitivity of our results to the age cut-off.
13
We omit women between the ages of 21-23 when analyzing college enrollment, as women in that age range may
still be in college and erroneously counted as low-educated and at-risk of being on welfare. We explored alternative
age restrictions before inferences were drawn.

20
If the comparison groups are valid counterfactuals, then they should look very similar to
the relevant target groups with respect to both levels and trends prior to the policy shift. Table 1
shows the mean educational outcomes for the various target and comparison groups prior to
welfare reform. For analyses of teen drop-out, in addition to the baseline periods defined below
for adult women, we also examine years prior to the enactment of TANF (1992 to 1995), since
welfare policy to discourage teen drop-out was an explicit feature of PRWORA but not of most
waivers. For analyses of adult women, we captured pre-reform observations two separate ways:
(1) Focusing on the first year of the sample period, 1992, which pre-dated welfare reform,14 and
(2) restricting the sample to state-year cells in which neither AFDC waivers nor TANF had yet
been implemented. Panel A compares high school drop-out rates for unmarried females and
males ages 15-20 (and 15-19) living in non two-parent low-educated households. Prior to the
implementation of major waivers or TANF, high-school drop-out rates were virtually identical
between males and females in these households, with no statistically significant differences.
Panel B presents means for high-school and college enrollment in 1992 for the relevant target
and comparison groups. Differences in the prevalence of current high school enrollment and fulltime college enrollment are insignificant between the target and comparison samples. While the
difference in current college enrollment is statistically significant at the 10 % level, the
magnitude is relatively small. As expected, unmarried women with no children are slightly more
likely (about one percentage point) than unmarried mothers of the same age and education to be
enrolled in college. This small observed difference in the unconditional means is reduced to zero
and becomes insignificant after adjusting for observed covariates (in subsequent multivariate
analyses). Panel B also presents the means for any school enrollment (high school or college) for

14

Only three states implemented major AFDC waivers in 1992, and they all did so relatively late in the year: CA in
December, and MI and NJ in October. We exclude these three states from the reported 1992 means.

21
the relevant target and comparison groups. The small, statistically significant, difference is also
eliminated when adjusting later for observed covariates. Panel C documents the group means
using the alternative definition of baseline: all state/year cells prior to the implementation of
AFDC waivers or TANF. The results are similar to those reported for 1992.
Figure 1 further validates the counterfactual by documenting very similar trends within
both the target and comparison groups in the baseline periods. Figure 1a shows that for each of
the years prior to TANF, both unmarried males and females from low-educated non two-parent
households had similar high school drop-out rates as well as changes in those rates from year to
year, and Figure 1b shows that unmarried mothers and the comparison group of unmarried
women with no children had similar trends in both high school and college enrollment.
Differences in trends in educational outcomes between the comparison and target groups,
prior to welfare reform, are tested for statistical significance in Table 2. For the purposes of this
check, reform is defined as the implementation of major waivers to AFDC or the implementation
of TANF, whichever occurred first, when considering school enrollment for adult women. For
the analysis of high school drop-out, reform is defined as the implementation of TANF since
welfare policy to discourage teen drop-out was an explicit feature of PRWORA but not of AFDC
waivers. With the reference category being the year of reform, coefficients on the interactions
between the various years pre-reform and the target indicator show differences in trends between
the target and comparison groups relative to the year of reform. All of these trend differences are
jointly insignificant in all models for all sets of target and comparison groups. The coefficient on
the target indicator further shows that differences in all of the educational outcome measures
between the groups are also insignificant in the year before reform (similar to insignificant
baseline differences documented in Table 1). Similarities between the relevant comparison

22
groups in terms of both levels and trends in the educational outcomes, even before any
adjustment for observed covariates, add a note of confidence to the validity of the assumptions
underlying our methodology. We present estimates from DDD specifications utilizing alternate
comparison groups in supplementary analyses described later.
Results
Effects of welfare reform on high school drop-out among young women
Table 3 presents estimates from a set of DDD specifications, corresponding to Equation
2, with respect to dropping out of high school. The sample is restricted to individuals who were
above the maximum state-mandated age for compulsory school attendance in a given year.15
Specification 1 indicates that TANF implementation reduced the probability of dropping out of
high school by about 3.4 percentage points (15 % relative to the baseline mean for the target
group) among unmarried females ages 15-20 living in low-educated non two-parent households.
The effect is robust to controlling for state-specific trends (specification 2), lagged measures of
the state’s economy (specification 3), and lagged measures of the state’s welfare caseload
(specification 4).
The results indicate that, in contrast to TANF, state AFDC waivers had no significant
effect on high school drop-out. This is empirically validating since the AFDC waivers generally
did not shift incentives with regards to schooling. This was not the case under PRWORA, which
has direct provisions requiring minor mothers to attend school and imposes a strict work-based
regime after the age of majority. Since the direct schooling-incentives embedded in TANF
specifically target unmarried minor mothers, and unmarried low-educated women are at

15

The legal drop-out age ranged from 14 to 18 between 1992 and 2001 and was not constant within states over this
period. Four states (CA, MN, MS, and NV) and DC increased the maximum school attendance age over the sample
period.

23
disproportionate risk of relying on public assistance, we may expect that the marginal effect of
TANF on high school drop-out would be larger in magnitude among young women who are
unmarried. The lower marginal effect in specification 5, which includes married women,
confirms this. Among young women (married or unmarried) from low-educated households,
welfare reform reduced the probability of dropping out of high school by about 2.3 percentage
points (about 10 % relative to the baseline mean for the target group).
The final column presents estimates for the sample of individuals ages 15 through 19, and
indicates that the marginal effect of TANF increases in magnitude relative to the sample that also
includes women 20 years of age. This likely reflects the differential schooling incentives of
welfare reform for minors versus non-minors. For a young adult woman with a low level of
education, there are potentially two competing effects at play. On the one hand, the incentives to
stay in high school when young may increase the probability that she continues and finishes high
school even after crossing the threshold of majority age. On the other hand, being newly
subjected to work requirements and time limits in order to receive welfare creates a strong
incentive for young adult women to substitute work for schooling. Thus, as the minor transitions
into adulthood, the incentives to remain in school are supplanted by incentives to work.
The validity of the maintained counterfactual assumption underlying the DDD analysis
can be assessed by examining the coefficient of the Target indicator in the multivariate models.
The fact that it is statistically insignificant and relatively small in magnitude in all specifications
suggests that the target and comparison groups were similar prior to the policy shift conditional
on observed covariates. This finding mirrors the figures reported in Tables 1 and 2, which
showed that the unconditional differences between the two groups were small and insignificant.
Further validation is provided by examining the marginal effects of the policy measures (AFDC

24
Waiver and TANF). Their insignificance suggests that welfare reform did not have any
discernible effect on outcomes for the comparison group, which is reassuring since the
comparison groups were defined to be similar to the target groups but unlikely to be affected by
the policy.
Overall, we find that welfare reform, specifically TANF, reduced female teen drop-out by
between 15 and 19 %. This range is very similar to the estimates in the Offner (2007) study,
which used a potentially problematic target group based on income, but lower than those in the
Kaestner, Korenman & O’Neill (2003) study, which used less problematic target groups but
compared two cohorts very widely spaced over time.
Effects of welfare reform on educational enrollment among adult women
Table 4 presents our main estimates of the impact of welfare reform on adult women’s
educational enrollment, and Tables 5 through 9 present estimates from alternative model
specifications. The results from specification 1 in Table 4 suggest that, among unmarried loweducated mothers between the ages of 21 and 49, TANF reduced the probability of attending
high school by 0.8 percentage points (29 % relative to the target group’s baseline mean). The
effect magnitude for any school enrollment (which, in addition to high school, includes trade
school, GED preparatory programs, and any other type of schooling) is smaller at 0.5 percentage
point (16 % relative to the target group’s baseline mean). The point estimates are not sensitive to
controlling for state-specific linear trends (specifications 2 and 4).16 Relatively large standard

16

This is not surprising since the DDD specification, with a valid comparison group, already nets out the impact of
omitted time-variant factors. The robustness is validating, though, with respect to the appropriateness of the
comparison group.

25
errors render the estimates in specifications 1-4 imprecise, though the estimated effects of TANF
on current high school enrollment are on the margin of significance (p-value=0.11).17
There is stronger evidence that welfare reform has had an adverse effect on college
enrollment among high-school educated unmarried mothers (ages 24-49).18 Of this group,
women in states that implemented major waivers to AFDC had a two percentage point (22 %
relative to the baseline target group mean) decrease in the probability of current college
enrollment, on average, relative to those in states that did not introduce welfare experiments into
their AFDC programs. Similarly, the implementation of TANF reduced the probability of current
college enrollment by a significant 1.1 percentage points (12 %) among the target group. The
next set of specifications considers full-time college enrollment (with the reference category
being not enrolled in college at all). Full-time college enrollment, being a time-intensive pursuit,
would be especially responsive to time and work constraints imposed by welfare reform.
Estimates suggest that AFDC waivers and TANF reduced full-time college enrollment by about
one percentage point (21 % relative to the baseline mean) and about 1.2 percentage points (26
%), respectively, among low-educated unmarried mothers.
The estimates from Tables 3 and 4 underscore the differential schooling incentives
embedded in the welfare reform policies. The results indicate that welfare reform has
significantly increased the probability of staying in high school among teenage girls from
disadvantaged families, by 15-19 %, while it has decreased the probability of school enrollment,
especially college enrollment, among low-educated adult mothers, by 12-25 %.
Auxiliary analyses
17

Inflated standard errors for the analysis of school enrollment among unmarried women with less than a high
school degree are most likely due to the limited sample size combined with the dependent variable being a relatively
low probability event.
18
The results are robust to alternative upper and lower age cut-offs, up to +/- one year for the lower age cut-off and
up to +/- 4 years for the upper age cut-off.

26
We conducted an extensive set of supplemental analyses to explore potential issues of
compositional selection (Table 5) and policy endogeneity (Tables 6), to explore the mechanisms
underlying our estimated effects (Tables 7 and 8), to explore sensitivity to alternative comparison
groups (Table 9), and to account for potential lagged effects of welfare reform (results not shown
in tables).
Compositional Selection
When the target and comparison groups are defined according to characteristics, such as
education, parental status, and marital status, which may themselves be affected by welfare
reform, potential bias due to compositional selection is a concern. Selection bias with respect to
parental and marital status is unlikely since prior research has found weak to no effects of
welfare reform on those as outcomes. However, there may be selective composition with respect
to classifying an individual as low- or high-educated if educational attainment is affected by
shifts in welfare policies, which is the key question addressed in this study. The results from
Table 2 suggest that welfare reform has increased high school enrollment among teens. In this
case, an analysis of college enrollment among low-educated (high school, but not college,
graduates) unmarried mothers may impart a negative bias to the estimated effect of welfare
reform on college enrollment due to the selection of women whose high school completion was
positively impacted by the reform.
We address the sensitivity of the estimates to selective sample composition by conducting
two specification checks. In specifications 1-4 of Table 5, an alternate sample is utilized to
bypass compositional selection by limiting the analysis to women whose high school completion
would not have been affected by TANF or early state experimentation with welfare reforms.
Specifically, the sample is restricted to individuals who are at least 21 years of age in the year

27
their state implemented an AFDC waiver or TANF, whichever came first. The coefficient
magnitudes for the effect of AFDC Waiver decline slightly by about 8-12 % (as expected), but
the conclusions are not materially affected; states that implemented major waivers to AFDC
witnessed a 20 % decline in the probability of current college enrollment and full-time college
enrollment. The effects of TANF decline somewhat more in magnitude.19 The effects generally
remain significant for full-time college enrollment and suggest that TANF implementation
reduced full-time college enrollment by about 16 %. The final two specifications in Table 5
integrate and broaden the separate analyses for high school enrollment (among less than high
school educated adult women) and college enrollment (among adult women who are high school,
but not college, graduates). These models examine enrollment in any type of education (high
school, college, or other training programs) among low-educated women, defined broadly as
those with less than a college education. This broader definition of low-educated women, based
only on college graduation, alleviates compositional selection as a result of the reforms having
increased the probability of completing high school (as shown in Table 3).20 While the models do
not separately estimate the effect on high school and college enrollment, the relative magnitudes
are robust; AFDC waivers reduced school enrollment by a statistically significant 1.8 percentage
points among low-educated adult women with children, which translates into a relative 23 %
decline (evaluated at the baseline target group mean), and TANF reduced school enrollment by a

19

This may be because the majority of states had experimented with AFDC waivers prior to PRWORA, and
therefore the sample restriction (to women who are at least 21 years of age when their state implemented welfare
reform) would be more binding for later years of the CPS for these states.
20
While college completion may also be affected by welfare reform policies, selection on college attainment is less
material for two reasons. First, at any point in time, college graduates are at lower risk of being on welfare. Second,
the question of how welfare reform affects school enrollment is by definition a question that relates to only a
selected group – low-educated women who are at an elevated risk of public assistance. It is not meant to generalize
to, and would not be relevant for, women with a college degree or above.

28
statistically significant 0.8 percentage point (11 % decline). These alternate specifications
suggest that overall the inferences are not sensitive to selective sample composition.21
Policy Endogeneity
The DDD research design is a quasi-experimental setup that exploits the natural
experiments implicit in the timing of state implementation of welfare reform. While 29 states had
implemented major AFDC waivers prior to TANF implementation, it is possible that the specific
timing of the implementation may be dependent on the state’s economic conditions and welfare
history. For instance, Blank (2002) notes that the rapid caseload decline after 1994 was preceded
by a strong increase in caseloads in the early 1990s. Part of the earlier increase may be a result of
the 1990-1991 recession. Thus, state experimentation with welfare reform through waivers may
have been related to prior increases in the caseload and prior economic conditions. This suggests
that there may be lagged unobservable time-varying state factors related to the state’s economy
and its welfare caseloads that may be correlated with the state’s decision of whether and when to
implement major waivers to AFDC and the timing of TANF implementation.
We address these possibilities by expanding the baseline specifications. Models
presented in Table 6 control for lagged state-level economic indicators including one- and twoyear lags of the state-level unemployment rate and real personal income per capita and also
control for the one- and two-year lags of the state’s welfare caseloads.22 All models control for
state-specific linear trends, which account for unobserved systematically-varying factors within
each state over the sample period. The marginal effects remain robust with respect to both
magnitudes and statistical significance. Among unmarried mothers with less than a high school
education, AFDC waivers reduced high school enrollment by 0.6 percentage points (though this
21

We are not aware of any prior research that has addressed this potential source of selection, perhaps because scant
attention has been paid to the potential effects of welfare reform on educational attainment of adults.
22
Results are not sensitive to alternate lag structures.

29
effect is imprecisely estimated as earlier) and TANF decreased high school enrollment by a
statistically significant one percentage point (33 % relative to the baseline mean for the target
group). Among unmarried mothers with less than a four-year college education, AFDC waivers
(TANF) reduced current and full-time college enrollment by 21-22 (12-25) %. Among loweducated unmarried mothers, AFDC waivers (TANF) reduced any school enrollment by 23 (11)
%. All of these estimates remain statistically significant.
We further check for potential bias due to policy endogeneity by assessing the
importance of lead effects of welfare reform. Models are estimated by extending Equation 2 to
include one-year leading measures of welfare reform policy in the same DDD context.
Specifically, the models include the interactions between the lead policy variables and the target
group indicator, in addition to the other covariates specified in Equation 2. Significant lead DDD
policy effects may indirectly inform on specification bias with respect to two sources: 1) changes
in outcomes could have driven the implementation of welfare reform policies within states over
time, implying that policy is endogenous to the outcomes, and 2) there could have been
anticipatory effects wherein individuals modified their behaviors in anticipation of welfare
reform. In all specifications (results not shown), the main DDD effects remain robust to adding
the leads. Furthermore, the point estimates of the lead DDD coefficients are statistically
insignificant and relatively small in magnitude. Since the inclusion of both contemporaneous and
lead policy measures may be collinear, an alternative check was also implemented. Equation 2
was re-estimated with all contemporaneous measures of welfare reform substituted with their
one-year leads. In the presence of significant lead policy effects, the DDD estimates in this
alternative specification should increase in absolute magnitude. If there are no substantial lead
effects, then the DDD estimates should be smaller in absolute magnitude. In all specifications

30
across all samples and outcomes, the marginal effects declined in size, confirming that leading
welfare reform measures are not significantly correlated with educational outcomes. These
results corroborate the estimates from Tables 6, which also confirm that the effects are not
sensitive to additional controls that account for unobserved state-varying factors that may be
driving welfare reform policies.
Lagged Effects
It is possible that there is a lag between welfare reform and the full response on
educational outcomes due to adjustments over time in family inputs, binding term limits over
time, and learning within the family. To address this possibility, alternative DDD specifications
were estimated, substituting the contemporaneous welfare reform measures with their one-year
lags. In the presence of a significant lagged effect, the DDD estimates in this recoded
specification would be larger in absolute magnitude. If there are no substantial lags in the policy
response, then the DDD estimates in these specifications would decline in absolute magnitude.
Among less than high school educated women (results not shown), the marginal effect of welfare
reform on high school enrollment and other schooling was slightly larger in magnitude (by about
10 %), suggesting a small lagged response to policy. However, among high school graduates
with less than a college education, the marginal effect declined in size suggesting no significant
lags in the effect of welfare reform on post-secondary educational activities.23 Overall, the
estimates in the lagged-response models remained robust in terms of statistical significance and
the direction of the effects.
The Role of Work
The estimates discussed thus far represent the “reduced-form” effects of welfare
reform—that is, the total effect of welfare reform on educational acquisition, operating through a
23

Results are available upon request.

31
variety of potential (and possibly competing) mechanisms. Work is the centerpiece of the policy
shift and there is strong consensus that welfare reform has indeed increased employment and
decreased caseloads as intended. We broadly test the work mechanism through stratification
analyses which exploit (1) how states specifically differ in their treatment of educational
activities post-PRWORA and (2) the strength of work incentives in states’ TANF plans.
Adverse effects of welfare reform on education that appear to operate through work
should be stronger in states that do not permit or limit education as an authorized work activity
for adults. To explore this hypothesis, Table 7 presents estimates for states stratified by the
degree to which educational activities are permitted to fulfill work requirements. Panel A limits
the sample to states that either never allow post-secondary or other education to substitute for
work requirements, or impose substantial time limits on the duration of the educational
activities.24 None of these states allow schooling, as a stand-alone activity, to satisfy work
requirements. Across all measures of school enrollment, the adverse effects of welfare reform
policies on education are strongest for this sample of restrictive states. For instance,
specifications 1 and 4 suggest that TANF lowered the probability of high school enrollment by a
statistically significant two percentage points (65 %) and lowered the probability of full-time
college enrollment by 1.4 percentage points (29 %). For states that support schooling as an
authorized work activity in some form (Panel B), the adverse effects of welfare reform on high
school, college, or other schooling is much mitigated. These states allow schooling to count fully
towards work activities, evaluate schooling in a case-by-case basis, or impose limits on the

24

Specifically, we examined these policies at two points in time (1999 and 2002), and designated states as "strict" if
they did not allow education as a stand-alone activity and they did not allow schooling to be combined with other
work activities for more than one year. Twenty-two states (AZ, CO, CT, FL, ID, IN, KS, LA, MA, MD, MI, MS,
ND, NM, NY, OH, OK, OR, SD, TX, WA, WI) and D.C. fall into this category. The data, available on the State
Policy Documentation Project website, can be found at: http://www.spdp.org/tanf/postsecondary.PDF and
http://clasp.org/publications/postsec_table_i_061902.pdf

32
duration of schooling that are in excess of one year. Among unmarried mothers with less than a
high school education, there is no adverse effect of welfare reform on high school enrollment in
these supportive states. With respect to college enrollment, the marginal effects continue to be
negative but are much smaller in magnitude. For example, TANF reduced the probability of fulltime college enrollment by 0.9 percentage point (18 %). While these educational policies are
defined based on TANF, to the extent that they are also reflective of a state’s sentiment towards
work versus educational incentives in general, the impact of AFDC waivers is also lower for the
education-supportive states. For instance, AFDC waivers reduce the probability of school
enrollment by 1.4 percentage points (18 %) in these states, versus 2.4 percentage points (31 %)
in states that do not support schooling as a work requirement. Waivers do not appear to have any
adverse effect on high school enrollment for the more lenient states. These results provide
support for the hypothesis that welfare reform reduced schooling among adult women through
policies which emphasized work at the expense of education.
The final specifications in both panels of Table 7 stratify the sample based on specific
work incentives in a given state as reflected in components of the state TANF program.
Specifically, Model 6 in Panel A includes only states that have strong work incentives as
measured by low benefit generosity and Model 7 is restricted to states that have strong work
incentives by virtue of having strict time limits (Blank & Schmidt 2001).25 Individuals in both
sets of states face a much stronger push towards work (compared to states with relatively
generous benefits and lenient time limits, respectively), which may have come at the expense of
educational activities. The marginal effects confirm this and suggest that welfare reform (in the

25

The educational policy and work incentives measures are based on TANF and not AFDC waivers. Ideally, these
detailed state measures would reflect both phases of welfare reform. Unfortunately, uniform data on educational
policy and work incentives under AFDC waivers are not available. That said, the relevant TANF provisions are
likely reflective of the general sentiment in a state toward work versus educational activities.

33
form of AFDC waivers) decreased school enrollment by 2.2 to 3.6 percentage points (28 - 46 %
relative to the baseline target sample mean). In contrast, among individuals who reside in states
with weaker work incentives as reflected by more generous benefits and lenient time limits, the
adverse effects of welfare reform on educational activities are also weaker. Specifically,
estimates from specifications 6 and 7 in Panel B indicate that welfare reform decreased school
enrollment by 9 - 22 % in those states and the effect is not statistically significant for the sample
of states with lenient time limits.
The push to work is the key hypothesized pathway by which welfare policies may affect
education and social behaviors, and the stratified analyses in Table 7 are consistent with this
hypothesis. Associated with changes in employment are changes in personal and household
income, though total income post-welfare reform may increase or decrease as earnings substitute
for cash benefits. Thus, depending on whether the income effect is negative or positive, the effect
of time constraints from market work may be exacerbated or counteracted. In order to shed light
on these different pathways, Table 8 presents estimates from models that incorporate the role of
time (as proxied by hours worked) and income constraints as mediating factors.
The specifications in Table 8 include indicators of hours worked in the past week
(reference category being non-employed) and a continuous measure of household income, as
well as interactions between these labor supply measures and the target group indicator to allow
the effects of labor supply to differ between the target and comparison groups. The models
indicate a significant non-linear relationship between hours worked and school enrollment. Up to
about 19 hours of work per week, intensity of labor supply has positive or no effects on school
enrollment relative to individuals who do not work.26 This may be due to potential simultaneity

26

Estimating an alternate specification that controls for continuous hours worked and its quadratic term leads to an
inflection in the hours worked - school enrollment relationship at about 19 to 20 hours. Thus, the dichotomous

34
between the labor supply decision and school enrollment. In addition, increases in personal
income associated with higher hours worked may, up to a point, lead to a positive income effect
on schooling. Individuals who work more than about 19 hours weekly have a lower propensity to
attend high school and college; there is also a dose-response relationship, with the negative link
between work and schooling becoming stronger with more hours worked. Household income
generally has a negative impact on the probability of being currently enrolled in school for the
target group.27
More importantly, accounting for labor supply, especially hours worked, substantially
mediates the impact of welfare reform on education.28 There is no statistically significant effect
of either AFDC Waivers or TANF on school enrollment among unmarried mothers with less
than a high school education, with effect magnitudes declining by 36-69 % relative to those
reported in Table 6. It is plausible that work constraints are particularly consequential for the
group with less than a high school education. For these women, there may be very large costs or
minimal benefits to completing high school. For some, linking schooling to welfare by allowing
education activities to count towards work may have been the sole motivation for staying in or
continuing high school. When the welfare-schooling link was weakened by PRWORA by deemphasizing schooling as an authorized work activity for adult women, many would have been
pushed to substitute work for school. For low-skilled women, high school enrollment is likely a
time-intensive activity and would be expected to be quite elastic to work and time constraints.

indicators for hours worked are defined to account for this inflection and to control for a non-parametric non-linear
relationship.
27
All specifications reported in Table 8 control for interactions between the target indicator and the labor supply
measures. The marginal effects of hours worked and household income reported in the table refer to those for the
target group. In order to be concise, marginal effects of hours and income are not reported for the comparison group.
Generally, the negative link between hours worked and school enrollment is stronger for the target group, and the
income effect on school enrollment tends to be positive for the comparison group.
28
Excluding household income does not significantly increase the magnitudes of the marginal effects, suggesting
that the attenuation of the effect is mostly due to the effects of work.

35
Thus, most or all of the adverse effect of welfare reform on schooling appears to be due to the
increase in employment among the target group. It is possible that some of these women may
have substituted from formal high school programs to less time-intensive schooling such as other
training or GED preparatory programs. However, the diminution of the marginal effect of TANF
on any schooling suggests that this substitution from more intensive schooling to less intensive
schooling was not a significant outcome.
Among high school graduates with less than a college education, hours worked also
mediates the negative effect of welfare reform on college enrollment. In contrast to the less than
high school educated women, the diminution of the effect magnitudes is smaller (on the order of
15 – 42 %). Some of the largest diminution of the effects of welfare reform (on the order of 27 –
42 %) occurs for full-time college enrollment, a relatively time-intensive educational activity.
While it appears that hours of work and household income explain some of the adverse effects of
welfare reform on college enrollment, there are likely to be other effects at play. Personal
income, which may be a more relevant indicator than household income of material resources
impacted by welfare reform, is not adequately observed in the October CPS. Furthermore, the
reforms may have led to changes in living arrangements, such as the formation of extended
family households, which may impact the demand for time-intensive activities such as schooling.
Overall, these results suggest that at least part of the negative impact of TANF and AFDC
waivers on adult women’s educational acquisition was due to added time constraints resulting
from increased work requirements.
Alternative Comparison Groups
The estimates of welfare reform on educational enrollment are based on comparison
groups that most validated the DDD research design. Tables 1 and 2 indicated that educational

36
outcomes were similar for all sets of target and comparison groups we used, both in levels and
trends, prior to any welfare reform. To further assess the robustness of our findings, we estimated
models using alternative comparison groups. These results are presented in Table 9. For the
analysis of high school drop-out, we compare unmarried females (ages 15-20) from loweducated two-parent households to our target group of unmarried females (ages 15-20) from loweducated non two-parent households. Pre-welfare reform baseline high school drop-out rates are
expectedly higher for teens from non two-parent households, as indicated by the significant
coefficient of the target indicator.29 TANF implementation reduced high school drop-out among
the target group by 2.3 percentage points (11 %) – this compares to the 15 % effect estimated
with our primary comparison group of males from low-educated non two-parent households
(from Table 3). For the analyses of college and school enrollment among low-educated
unmarried adult mothers, we employ married mothers for comparison. In these alternative
specifications, the effects of AFDC waivers are not statistically significant and generally close to
zero. However, the effects of TANF remain generally robust in both magnitudes and
significance. TANF implementation reduced college enrollment by 12 % and full-time college
enrollment by 22 % among low-educated unmarried mothers -- this compares to 12 and 25 %,
respectively, using our primary comparison group of low-educated unmarried women with no
children (from Table 4). TANF implementation reduced school enrollment by 11 %, which is
almost the same as the earlier effect. The robustness of the TANF effects, in both magnitude and
significance, using these alternative comparison groups reinforces our findings that welfare

29

While such observable baseline differences in outcomes do not necessarily invalidate the comparison group as a
counterfactual, they raise the specter of differential unobservable factors between the target and comparison groups.
We have therefore emphasized estimates based on our primary comparison samples which are most similar to the
target samples across all potentially relevant dimensions and therefore most defensible as a valid counterfactual.

37
reform reduced high school drop-out among girls but adversely affected school enrollment,
especially college enrollment, among low-educated adult women.
Conclusion
This study makes three major contributions. First, it contributes to the sparse literature on
adult education by identifying welfare policy as a strong determinant of educational acquisition
among poor adult women and underscores that policies not specifically focusing on education
may be important determinants of educational attainment. That said, it is important to underscore
that we have looked at enrollment, not attainment, and it is therefore possible that our effects
reflect a slowing down of schooling rather than decreased educational attainment.
Second, we produced the most compelling evidence to date on the effects of welfare
reform on teen drop-out. Specifically, we found that welfare reform has significantly increased
the probability of young women from disadvantaged families staying in high school, by about 16
%. The opposing effects for teens and adult mothers underscore the differential educational
incentives for the two groups that are built into welfare reform.
Third, and most importantly, we found robust and convincing evidence that welfare
reform has significantly decreased the probability of college enrollment among adult women, by
at least 20 %. It also appears to have decreased the probability of high school enrollment of adult
women on the same order of magnitude, although high school enrollment, unlike college
enrollment, is a relatively uncommon outcome in the relevant target group. These results fill an
important gap in the welfare reform literature and suggest that the gains from welfare reform in
terms of increasing employment and reducing caseloads have come at a cost—lower educational
attainment among women at risk for relying on welfare. This finding may have negative
implications for poor mothers’ ability to attain self-sufficiency and experience upward mobility,

38
given the evidence of substantial earnings gains from even one year of community college and
an increasing recognition that we know very little from welfare-to-work experiments about the
effects of formal education. It may even have negative implications for their health, as there is a
positive association between years of education and health, with no evidence of a “sheepskin
effect,” and evidence from quasi-natural experiments suggests that at least part of the association
is causal (Cutler & Lleras-Muney 2006). While not every potential welfare recipient would
benefit from a high school or a college education, it cannot be assumed that the large negative
aggregate effects of welfare reform on formal educational enrollment among adult women are an
economically efficient or socially desirable outcome. A comprehensive assessment of the costs
and benefits of welfare reform would need to factor in these impacts.
Finally, it is important to point out that the negative effects of welfare reform on
educational enrollment may have become even larger under the Deficit Reduction Act of 2006,
which raised states’ work participation targets and narrowed the range of welfare-to-work
activities that can be counted toward those targets.

39
References
Becker, Gary S. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference
to Education. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1975.
Bitler, Marianne P.; Gelbach, Jonah B. and Hoynes, Hilary W. "Welfare Reform and Health."
Journal of Human Resources, 2005, 40(2), 309-34.
Blank, Rebecca M. "Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States." Journal of Economic
Literature, 2002, 40(4), 1105-66.
Blank, Rebecca M. “What We Know, What We Don’t Know, and What We Need to Know about
Welfare Reform.” National Poverty Center Working Paper Series #07-19, June 2007.
http://www.http://npc.umich.edu/publications/u/working_paper07-19.pdf
Blank, Rebecca M. and Schmidt, Lucie. "Work, Wages, and Welfare," in The New World of
Welfare, Rebecca M. Blank and Ron Haskins, eds. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution,
2001.
Corman, Hope. "Postsecondary Education Enrollment Responses by Recent High School
Graduates and Older Adults." Journal of Human Resources, 1983, 18(2), 247-67.
Cutler, David M. and Adriana Lleras-Muney. “Education and Health: Evaluating Theories and
Evidence.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper #12352, June 2006.
Dee, Thomas S. and Jacob, Brian A. "Do High School Exit Exams Influence Educational
Attainment or Labor Market Performance?" In Adam Gamoran (ed.), Standards-Based Reform
and Children in Poverty: Lessons for "No Child Left Behind.” Washington D.C.: Brookings
Institution Press, 2007, 154-200.
DeLeire, Thomas; Levine, Judith and Levy, Helen. “Is Welfare Reform Responsible for LowSkilled Women’s Declining Health Insurance Coverage in the 1990s?” Journal of Human
Resources, 2006, 41(3), 495-528.
Gennetian, Lisa A. and Knox, Virginia. Staying Single: The Effects of Welfare Reform Policies
on Marriage and Cohabitation. New York, NY: MDRC, 2003.
Grogger, Jeffrey. “Time Limits and Welfare Use.” Journal of Human Resources, 2004, 39(2),
405-24.
Grogger, Jeffrey and Karoly, Lynn A. Welfare Reform: Effects of a Decade of Change.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005.
Hao, Lingxin and Cherlin, Andrew J. "Welfare Reform and Teenage Pregnancy, Childbirth, and
School Drop-out." Journal of Marriage and Family, 2004, 66(1), 179-94.

40
Hotz, V. Joseph, Guido W. Imbens and Klerman Jacob A. "Evaluating the Differential Effects of
Alternative Welfare-to-Work Training Components: A Reanalysis of the California GAIN
Program." Journal of Labor Economics, 2006, 24(3), 521-566.
Jacobs, Jerry A. and Winslow, Sarah. "Welfare Reform and Enrollment in Postsecondary
Education." Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 2003, 586, 194217.
Kaestner, Robert; Korenman, Sanders and O'Neill, June. "Has Welfare Reform Changed
Teenage Behaviors?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2003, 22(2), 225-48
Kaestner, Robert and Tarlov, Elizabeth. “Changes in the Welfare Caseload and the Health of
Low-Educated Mothers.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 2006, 25(3), 623-43.
Kane, Thomas and Rouse Cecilia B. “The Community College: Training Students at the Margin
Between College and Work.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1999, 13(1): 63-84.
Koball, Heather. "Living Arrangements and School Drop-out Among Minor Mothers Following
Welfare Reform." Social Science Quarterly, 2007, 88(5), 1374-91.
Leigh, Duane E. and Gill, Andrew M. "Labor Market Returns to Community Colleges: Evidence
for Returning Adults." Journal of Human Resources, 1997, 32(2), 334-53.
London, Rebecca A. "The Role of Postsecondary Education in Welfare Recipients' Paths to SelfSufficiency." The Journal of Higher Education, 2006, 77(3), 472-498.
Moffitt, Robert A. "Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review." Journal of
Economic Literature, 1992, 30(1), 1-61.
Moffitt, Robert A. "Report to Congress on Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing." Hyattsville, MD:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1995.
Moffitt, Robert A. "The Effects of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility." In R. A. Moffitt (ed.),
Welfare, the Family, and Reproductive Behavior: Research Perspectives. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1998, 50-97.
O’Donnell, K. Adult Education Participation in 2004-05 (NCES 2006-077). U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics, 2006.
Offner, Paul. "Welfare Reform and Teenage Girls." Social Science Quarterly, 2005, 86(2), 30622.
Peters, Elizabeth H.; Plotnick, Robert D. and Jeong, Se-Ook. "How Will Welfare Reform Affect
Childbearing and Family Structure Decisions?" R. A. Gordon and H. J. Walberg, Changing
Welfare. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003, 59-91.

41
Price, Charles. "Reforming Welfare Reform Postsecondary Education Policy: Two State Case
Studies in Political Culture, Organizing, and Advocacy." Journal of Sociology and Social
Welfare, 2005 32(3), 81-106.
Ratcliffe, Caroline; McKernan, Signe-Mary and Rosenberg, Emily. "Welfare Reform, Living
Arrangements, and Economic Well-Being: A Synthesis of Literature," Washington, D.C.: The
Urban Institute, 2002.
Schoeni, Robert F. and Blank, Rebecca M. "What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished? Impacts
on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #7627, 2000.
Shaw, Kathleen M.; Goldrick-Rab, Sara; Mazzeo, Christopher and Jacobs, Jerry A. Putting Poor
People to Work: How the Work-First Idea Eroded College Access for the Poor. Russell Sage
Foundation: New York, 2006.
U.S. Census Bureau. Census 2000, PHC-T-39. Table 5: School Enrollment of the Population 3
Years and Over by Age, Nativity, and Type of School: 2000.
http://www.census.gov/population/www/cen2000/briefs/phc-t39/tables/tab5S-03.xls [Accessed
October 18, 2008].
U.S. Census Bureau. Table 12: Employment Status and Enrollment in Vocational Courses for the
Population 15 Years Old and Over, by Sex, Age, Educational Attainment, College Enrollment,
Race, and Hispanic Origin: October 2005.
http://www.americanfactfinder.biz/population/socdemo/school/cps2005/tab12-01.xls [Accessed
October 18, 2008].
U.S. Census Bureau, "Work and Work-Related Activities of Mothers Receiving Temporary
Assistance to Needy Families: 1996, 1998, and 2000.” Current Population Reports P70-85, 2002.
U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey. Table A-6: Age Distribution of College
Students 14 Years Old and Over, by Sex: October 1947 to 2006.
http://www.census.gov/population/socdemo/school/TableA-6.xls [Accessed October 18, 2008].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families.
“Characteristics and Financial Circumstances of TANF Recipients, Fiscal Year 1999.”
http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/ofa/character/FY99/analysis.htm [Accessed October 18, 2008].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation. “Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers,” June 1997.
Available at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/isp/waiver2/title.htm [Accessed April 3, 2009].
Ziliak, James P. "Taxes, Transfers, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers." Unpublished
working paper, 2006. Available at: http://www.nber.org/~confer/2006/URCf06/ziliak.pdf.

42
Table 1
Baseline Means - Target and Comparison Groups
Panel A: High School Drop-out

Drop-out

0.222

Comparison Group
Target Group
Unmarried Males
Unmarried Females
Age 15 - 20
Age 15 - 19
Non Two-Parent
Non Two-Parent
Household
Household
Household Education: Household Education:
< College Graduate
< College Graduate
Waiver = 0 & TANF = 0
0.232
0.216

Drop-out

0.208

1992 (Non-Waiver States)
0.221
0.211

0.196

Drop-out

0.215

Pre-TANF (1992 - 1995)
0.227
0.213

0.213

Sample

Target Group
Unmarried Females
Age 15 - 20
Non Two-Parent
Household
Household Education:
< College Graduate

Comparison Group
Unmarried Males
Age 15 - 19
Non Two-Parent
Household
Household Education:
< College Graduate
0.222

Panel B: School Enrollment - 1992 (Non-Waiver States)
Sample
Current High School Enrollment
Any School Enrollment
Sample
Current College Enrollment
Full-time College Enrollment
Sample
Any School Enrollment

Target Group
Unmarried Mothers
Age 21-49
< High School Graduate
0.029
0.035
Unmarried Mothers
Age 24-49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
0.089
0.047
Unmarried Mothers
Age 24-49
< College Graduate
0.078

Comparison Group
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 21-49
< High School Graduate
0.028
0.030
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 24-49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
0.104*
0.048
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 24-49
< College Graduate
0.091**

Panel C: School Enrollment - Waiver = 0 & TANF = 0
Sample
Current High School Enrollment
Any School Enrollment
Sample
Current College Enrollment
Full-time College Enrollment
Sample
Any School Enrollment

Target Group
Unmarried Mothers
Age 21-49
< High School Graduate
0.034
0.039
Unmarried Mothers
Age 24-49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
0.092
0.051
Unmarried Mothers
Age 24-49
< College Graduate
0.082

Comparison Group
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 21-49
< High School Graduate
0.026
0.031
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 24-49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
0.104***
0.051
Unmarried Women - No Children
Age 24-49
< College Graduate
0.094***

Note: Asterisks denote that the difference in means between the target and the control group is statistically significant as follows:
*** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.

43

Figure 1a
High School Dropout
Trends in Target and Comparison Samples

0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
1992

1993

1994

1995

Target - Unmarried Females (15-20) Low-educated Non Two-Parent Households
Comparison - Unmarried Males (15-20) Low-educated Non Two-Parent Households

Figure 1b
School Enrollment - Non-Waiver States
Target Group: Low-Educated Unmarried Mothers
Comparison Group: Low-Educated Unmarried Women - No Children
0.12
0.08
0.04
0
1990

1991

1992

1993

Target - HS Enrollment (21-49)

Comparison - HS Enrollment (21-49)

Target - College Enrollment (24-49)

Comparison - College Enrollment (24-49)

44
Table 2
Differences in Pre-Welfare Reform Trends between Target and Comparison Groups
Sample Restricted to Pre-Welfare Reform Periods (Waiver = 0 & TANF = 0)
Sample

Outcome
Target
5 Years Pre-Reform*
Target
4 Years Pre-Reform*
Target
3 Years Pre-Reform*
Target
2 Years Pre-Reform*
Target
Joint F-statistic1
Observations

Unmarried
Age 15 - 20
Non Two-parent Household
Household Education:
< College Graduate
High School Drop-out
-0.0355
(0.0236)
0.0345
(0.0240)
0.0035
(0.0286)
0.0511
(0.0319)
0.0228
(0.0319)
1.86
[p=0.132]
8778

Unmarried Women
Age 21 - 49
< High School Graduate
Current High
School Enrollment
0.0079
(0.0067)
0.0180
(0.0120)
-0.0034
(0.0104)
-0.0076
(0.0141)
-0.0038
(0.0103)
1.08
[p=0.376]
5217

Any School
Enrollment
0.0073
(0.0071)
0.0216*
(0.0117)
-0.0063
(0.0113)
-0.0033
(0.0154)
-0.0032
(0.0104)
1.81
[=0.143]
5217

Unmarried Women
Age 24 - 49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
Current College
Enrollment
-0.0101
(0.0084)
-0.0006
(0.0100)
-0.0080
(0.0108)
-0.0107
(0.0133)
0.0131
(0.0138)
1.01
[0.410]
20313

Full-Time College
Enrollment
-0.0012
(0.0071)
-0.0050
(0.0076)
0.0021
(0.0080)
-0.0016
(0.0084)
0.0075
(0.0092)
0.96
[0.438]
19284

Unmarried Women
Age 24 - 49
< College
Graduate
Any School
Enrollment
-0.0112
(0.0071)
0.0043
(0.0084)
-0.0043
(0.0093)
-0.0054
(0.0118)
0.0035
(0.0133)
0.29
[0.882]
24868

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. For high school drop-out, the target group consists of females and the comparison group consists of males. For
each of the other outcomes, the target group has children and the comparison group has no children. Reference category is one year pre-reform. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary
correlation within each state and reported in parentheses. For the high-school drop-out sample ages 15-20, pre-reform is based on TANF implementation. For the adult samples, pre-reform
is based on AFDC Waiver or TANF implementation, whichever occurred first. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.
1
F-statistics for joint significance of differential pre-welfare reform trends between the target and comparison groups are presented. P-values are presented in square brackets.

45
Table 3
High School Drop-out
October CPS 1992 - 2001
Sample

Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
Lagged State
Economic Indicators a
Lagged State Welfare
Caseload b
State-Specific Trends
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried
Age 15 - 20
Non Two-Parent Household (HH)
Household Education:
< College Graduate
1
2
3
4
-0.0170
-0.0176
-0.0176
-0.0177
(0.0136)
(0.0137)
(0.0136)
(0.0135)
0.0049
-0.0019
-0.0036
0.0005
(0.0207)
(0.0211)
(0.0218)
(0.0228)
-0.0084
-0.0082
-0.0083
-0.0079
(0.0224)
(0.0221)
(0.0221)
(0.0220)
0.0128
0.0114
0.0107
0.0141
(0.0339)
(0.0384)
(0.0363)
(0.0326)
-0.0338**
-0.0331*
-0.0330*
-0.0329*
(0.0167)
(0.0169)
(0.0168)
(0.0167)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

Age 15 - 20
Non Two-Parent HH
Household Education:
< College Graduate
5
-0.0145
(0.0128)
-0.0045
(0.0209)
0.0026
(0.0207)
0.0095
(0.0330)
-0.0229
(0.0163)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Unmarried
Age 15 - 19
Non Two-Parent HH
Household Education:
< College Graduate
6
-0.0145
(0.0134)
0.0061
(0.0271)
0.0048
(0.0256)
0.0115
(0.0524)
-0.0423**
(0.0179)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
0.040
18532

Yes
0.043
18532

Yes
0.043
18532

Yes
0.043
18532

Yes
0.044
21164

Yes
0.052
12556

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within each state and reported in parentheses. All
target groups are females and all comparison groups are males. All models include age and age-squared, indicators for race and Hispanic ethnicity, indicator for no parents in
household, age and age-squared of the oldest household member, state fixed effects and year fixed effects. State covariates include state-level unemployment rate, real state
personal income per capita, indicators for maximum compulsory schooling age, and indicators for state high school exit exam requirements. Significance is denoted as follows:
*** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.
a
Lagged state economic indicators include the one-year and two-year lags of the state-level unemployment rate and real personal income per capita.
b
Lagged state welfare caseload include the one-year and two-year lags of the number of welfare recipients in the state.

46

Table 4
Effects of Welfare Reform on School Enrollment of Adult Women
Baseline DDD Models
October CPS 1992 – 2001
Sample

Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried
Age 21 – 49
< High School Graduate
Current High School
Enrollment
1
2
0.0019
0.0029
(0.0042)
(0.0041)
0.0074
0.0066
(0.0065)
(0.0071)
-0.0045
-0.0053
(0.0076)
(0.0075)
0.0029
0.0039
(0.0116)
(0.0118)
-0.0083
-0.0094
(0.0057)
(0.0058)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
0.019
0.025
13505
13505

Any School Enrollment
3
0.0024
(0.0046)
0.0049
(0.0068)
0.0006
(0.0081)
0.0047
(0.0176)
-0.0049
(0.0068)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.022
13505

4
0.0031
(0.0046)
0.0047
(0.0080)
-0.0001
(0.0081)
0.0081
(0.0194)
-0.0064
(0.0071)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.027
13505

Unmarried
Age 24 – 49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
Current College Enrollment
Full-Time College
Enrollment
5
6
7
8
0.0043
0.0043
0.0042
0.0040
(0.0050)
(0.0050)
(0.0040)
(0.0040)
0.0077
0.0092
-0.0046
-0.0019
(0.0077)
(0.0066)
(0.0046)
(0.0048)
-0.0194***
-0.0200***
-0.0097*
-0.0100*
(0.0058)
(0.0058)
(0.0055)
(0.0055)
-0.0006
0.0032
-0.0011
0.0026
(0.0156)
(0.0163)
(0.0084)
(0.0087)
-0.0106*
-0.0104*
-0.0122***
-0.0116***
(0.0054)
(0.0055)
(0.0041)
(0.0041)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
0.097
0.098
0.075
0.076
56618
56618
53721
53721

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within each state and reported in parentheses. All
target groups have children and comparison groups do not have children. All models include age and age squared, indicators for race and Hispanic ethnicity, indicators for highest
grade attended, number of children in the household, residence in a metro area, residence in a center city within a metro area, residence in suburban area, state fixed effects and
year fixed effects. State covariates include state-level unemployment rate, real state personal income per capita, indicators for maximum compulsory schooling age, and indicators
for state high school exit exam requirements. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.

47
Table 5
School Enrollment of Adult Women
Alternative Specification—Addressing Potential Compositional Selection
October CPS 1992 - 2001
Sample

Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried
Age 24 - 49
High School Graduate, < College Graduate
Restricted Baseline Age ≥ 21 a
Current College Enrollment
Full-Time College Enrollment
1
2
3
4
0.0029
0.0029
0.0030
0.0027
(0.0051)
(0.0051)
(0.0040)
(0.0040)
0.0094
0.0092
-0.0019
-0.0014
(0.0076)
(0.0068)
(0.0046)
(0.0046)
-0.0173***
-0.0176***
-0.0089*
-0.0090*
(0.0060)
(0.0061)
(0.0054)
(0.0054)
0.0010
0.0046
-0.0025
0.0003
(0.0164)
(0.0170)
(0.0101)
(0.0106)
-0.0048
-0.0048
-0.0073*
-0.0069
(0.0056)
(0.0058)
(0.0044)
(0.0044)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
0.091
0.092
0.070
0.071
54808
54808
52084
52084

Unmarried
Age 24 – 49
< College Graduate
Any School Enrollment
5
6
0.0033
0.0034
(0.0042)
(0.0042)
0.0050
0.0062
(0.0062)
(0.0055)
-0.0173***
-0.0181***
(0.0054)
(0.0054)
-0.0023
0.0020
(0.0131)
(0.0141)
-0.0082*
-0.0081*
(0.0047)
(0.0048)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
0.098
0.099
68378
68378

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within each state and reported in parentheses. All
target groups have children and comparison groups do not have children. All models include age and age-squared, indicators for race and Hispanic ethnicity, indicators for highest
grade attended, number of children in the household, residence in a metro area, residence in a center city within a metro area, residence in suburban area, state fixed effects and
year fixed effects. State covariates include state-level unemployment rate, real state personal income per capita, indicators for maximum compulsory schooling age, and indicators
for state high school exit exam requirements. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.
a
Sample is restricted to individuals who were 21 years of age or older in the first full year that a state implemented an AFDC waiver or the first full year that a state implemented
TANF if it did not have an AFDC waiver in place.

48
Table 6
School Enrollment of Adult Women
Alternative Specification—Addressing Potential Policy Endogeneity by Controlling for
Lagged Economic Indicators & Lagged Welfare Caseloads
October CPS 1992 - 2001
Sample

Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Lagged State Economic
Indicators a
Lagged State Welfare
Caseload b
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried
Age 21 – 49
< High School Graduate

Unmarried
Age 24 – 49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
Current College
Full-Time
Enrollment
College
Enrollment
3
4
0.0042
0.0040
(0.0050)
(0.0040)
0.0074
-0.0029
(0.0071)
(0.0052)
-0.0199***
-0.0100*
(0.0058)
(0.0056)
0.0038
0.0020
(0.0144)
(0.0082)
-0.0104*
-0.0116***
(0.0055)
(0.0041)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Unmarried
Age 24 - 49
< College
Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

Current High
School
Enrollment
1
0.0031
(0.0041)
0.0037
(0.0074)
-0.0055
(0.0075)
0.0003
(0.0146)
-0.0097*
(0.0057)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Any School
Enrollment

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.025
13505

0.027
13505

0.098
56618

0.076
53721

0.099
68378

2
0.0032
(0.0046)
0.0013
(0.0080)
-0.0003
(0.0081)
0.0060
(0.0208)
-0.0068
(0.0070)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5
0.0034
(0.0042)
0.0040
(0.0062)
-0.0180***
(0.0055)
0.0031
(0.0127)
-0.0082*
(0.0048)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within
each state and reported in parentheses. All target groups have children and comparison groups do not have children. All models
include age and age-squared, indicators for race and Hispanic ethnicity, indicators for highest grade attended, number of children in
the household, residence in a metro area, residence in a center city within a metro area, residence in suburban area, state fixed effects
and year fixed effects. State covariates include state-level unemployment rate, real state personal income per capita, indicators for
maximum compulsory schooling age, and indicators for state high school exit exam requirements. Significance is denoted as follows:
*** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.
a
Lagged state economic indicators include the one-year and two-year lags of the state-level unemployment rate and real personal
income per capita.
b
Lagged state welfare caseload include the one-year and two-year lags of the number of welfare recipients in the state.

49
Table 7
School Enrollment of Adult Women
Stratified Samples by TANF Educational Policy, Benefit Generosity, and Strictness of Time
Limits
October CPS 1992 – 2001
Panel A
Sample
Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Lagged State Economic
Indicators
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

School Enrollment Not Supported as Work Requirement a

Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Lagged State Economic
Indicators
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Strict/Medium
Time Limits c
Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< High School Graduate
Current
Any School
High School
Enrollment
Enrollment
1
2

Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
College
Full-Time
Any School
Enrollment
College
Enrollment
Enrollment
3
4
5

6

7

0.0073
(0.0050)
0.0271*
(0.0148)
-0.0200
(0.0174)
0.0156
(0.0127)
-0.0197***
(0.0065)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0043
(0.0064)
0.0215
(0.0215)
-0.0093
(0.0179)
0.0342*
(0.0178)
-0.0140
(0.0097)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0083
(0.0085)
0.0077
(0.0117)
-0.0317**
(0.0121)
0.0023
(0.0155)
-0.0123
(0.0091)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0083
(0.0072)
-0.0108
(0.0098)
-0.0113
(0.0088)
0.0106
(0.0097)
-0.0137**
(0.0066)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0075
(0.0074)
0.0028
(0.0102)
-0.0244*
(0.0126)
0.0038
(0.0120)
-0.0098
(0.0078)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0088
(0.0071)
0.0308
(0.0177)
-0.0361**
(0.0145)
0.0512*
(0.0253)
-0.0148
(0.0084)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0063
(0.0047)
0.0134*
(0.0072)
-0.0224***
(0.0080)
0.0281**
(0.0122)
-0.0071
(0.0051)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.027
6811

0.029
6811

0.098
27742

0.075
26372

0.098
33616

0.099
11757

0.094
49665

High or Medium
Benefit Generosity
Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

Lenient
Time Limits
Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

Panel B
Sample

Low Benefit
Generosity c
Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

School Enrollment is Supported as Work Requirement
Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< High School Graduate
Current
Any School
High School
Enrollment
Enrollment
1
2

Unmarried
Age 21 - 49
< College Graduate
College
Full-Time
Any School
Enrollment
College
Enrollment
Enrollment
3
4
5

6

7

-0.0028
(0.0062)
0.0006
(0.0096)
0.0007
(0.0097)
-0.0104
(0.0179)
0.0024
(0.0083)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0015
(0.0070)
-0.0003
(0.0102)
0.0007
(0.0104)
-0.0180
(0.0176)
0.0016
(0.0093)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0001
(0.0057)
0.0122
(0.0095)
-0.0149**
(0.0060)
0.0114
(0.0256)
-0.0084
(0.0063)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0013
(0.0041)
0.0031
(0.0063)
-0.0060
(0.0067)
0.0019
(0.0122)
-0.0087*
(0.0049)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0015
(0.0042)
0.0086
(0.0088)
-0.0141**
(0.0054)
0.0087
(0.0210)
-0.0059
(0.0055)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.0026
(0.0049)
0.0068
(0.0065)
-0.0172***
(0.0060)
0.0006
(0.0142)
-0.0070
(0.0055)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0052
(0.0063)
0.0090
(0.0083)
-0.0070
(0.0072)
0.0229*
(0.0116)
-0.0103
(0.0095)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.029
6694

0.030
6694

0.099
28876

0.078
27349

0.100
34762

0.098
56621

0.111
18713

50
Notes: See Table 4
a
Sample is limited to states which do not completely allow post-secondary education to count toward the state’s work
requirement.
b
Sample is limited to states which have high earnings disregard, as defined in Blank and Schmidt (2001).
c
Sample is limited to states which have strict or medium time limits as defined in Blank and Schmidt (2001).

51
Table 8
School Enrollment of Adult Women
Assessing Hours Worked & Income as Potential Mediators
October CPS 1992 - 2001
Sample

Outcome
Specification
Hours Worked (1-19) a
Hours Worked (20-31)
Hours Worked (32 - 40)
Hours Worked (> 40)
Household Income b
Target c
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Lagged State Economic
Indicators d
Lagged State Welfare
Caseload e
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried
Age 21 – 49
< High School Graduate

Unmarried
High School Age 24 – 49
Graduate
< College Graduate
Current College
Full-Time
Enrollment
College
Enrollment
3
4
0.0401***
0.0296***
(0.0134)
(0.0103)
-0.0280***
-0.0403***
(0.0070)
(0.0068)
-0.0615***
-0.0754***
(0.0065)
(0.0060)
-0.0733***
-0.0809***
(0.0073)
(0.0061)
0.00002
-0.0001
(0.0002)
(0.0001)
0.0234**
0.0075
(0.0094)
(0.0082)
0.0061
-0.0051
(0.0077)
(0.0053)
-0.0171***
-0.0073
(0.0061)
(0.0053)
-0.0013
-0.0065
(0.0141)
(0.0097)
-0.0066
-0.0067*
(0.0052)
(0.0038)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Unmarried
Age 24 - 49
< College
Graduate
Any School
Enrollment

Current High
School
Enrollment
1
-0.0057
(0.0102)
-0.0240***
(0.0061)
-0.0254***
(0.0039)
-0.0251***
(0.0057)
-0.0006***
(0.0002)
0.0204***
(0.0056)
0.0016
(0.0084)
-0.0017
(0.0114)
0.0020
(0.0141)
-0.0056
(0.0062)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Any School
Enrollment

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.030
12423

0.034
12423

0.116
51529

0.120
48854

0.115
62336

2
0.0024
(0.0116)
-0.0276***
(0.0068)
-0.0287***
(0.0042)
-0.0343***
(0.0059)
-0.0007***
(0.0002)
0.0248***
(0.0057)
-0.0005
(0.0100)
0.0019
(0.0121)
0.0072
(0.0199)
-0.0032
(0.0080)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

5
0.0303**
(0.0118)
-0.0272***
(0.0055)
-0.0574***
(0.0056)
-0.0705***
(0.0059)
-0.0002
(0.0002)
0.0245***
(0.0079)
0.0024
(0.0062)
-0.0151***
(0.0051)
-0.0008
(0.0119)
-0.0037
(0.0047)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within
each state and reported in parentheses. All target groups have children and comparison groups do not have children. All models
include age and age-squared, indicators for race and Hispanic ethnicity, indicators for highest grade attended, number of children in
the household, residence in a metro area, residence in a center city within a metro area, residence in suburban area, state fixed effects
and year fixed effects. State covariates include state-level unemployment rate, real state personal income per capita, indicators for
maximum compulsory schooling age, and indicators for state high school exit exam requirements. Significance is denoted as follows:
*** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, * 0.05<p≤0.10.
a
Reference category is individuals who are not working. Marginal effects for hours worked are reported for the target group. All
models also include interaction terms between the indicators for hours worked and the comparison group indicator to allow the
marginal effects to differ between the target and comparison groups.
b
Household income is measured in thousands of dollars, adjusted by the national consumer price index. Marginal effect for income is
reported for the target group. All models also include an interaction term between household income and the comparison group
indicator to allow the marginal effect to differ between the target and comparison groups.
c
In this context, the marginal effect of the target group indicator represents the difference in pre-welfare reform school enrollment
between individuals in the treatment and comparison groups who are not currently working and have zero household income.
d
Lagged state economic indicators include the one-year and two-year lags of the state-level unemployment rate and real personal
income per capita.

52
e

Lagged state welfare caseload include the one-year and two-year lags of the number of welfare recipients for the state.

53
Table 9
High School Drop-out and School Enrollment of Adult Women
Alternative Comparison Groups
October CPS 1992 - 2001
Sample

Target Group
Comparison Group
Outcome
Specification
Target
AFDC Waiver
AFDC Waiver*Target
TANF
TANF*Target
Year Indicators
State Indicators
State Covariates
State-Specific Trends
Lagged State Economic
Indicators a
Lagged State Welfare Caseload
b

Adjusted R-squared
Observations

Unmarried Females
Age 15 – 20
Household Education:
< College Graduate
Non Two-Parent HH
Dual Parent HH
High School Drop-out
1
0.1040***
(0.0092)
-0.0043
(0.0171)
-0.0071
(0.0190)
0.0400*
(0.0217)
-0.0234**
(0.0100)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Mothers
Age 21 - 49
< High School Graduate
Unmarried Mothers
Married Mothers
Current High
Any School
School
Enrollment
Enrollment
2
3
0.0134***
0.0161***
(0.0038)
(0.0038)
-0.0047
-0.0074
(0.0056)
(0.0050)
-0.0029
0.0034
(0.0071)
(0.0062)
-0.0018
0.0034
(0.0075)
(0.0101)
-0.0050
-0.0022
(0.0054)
(0.0059)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Mothers
Age 24 - 49
High School Graduate
< College Graduate
Unmarried Mothers
Married Mothers
Current College
Full-Time
Enrollment
College
Enrollment
4
5
0.0361***
0.0272***
(0.0037)
(0.0031)
0.0018
0.0020
(0.0042)
(0.0022)
0.0021
-0.0063
(0.0069)
(0.0043)
0.0052
0.0070*
(0.0086)
(0.0042)
-0.0108**
-0.0102***
(0.0045)
(0.0033)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Mothers
Age 24 - 49
< College Graduate
Unmarried Mothers
Married Mothers
Any School
Enrollment
6
0.0340***
(0.0032)
-0.00001
(0.0038)
-0.00003
(0.0056)
0.0039
(0.0073)
-0.0088**
(0.0038)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.060
18733

0.017
18613

0.017
18613

0.051
98457

0.035
95004

0.050
115370

Notes: Coefficient estimates from linear probability models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within each state and reported in parentheses. See notes to Table 3 (for high
school drop-out) and notes to Table 4 (for school enrollment among adult women) for other covariates which are included in the models. Significance is denoted as follows: *** p≤0.01, ** 0.01<p≤0.05, *
0.05<p≤0.10.
a
Lagged state economic indicators include the one-year and two-year lags of the state-level unemployment rate and real personal income per capita.
b
Lagged state welfare caseload include the one-year and two-year lags of the number of welfare recipients in the state.

53

